O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You dear children, I have completed this book which is the culmination of medical knowledge collection and compilation, finishing it through its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And in my vision, I thought of completing it with this manual tool, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is highly practiced in our region and spread everywhere, if the science has been lost or abandoned, there are no longer any remnants from it other than small descriptions found in books written by the ancients that were used with the hands.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And because of this, errors and vanity have arisen, and closed minds occur, causing the loss of knowledge.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I should renew this treatise together with the order of its content according to the path of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and will come together in groups the forms of the metal cauterizing tools, and the other instruments of the operation with the adjustment of declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no skilled physicians can be found in our times, the art of medicine has been lost.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	It is necessary that one who interferes in this matter become proficient in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so long as they understand the position of the limbs, their shapes and connections and separations, have knowledge of bones and nerves and muscles, know the number of bones, the movement and location of mobile and stationary veins, and the origin of their exit.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And because of this, says Hippocrates that with a little effort you are much better off and with the use is slightly more so; similarly in the art of manual skill.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that if someone is unaware of the things already spoken about, they should avoid making errors and wasting others' time; just as I have seen many times with those who interfere in this science and abandon their knowledge and lack of experimentation.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	And I have seen a foolish healer who cut open one of the lymph nodes or neck of a woman and severed her neck arteries; because so much blood came out that the woman died in her doctor's hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I have seen another healer who treated a stone in an elderly man's bladder, and the stone was large; he took with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already been called to draw blood, and saw the arrangement of the body part and the size of the stone, and if he had let me cut him it would have led to his death.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw one other instance where I was called to treat another individual, the Duke of our land who had his leg broken, and along with the breakage there was an injury; and these clergymen full of ignorance would bend the break over the injury in many ways due to their strength, and did not allow any relief for the injury, and left him like that for one month; and I commanded him not to bend it again; and he remained like this until his leg was completely swollen and his feet turned, resulting in loss.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and bend the leg; and when I heard it bent so smoothly that he did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But every way of corruption was now confirmed in the member or body, and could not be cured; and the process of corruption continued within the member until the entire member was lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And there is another mark that collapses an abscess, then inflames it due to the wickedness of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a gangrene, when it is full of melancholic humours, it should not be touched with iron if it has not been cut in such a way that all that is corrupted can be removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And because of this, dear children, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: meaning places where there are risks in multiple situations. And I will show each one in this book where it has danger and risk.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Because it is necessary that you take care so that others do not speak ill of you. Take your weapons into account and treat your wounds lightly yet firmly, use the best way possible so that through the grace of God you come to health and remain safe; and leave unendurable diseases without complaint for cleanliness. Remove from yourself those who cause doubt about you, have faith in yourselves so that you can go from this world to glory with it.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen mentions in none of his admonishments: "Do not take any remedy for an illness that you might be called a foolish outsider.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cauteries and medical water cauteries, and the chapters are organized from head to stone; and about the forms of tools, and the metals for cautery, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar matters; and the chapters are arranged and describe the forms of tools.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapters deal with restoring dislocations and twists, and similar matters; and it is organized from head to stone, and describes the forms of tools.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Just as we remind ourselves of the work, it is fitting that I describe the quality of each remedy and its harm for each constitution.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I assert that the qualities of help and harm are the longest word and most subtle science and secrets. And many wise ones spoke about this, agreeing with it; they barely gave me their words, for I fear lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I state that the fire cautery helps universally for all constitutions where there is matter, because it has two constitutions: this means hot constitution with substance and dry constitution with substance.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the combination of hot and dry constitutions with matter, people proposed that the fire cautery is a great help; and others said the opposite: that the fire cautery only works for diseases caused by heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	Because the nature of fire is so hot, it should never be used to treat diseases caused by heat or dryness; and those who say the opposite argue that the fire cautery greatly helps with hot and dry illnesses that manifest in one's body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of the person and their moisture to the condition of fire, you find that the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it true every time by experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And through all means, do not interfere with it except for the one who has experimented with it, and who knows by long use of medical knowledge, the art of cauterization, and the different complexities of human beings, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, as well as the occurrences and span of time; we have no fear from other complexities, even when dealing with cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all of them gathered together with the fire cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, my children, that the assembly of a fire cautery has secrets in healing, and brings more benefit than a burning medical cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and it only affects the limb that is being treated, not harming any other limbs if properly done.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The medicines that spread from one part of the body to another cause diseases due to cleanliness in healing; and by chance, the patient's illness is caused by fire because of its height and the goodness of its composition does not do this if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this I have found by experience and through the length of my service and study in the art, based on truth of things; for which reason I excuse the length of speech, because it does not please me to reveal the secret that is revealed by fire, and the quality of work, how it relieves diseases from bodies, as the philosopher says when demonstrating this. Receive it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, child, that they agreed on what times the cauterizations should be made, and set fire to them.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is suitable at all times, for the injuries occurring are often mitigated by the aid of the cautery; and indeed, if the cauterizations are for necessary pains that cannot wait until the larger mischief does not affect the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think like a fool, dear boy, as those who use cautery do; for sickness healed by cautery does not return. And they say it this way, but it is not quite so, because cautery is medicine that alters the complexion and dries out the fluids causing pain, being worth more than ordinary medicine due to its speed of action and virtue of its work and authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the sickness comes at any time according to the complexion of the sick person and their condition of illness and its virtue; and in them, excesses are gathered by the intake of foods and similar things if cautery isn't administered in the place where there's a little excess and moisture, like hot cauteries for pain, and similar things, so this kind of pain doesn't return; but this happens seldom.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And few people understand why cautery is called the last of medicines; it's indeed to see. But they don't believe that cautery matches after medicine, but their understanding is false. Cautery is the last of medicines because when our methods for treatments fail in any sickness and they do not work, then we administer our cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore it's clear that cauterization is part of medicine, not according to the thoughts of ignorant people though.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The old ones said that gold cauterization instruments are more effective than those made of iron and they said this because of the quality of gold and its high substance; and they stated that burn marks from a cauterizing tool don't cause decay, but some people think otherwise as I have experimented with it and found evidence that supports their view in certain individuals; and gold cauterization tools are better than those made of iron, just as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	Yet still, when you heat gold instruments, you may not notice that they are heated by the color of the gold, and it is soon cooled down. If they are heated too much; if you put them to fire; thus, there's enough prevention.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And that is why we use iron cauterization tools that we have adapted to our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	And you have ordered this chapter on the animal's head up to the nose, because its visibility is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	For the olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	The olive cautery is effective against moisture and cold in the brain, and there are two ways to do it due to an illness called 'soda', and due to many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, ears, and for a multitude of dreams and toothaches, throat pain, and especially all diseases caused by cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The shape of this cautery is such that the patient's body is cleansed by dissolving medicine, transforming the head. Three or four times or five times, according to how the properties and the heat and the habit of the ailment can bear it; and then follow up on the head with treatment for the ailment.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then have them sit cross-legged between your hands, and place their hands under the sides of their nose; after placing the base of your palm on the base of their nostril between their two eyes; and when your middle fingers reach that spot, if it bleeds from the inside, heat up the cautery called "olivare" which is in this form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it under the line of ink, and move your hand down gradually while holding steady in twists; then lift your hand alone, and check if you see bone at a small solitary spot; if you don't see it, keep applying heat until you do see the bone as I have told you; after that take one pinch of ash, soak wet cotton lightly and place it under the line, let him be for three days; afterwards put on a moistened butter cloth; and leave it until the scab falls off; then treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmaçon", until it heals.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And if they said to the old ones that when a wound remains open for longer, more pus is produced; and thus they were advised accordingly.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they say none of these that we must let the cautery burn until part of the bone is burned, and then reset the one that has been burnt by the bone, and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And they say that the cautery must be left burning there, and press so hard that it removes as much bone wide as a little horn that women place in their bellies for when the fluids are expelled; and should we leave the wound open for a long time afterwards; then we must treat and stitch it.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of using the cautery do not seem to me entirely good for everything; except in some people where there is a way of fear, and I believe that I should leave it like this. For the joints weaken by continuous discharge of nature, as we show with other limbs; even when the joints are weak due to nature themselves, and my first impression of using cautery is more healthy for me, and from these methods I take together a form of healing.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	From old age pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When throughout the head comes chronic pain that lasts for a long time, one should use the patient's remedies of herbs and pills which are called "cochines", and treatments for the head and ears and bandages; and if one applies the cautery as we have previously mentioned to them, it proves effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take caution that the head of the patient is not too cold in nature; therefore, apply the cautery just under the one we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After applying the cautery to each horn of the head up to the bone as we have said previously, do one more cautery on the side called "vassel", and insert one in that area where suction cups are used; and move your hand so you don't touch the bone: patients feel much greater pain in this type of cautery than in others, and I will discuss it further elsewhere. And it should be noted that the cauteries applied to the horns should be more precise than those applied to the middle part of the head, which is its form:
dou cautere dou chief	The fire cautery commands the patient to let his hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When suddenly in part of the head comes an acute pain, and the illness spreads until the eye, and the shoulder blade is purged by purgative medicines, and other treatments that I have mentioned in the division of diseases have been done, and none of this helps: then make cauterizations according to two ways, namely with ague medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The medicine-cauteries using ague medicine are as follows: you take a spoonful of ale and apply the peel and re-coatment over both shoulder blades, then place the temple in such a way that you can spread the spoonful of ale beneath the skin; when it has been spread, tie it firmly in this manner for 12 hours; then untie it and remove the garlic poultice, and leave the wound like this for two or three days. Then apply a poultice in butter until pus is discharged.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the oil cure as long as it is pure; and if you see that some of those burning medicines I have written about or in the tenth book of medicines that burn, you should perform.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery follows this method.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery of which I have described:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And call it "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a bell or has .i. pinch at the back, and midway there's a small appearance; and put it on the painful spot, hold your hand and gently move the iron slightly, until half of the thickness of the skin is burned; lift your hand so that the artery doesn't burn, when it exits, and allows an abundance of blood to flow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After that, place gauze soaked in salt water and keep it on the affected area for three days; then replace with cotton soaked in butter, and continue applying a healing oil as long as it remains pure. If you wish to cauterize this headache using the cautery called "cultellare", do so at its entire tip, but beware not to cover the artery in this headache which is not old.
de emigraine	Of the headache
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraines as we have explained in the divisions of diseases before, and it doesn't help, and you observe that the cauterizations mentioned previously concerning medicine and iron do not benefit here, then it is necessary that you heat up the cauterization which is called "cultellare" until it is white; and do this such that your thumb spans half a span in length from the root of your limb, and hold with one hand once, and apply pressure so that you don't cut into the artery and only reach up to bone; and beware not to let any saliva interfere when eating, and have the nose focus solely on preventing it from closing like a snore, and be wary of bleeding in the artery if it is cut, or if one has great fear and likewise for those who are unaware and inexperienced; and leave the work halfway done; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when the artery is cut, and show you where this happens in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you find that these cauterizations don't help with the illness and the patient is suffering, apply it in the middle of the head as we have said before, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you see that this is not enough, administer the fire instrument that we mentioned or at the chapter on extracting the artery, using a fire tool with two blades; and know that these will be better than others and more effective.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears due to cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When cold causes pain in the ear, and we have applied remedies that dissolve it as well as other treatments that we have mentioned in this division, and if the pain does not subside, then apply this cautery which is called "points", its use is as follows:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After applying the points all around the ear, or in the area of two, where the pain is located on both sides, and move away slightly from the root of the ear after marking its position. Place 10 points around each ear; after that, treat the area until it heals completely.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torment/pain in the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	The treatment that should be cured by a cautery is not about those that move with urine, as we have stated in the divisions of diseases; and no cautery should be done on what seems to come from heat and nerve scarring.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this semblance of torture that moves with urine and the discharges from head and gargling, what is not effective, then it must be that you apply a cautery for three times: one in the root of the ear, and another somewhat further into the temple, and the third at the adjustment between the two lips; and place the cautery on the healthy part where there is an opening, and make it cauterize the tip of the ear up to just below the headkerchief, and another similarly long in the temple like a thumb's length; and let the cautery be applied until half of the headkerchief is burned; and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And there is the semblance of the sword injury which we placed before, but it is a bit more subtle; so it must be that the swords should be slightly thicker. After treating the wound as I said previously, until it becomes healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When dealing with apoplexy which is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and if the patients do not benefit, and the sick person has fever, then make these three cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, and one on the head itself, and one under the chin, and the last one over the mouth of the stomach; and follow this treatment as we had previously instructed.
de litargie	of liturgy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness, you must give the patient large and powdered pills that purify the brain; after that, you should remove the head of the sick person completely, and place a sinapism plaster on the occipital region. And here is how to apply the cautery: do it as I have instructed.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is done properly, well and good; if not, do this: apply three fire cauteries below the neck until reaching the collarbone, leaving an interval of one finger's width between each cautery. Proceed with treatment as usual. If you see it adjusting, and the patient suffers, apply another cautery in the middle. Should it be necessary, two more above the two horns, and treat until it is done properly; use the cauterizations called 'olivare', as I've mentioned before.
de la froidor dou chief	from cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary to cleanse the head of hairs and what we have mentioned previously. After cleaning the head with vinegar, then heat it over the fire for the patient. Apply cauterizations around the head and on each horn, and two at the neck spine; and if you need more, when the area is moist and the patient suffers from sickness, and the illness spreads, apply four cauterizations to the spinal bone of the back; and leave it until the deepest heat is completely burned away, then raise your hand; afterwards treat until it heals properly, and use the cauterizations called 'olivare' as we have mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	From the cautery
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics should only use the cautery for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first modify the brain with years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section where the body parts suffer from medicine's effects.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it's a child who cannot bear the suffering, make them gargle and chew, modifying their brain frequently with good meats; after that place their head in mid air, and apply a .5 stick of fire according to what we said before, then another fire on each vessel, and on every horn; and if the body parts are sore and suffering, perform fires as I explained for those with paralysis and softening of limbs, on the spinal cord at the back and neck, and apply olive oilier fire in the way that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is young, apply a fine cautery according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When it is due to melancholy that the excesses or fluids are corrupted and thickened, then apply a partial cautery as we have described for the person who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if it is due to melancholy that the excesses decline into melancholy and the body is wet with malaise, then let them drink something so that the brain might be purified, as described in the section before on purification.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After receiving the head of the patient; after making .i. thread of well made linen, like .i. circle, you put it around the head; and the patient lies on his back, and is held firmly from all sides; afterwards present the liniment, and spread butter of old goat's milk; and heat the fire properly, so that one may be able to endure even if they are burnt by it; after emptying the circle through the head, and let it cool down; and do this to each patient once a week with another method well, until they recover.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you wish to cauterize him, do by making points on all parts of the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cautery moistens the brain greatly; and then place a moistened cotton ball in butter and linseed oil.
de l’awe des eulz	regarding the treatment of eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eyes start moving according to the signs I have mentioned in division, then begin and continue to give something purifying to the patient for their head, protecting them from all moisture. Have them sweat or take baths several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After commanding them to move their head again and having them apply a cautery on the head, then have them apply two cauterizations on each temple when the movement of the eyes is in both eyes together or if it's only in one. And for every application of the cautery, take care of all veins and arteries that are around the brain, applying the cautery long according to the width of the temples; and beware of blood spillage, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop using such power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you about extracting arteries and cutting in the cauterization method how to apply it; and in no instance should you do a cauterization or cautery between the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	of the streams of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and present on the veins, or penetrate into the arteries that are outside the appearance of the head; and one sees that they are excesses of cold phlegm, then make them with the cautery that I have said at the beginning of this art concerning the descent to the eyes: .i. cautery over the head, and .ij. cauterizations on the .ij. temples, and .ij. cauterizations where the cheekbones are below the .ij. bones; and if there is need for more, cauterize carefully above the eyebrows with all .i. small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	of the streams of tears from within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you apply the remedies according to what we have discussed in the division and it doesn't help, then try giving three bad ointments to the patient; after that press on the head, and make a cautery or the middle of an olive oil cautery; and do two cauterizations with the 'clavilis' cautery on both eyebrows, a little above the hair. And beware not to touch the artery so you don't cut it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery which is called "claw":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil has been softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this type of cautery called "olive".
de coi ci est li forme:	of which I have described:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see to do two cauterizations on the two eyelashes as long as they are; and don't rest your hand until only one-third of the paper is burnt, according to the method that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair that touches the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	No time comes when the hair of the ears turns into wax, and it pinches the ear, and one performs cauterizations in two ways: namely by fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they have grown and are even, then place the patient in their healthy state; after that, draw on the paper of the eyes a figure as it is like a leaf of myrtle, and mark the beginning of the sign with the end of the hairs. Then apply moist cotton soaked in egg whites and garlic paste to the ear, then warm up the cautery according to this shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the figure you have marked gradually and a little bit at a time, until the knees are burnt in that spot; and signs of health from the wound is that you see the paper retracting, and the hairs lifted to the tip of the ear; then lift your hand and leave it like this for three days, then apply moist cotton in butter until the scab comes off; after the ointment treatment until it becomes clean.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hairs come, and the paper has been softened then begin the cautery on that same place as you did before; and when the hairs have fallen out, cauterize until the paper reaches its natural position, and is even, not touching any of the hairs.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The burning cauteries of medicine you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and even, then shape the parchment as if it were a leaf of myrtle; take one part each of French soap and hot water and mix them thoroughly. Do this quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it on the form resembling a leaf of myrtle, and place it on the paper of the eyes; if the disease persists in one oil only, you should open it for one oil, and if in both equally; put cotton moistened with egg white under the eye. The patient's head should be covered with your clean hand while applying medicine, press once every time the patient feels a bite from the medicine because it also feels like heat.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for some time, apply the medicine to your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the ablation is done, lift up his arm and reward him, if you see that the paper has been lifted as it would be by the constraint of fire or through incision; and if it is like this, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If this doesn't work, try again with the medicine on your head or where the medicine hasn't taken effect, until all your actions are equal, and your eyes in good position; then place wet cotton in butter until the burned ears are covered, after treating the head from the ointment known as 'dyafenis' and others, until it is clean.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if this requires that you keep well to your work by great care so that no medicine leaks into your eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes moist after that, and the hair sticks into the eye, then apply medicine to that part of your head which has become softened from clean paper in the same way as you did before; afterwards treat it until it is clean; and this is like the form of the mallow leaf:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the ears of men are diverse in size and degree, and according to this, your instructions should vary; and do not prescribe for someone who has studied this art what is not appropriate for them.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	On the treatment of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments are not beneficial, then it is necessary for you to apply cautery according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place their head in your healthy position; and guide the doctors to hold their head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or fall from its position; afterwards, apply moistened cotton on the inside of an egg or garlic juice on the eye; then heat up the cautery which is prepared: and place it above the head so that it forms like a feather pen; if you see it, let it be pointed between one part of the head to the other, and if you see it, let it resemble a tent; but always remember, whatever is placed above must serve for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it has been opened, and treat the putrefaction, then dry it; and if it is closed but still secretes pus, cut it out from the bowels; afterwards place a heated form on the cautery and hold your hand on top of the cautery at the part just below the ear near the eye, so that your hands do not cause mischief; and put the cautery in the oil grease, and let it become spoiled.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you proceed to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be well.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then redo the cautery one more time, and otherwise if you need it, leave it for three days. Afterwards, place damp cotton on butter, and apply the ointment healing salve until it heals properly, and once forty days have passed without proper healing, apply corrosive water medicine until the bone is exposed; and follow the recipe as detailed in its chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a method for cauterizing fistulas that none of the old ones mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Understand about fistulas, and make it so; after that place in the cut a thin piece of hide with this shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and it's in quantity of three-quarters of a rod; and hold your hand or wooden pick firmly, and do not move the patient at all, so that the wax does not leak out of its hole; and let some wet cotton be placed on the wax with the purpose of egg whites or water: the wax serves as a plug for the fistula, and through this miraculous healing process leads to recovery.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery method we have described, it's good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if not, then it is necessary to apply petasite to the nose, and bring the fistula back into the body under the nose according to what should be done in its own proper place.
des crevaices en levres	of cuts in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, cuts occur in the lips that are called "whiskers", and also in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cuts using the method we've discussed in sections, and if the treatment doesn't work, then use this: apply a small surgical torch on the size of this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place them immediately in those cavities until it grows as far as possible; afterwards, cleanse the area of wax while it remains healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess on the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess affects the root of the throat or in the lymph node, or under the tongue, or at the roots of the teeth, after it turns into a gangrenous infection and becomes discolored, hardening and forming a fistula; then you treat it as we have instructed in divisions, but if it doesn't heal, you must prepare according to your medical knowledge for what is needed. It's necessary that you have one cautery instrument suitable for the size of the fistula; after incision or cutting out the fistula, keep your hand until the cauterizing iron reaches the bottom and as far inside as possible; then perform this method once or twice. After treating it according to what we have said in treatments, while it remains healthy; if it heals like this, it's good; but if not, you must expose the wound and remove the rotten bone, depending on what you find when consulting your medical text.
dou movement des dens	of the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines and that doesn't work, then put the head of the sick person in your healthy position; afterwards heat up the cautery which will come into play hereafter in this manner: you place a stick under the tooth; and place burning hot inside the cautery quickly, hold your hand until the diseased body feels heat reaching to the root of the tooth; after that lift your hand and continue with the cautery according to your desire; afterwards fill the diseased person's mouth with salty water, and let it sit for an hour and then remove it.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner the tooth which was moving is now fixed, and the softened gums are held back, and the moisture that caused damage becomes dried.
de la dolor des dens	from the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes from coldness, or there is coldness or frostbite, and medical treatments do not help, then it's necessary to use a cautery according to two methods: and the butter cautery and the fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	The butter cautery works as you take butter from a cow, and with it the tip of a iron or spider's tool; after taking cotton and wrapping it on the point of a tent, and moisten the butter until it forms, then place it on the painful tooth quickly and hold it until it cools down; and do this repeatedly until the remedy's effectiveness reaches the root of the tooth. And if you see moist wool and cotton in cold butter, place it on the aching tooth, and put hot iron on for as long as the fire reaches into the tooth pain.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The fire cauteries should be such that you choose a rod of iron or bronze, and it should be large enough so that the flame doesn't reach the mouth of the patient; after heating the cautery, the form will come out like this afterwards, and place it on the tooth and keep your hand until the cautery cools down; do this often, because the pain will be alleviated that day or the following.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it's necessary that the patient fills their mouth with good butter in anticipation of this cautery, and then quickly rubs it in; and this is the form of the cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And perform the cautery according to how much you desire or are able to, and in this manner is it done for the application of a cauterization:
des scrophules	regarding the pock marks
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrophules are due to cold wet phlegm and do not respond to medicine, then heat up the cautery as described below. And create two openings for the fumes to exit from the other side of the cautery; and place hot cautery on the abscess once or twice, according to need, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, adjust the size of the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it like that for three days. And apply moistened cotton with butter until the pus is removed; afterwards cure with ointments and plasters until it heals properly.
Li forme de la cainne:	The shape of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moist conditions overcome the channels in the heart, especially when it comes from cold constitution, then it is necessary that the body be cleansed with medicines first; afterwards do cautery at the root of the throat, and make sure not to come all the way up to the throat, but just a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you perform another cautery on the joint at the neck of the spine under the head, and use the cautery that we call "clavicle" which has our form described ahead, and treat the area as previously instructed until it is healed.
de la toust	Of cautery by fire, command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and the disease of the womb are due to cold moisture, and the patients do not have fever or dryness, and it is an old disease, then make two cauteries on their force lines in their veins; and one other cautery in between the buttocks under the nipples; and let the cauteries that are called "clavile" be as described beforehand according to form.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see fit, perform a cautery by applying the entire "point" cautery which is called such as it has been depicted in the ailment of ears previously; and use points up to 30, or even more if needed.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the area according to what has been described, perform three rounds of cautery following this pattern:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because of this they are performed with a lighter cautery, for you do it three times over each area.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After that, bandage the wound on his back and sides; afterwards lift out the kidney which is inside the testicle with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated internally, heat the cautery until it has two fingers' width as shown below:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	And burn the knee until it reaches bone, and make all the marks of the burning together. These are four burns; for this purpose, you should use a cauterizing tool with three points, because the marks left by this type of cauterization consist of four burns; and they follow the delicacy of a tent, which is the shape of the burning tool with three points:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And fix it on this one nerve because there are seven burns in relation to this.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After placing the cautery, grind with string; afterwards, let the patient rest, and do not let any of the limbs be in prolonged tension until it is properly secured.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it has been dislocated there, with very little happening, then perform a cautery on the thickness of the clavicle cautery, or do a few cauterizations.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is expelled from it, and the patient's injuries are treated.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	For when colds and moisture reach the stomach while it is in harmony with its constitution, they increase the production of phlegm within him. These conditions are multiplied by over-indulgence in certain treatments that he follows without benefit. Therefore, it's necessary for the patient to wear a cloak on his back, extend his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	From this point on, I perform three cauterizations around the heel near the buttocks for a quantity equivalent to two points per cautery. For each cautery, I apply it to the knee bone and then two further cauterizations on both sides until the pattern of cauterizations forms at three angles, with equal spacing between them so that when they are applied, they do not join together as if they were causing a rotatory process; and execute the cauterization properly so that it purges the two parts of the knee bone. The pattern of cauterizations should follow this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see to be treated with a large cautery in the stomach according to this shape; and whoever is afraid of this cautery, treat it by pressing and commanding on the stomach at one point following the amount that you see increasing; then completely cauterize using the whole cautery which is called 'points'.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment we have discussed previously, as long as it remains clear.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	As for the liver, it experiences pain due to coldness, moisture, and great windiness. It is treated by reducing its natural complexion through excesses; and then the body will respond well if the liver is soved in accordance with what we have discussed in divisions, but if not, the liver should be treated by using a small amount of cautery on top of its hairline; apply three points of cautery according to this shape, figure, and quantity on the liver, under the waistband where the stomach pain comes from; there should be space between each point about twice the size of a coin. The length of the cautery is from the belly button up to the back, don't fully press your hand onto the entire area when applying the treatment; only burn half of the fat and make sure the liver stays in place on its feet; if not possible, it can lie down with legs stretched out and arms lifted; this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you wish to do so, use these cauterization tools like a surgical knife, being subtle and cautious in the art, and beware not to burn all the tissue completely, for it would dry up your entire body; and don't heat until just before boiling, as the tissues are very delicate at that spot, and you need to know how to see this clearly.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When it has progressed to the liver, and you need to determine if it's located within the liver tissue or in the surrounding tissue: if it is in the liver tissue, one will feel pain but not excessively severe; and if it is in the surrounding tissue, there is a more intense pain felt.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this treatment begins to affect the membranes, it is necessary for the patient to pull on its head; and then guide the hand to where the lesion is; and then heat the cautery which resembles a reed, as described here, which is how it's done:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And heat the cautery until it burns, and go up to syphac, until all pus is out; after this clean according to cleaning of scabs while it's healthy; and none should use this cautery elsewhere than those who have studied long in the art of medicine, and through which hands these diseases have never been cured once.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Therefore it can be boldly opened, and every time I think that movement is worth leaving to.
dou cautere de pleuresin	A cautery of rue oil
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The old ones said that one should make rue oil cauteries from the roots of aristolochia, and this is how you do it: take a long root of aristolochia, the longest you can find, and make sure it's dry, also ensure it is as thick and long as your arms; and soak it in oil, then put it on fire, and cauterize once between the elbow and neck, and twice smaller ones somewhat downwards in the area under the beard; and four more cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, descending a bit behind; and one cauterization near the belly button, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and four more along both sides of the waist under the cauterization between the two shoulders; and do not squeeze your hand at all, just make it widely open as when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And it is said by no old man that any person uses the fire cautery at its base, and heats it up before placing it between the ribs, until it reaches this abscess; and once pus comes out, as we have mentioned in the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this chapter is fear or the illness has now ended, or there appears a fistula which cannot be cured.
de la mice	from the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease 'la mice' in those whom we have spoken about with regards to our treatments and nothing benefits them, then they try three methods of cautery which are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	In a certain way there is one method whereby you make III or IV cauteries, according to the length of the mouse [possibly referring to a medical condition], according to the shape of the cautery for the liver that we said before; and do not rush your hand over all the cautery, and let the patient be mindful on their back; and another method of cautery is where you warm up the cautery which has two parts, as we showed it in the dislocation of the shoulder; lift the knee that is at the mouse location, or where the pain comes from towards the left, and let the elevations guide you when lifting the knee according to the position, according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After heating the two electrodes until they are incinerated on the other side where the knees can be felt, then remove the cautery, and thus there will be four. And if you see that, completely cauterize over the entire surface of three electrodes.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has eradicated the putrefaction for a long time, and this is equivalent to changing other treatments as were mentioned previously.
de ydropisie	Regarding dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	The cautery does not work in dry conditions, except for the method that is called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat according to the methods we have mentioned in sections, and your treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary for you to make four cauteries around the anus, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the kidneys, and one behind the back on the spine, and one place on the buttocks; and let the cauteries be well near the spinal nerves where the anus is.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After allowing the cauterization to set for a long time to heal from infection, do not stop the treatment of the disease after the cauterization; and recovery would hasten, with both intentions combined together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly is the blade that we have demonstrated in front; and the one for the back is olive-shaped, as was shown before.
de l’enfleure des piez	regarding the swelling of bones
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the joints are swollen in someone who is anuric and full of yellow bile, it is necessary to apply the cautery on the back between the index finger and the ring finger; and move your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deep through this part, so it would be like leaving the liver, and thus follow this form for the cauterization:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After doing this on both legs, do two cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the heel; and make the cauterizations long, one in front of the knee joint and the other behind, halfway along the leg; and leave the cauterizations alone for a long time without treating them until the yellow bile comes out; after that treat all the other treatments we have mentioned.
de la menoison	Of the memory
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	For ailments of the stomach that come from cold and moisture, as long as the retaining and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, they cannot be cured by ordinary treatment methods; and you see the patient suffering greatly with strong green symptoms, so apply one large stomach cautery according to what has been discussed earlier or stomach cautery, with a circulating cautery; and four internal abdominal treatments around the mouth of subtle substances for each. Then apply one delicate hip cautery and four cauterizations on the thighs.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, apply a cautery to the wrist, and one cautery on each knee, and two small cauterizations on the stomach below the large ones, because the treatment benefits when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	Of treatments for hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhages are at their origin or multiple and are old with large cold, moist, corrupted fluids, and they are treated as we have said in divisions, but if it does not benefit, then do cauterizations: III on the spine of the back, that is right beyond the middle point somewhat into the muscle little by little in a triangular pattern, and one cauterization under the liver II inches; and if you think the stomach has cooled down and the meat doesn't cook, and you see it swell, then apply I large cauterization on the stomach as previously mentioned, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the cauterizations. And let the cauterization last for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	Regarding the disease called "thelul".
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you are working with the shoulder, heat the tool that seems to be a rasp until it is glowing hot, and then place all of its heated part on the shoulder being worked; let your hand remain as long as the cautery touches the beginning of the vein from which blood flows. Perform this action once or twice, and if there are many shoulders, cauterize each one as we have said; after applying ointments for benefit, do so while they are still in good condition; and if you use a large cautery on the shoulder blade, it will provide more help.
de plaie mal curee	of improperly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure surgery or opening (operation), which we will describe in its proper place, should such a disease occur that cannot be cured except by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	If there is no瘘管, it becomes old and festers with corrupted moisture, so you should thoroughly inspect the area for any sign of a subtle change. And remember that you need to know precisely how far up the test needs to go.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After the scrape, apply a cauterizing agent that seems appropriate, and insert it into the fistula according to the depth of its entry point. Reapply the cauterizing agent until the diseased pus is no longer burned away, once or twice, depending on your need; and be cautious not to burn nerves or large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula extends to the bladder or the intestine, be aware of these symptoms and do not perform this procedure outside their natural location. Remember that the cure should only be done inside their natural place, and consider that it is not a normal condition. After treating until the area heals, if the wound has healed over completely, know that the treatment was successful; and if the tissues are not hardened after an extended period of time, realize that the wound is still open and the bones have become rotten at its base, like in one of these examples we will discuss in their natural place.
de la maladie des reins	Of kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When abdominal pain originates from the kidneys and large wind, it affects women differently, hence you should apply a cautery to both sides of the kidneys with a bistoury as we have previously mentioned; if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in line, and they will provide more help.
de la vessie	From the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is thick and weak from heat and moisture such that patients retain urine, then the physician should perform a cautery on the lower part of the bladder, where the body hair begins, and one each on the right and left sides, and make sure each cauterization spans as long as it takes about an inch; and if necessary, also do a cauterization behind the back, or two if needed; and perform the cauterizations in a cross pattern according to the form described beforehand.
de la marris	From the mare's milk
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the mare's milk is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and its flowers are corrupted causing delayed periods; and when they do come, one can feel great pain: in such a case, it would be appropriate to perform three cauterizations inside the uterus, as we have described or like how we explained for bladder cautery, and two cauterizations behind the back; and make sure the cauterizations are done in a cross pattern, as we have said.
de la hainche	From the thigh
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous fluids descend into the thigh cavity, and because of this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the leg is longer than the other when measured together; and you find the joints at their starting points visible. It should be that you cauterize the disease on the thigh around .i. the appearance of a circle, and mark in front of the joint along the thigh as it curves, so that the thigh is within the circle; and if they are like those which have been cauterized for stomach issues.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if these cauterizations do not seem present, make three large olive-like cauterizations, and let the cauterizations be as long as all the ribs; and treat until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	From thigh pain
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the buttock region, and this is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient is treated according to what we have discussed about divisions and treatment, but the cure does not work, and the disease is old: then it must be that you cleanse the patient of the thick fluids using stinking pills, or other similar good pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After you perform the cautery; and the method of how to do the cautery is according to two methods: this means together with burning substances, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery has several methods, among which one is like this: you should cauterize the buttock area with three triangular cauterizations following this shape, and make each cauterization deep and large, leaving an interval between each cauterization equivalent to the size of two coins, and use olive oil as the cauterization substance; no cauterization should be done in the middle of the buttocks because according to this form there are four cauterizations.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see fit, apply the circle cautery method that we described earlier regarding the dislocation of the buttock; but make sure the circles encompass the entire buttock area and all parts of the wound are heated through.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	This is the way it's done in sciatica, when pain stays in the buttocks and doesn't reach up to the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes up to the thigh and leg, make two fire cauteries there where the patient says the pain holds them back, and four above the ankle on each side a bit more to the left; and have the surgical cuts, and burn off the thickenings of the heel; and if the patient feels that the pain extends down to four or even five feet or just before the knee, cauterize where they feel the pain three points or four with the ‘point’ type of cautery.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if there's more work needed, then you proceed with more cauterizations; and if it is that the pain spans from the knee towards the thigh, then do a circular or knife-like cauterization, and be sure to well maintain your caution throughout all your cauterizations so as not to leave any part undone, burning nerves and large arteries until they are properly treated, and do not cause the patient more harm or contraction than necessary.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who performed a cautery on the ankle up to the knee, and they only allowed it until the leg was completely swollen, and also all the feet, causing them to be pierced and corrupted throughout.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After an abdominal treatment that led to their death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pains are in two parts together, make a cautery on each one, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the sage said about the cautery of the hip, as follows: make it such that the iron is at the top as big as a chicken's head, or perhaps slightly smaller, and place it between supports and have it in between each support stretching from one end to the other, the size of a pea; let the supports be divided into two parts, and they should resemble knots too, and ensure the iron handle is well made; this is its form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heat it until it is completely red and emits steam, then place it on the area of concern at the hip gland, and rotate around the healthy ribs; and apply one cautery treatment with repeated applications every day for three days; and then cover the affected area with butter, allowing the wound to be exposed as long as needed; after the ointment treatment until it has healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use very little of this cautery for his fear of the effects, and we find few who use it; yet this is a good type of cautery, which can be tolerated, and there where it takes effect.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The burning medical cauteries are such that you make an instrument with supports in which the edge of the door descends, and it can be made of steel or iron with a long side, and at the height have two knots, and between each one have the size of a pea; let them be over a fire and above too, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After applying the balm to the buttocks of the lying patient on a firm surface, hasten your hand to the area of the buttock. Next place between the two circles of the hot embers which are heated in fire, and allow one hour exactly, then permit the patient to endure the heat and burning sensation.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For there one finds biting like that of fire; and when the bite passes, lift your hand with the tool and elevate the buttock gently from the embers. And leave it for three days, and put on butter until what is blackened by scorching turns to ash; and let it be for three days as long as pus has come out. And this would be the last aid after the removal of ointments while he remains sound.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread up to the thigh or even to the leg, you should apply a heated instrument there in accordance with what you have done on the hip also; and this is how you use hot leeches, and I have written about correcting medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take ashes and quicklime in equal amounts of one to the other, grind them together, and put them into a new jar.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Let it have the shape of a small reed so that the point of a razor may be able to enter; and put this jar into another one well filled with water, and place ashes and lime in gently until there are two inches above the powders when you will have taken them gently by hand; and leave it like this until all the water turns into liquid and sediment or is completely covered, then take all of this liquid, and pour it over lime and over ashes as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And thus it will be very effective and administered in the movements of medical works and other members' cauteries. For she accomplishes a work like fire, and to others medicines whereby one cauterizes well the hip bone so as with tannisia and melon seed oil, walnut and soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a treatment in which an honored person was treated for the pain in the hip and sciatic vein, and with great relief. He says that no other treatment was done, and that it cured him completely in one fell swoop when this treatment was performed, and he bathed himself as he instructs hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And it is said in this manner that you take some green and dry argyrite dust, grind it thoroughly with a little fat, and place it on the hip, thigh and leg where the pain occurs, then tie it up; and let him leave it for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burn.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make them enter into a bath as long as their body becomes somewhat refreshed, and make them enter onto bed, and the pain will disappear completely and they shall be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	Know that no one should use such medicines as a cautery, if it isn't after the removal of flesh.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides states that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with donkey's fat, if it helps much; and the cautery should be made in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take lard and mix it with old oil, and place it on the hollow area between the base of the thumb and the other that is called a flexor.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After taking donkey hair and let it burn until it turns to charcoal, put it on the lard, and leave it until it sticks; and repeat this process again, never stopping until you think it will reach up to the hip bone, and that pain is gone; and this method of cautery is called "donkey's hair cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	The pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or impact, or due to too much evacuation, or because of cold matter spread out, none of these occurrences warrants cauterization, rather it is for someone who has come from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after this that when the body has been cleared of putrid pills or other such occurrences, one should place on the back where the pain resides, three lines marked with a cross, and in each line, up to .v. cauterizations according to the power and quantity that the body can endure; and perform the cauterization as per the "point" cautery named; and if you see fit, do .iij. or .iiij. cauterizations at the intermediate "claw" cautery in accordance with this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This illness often befalls children and at the beginning of its manifestation, it shows itself in that they are pale when they stand up, and fear follows; and you find in the last spinal bone of the back and on us, an appearance that comes over other bones.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and observe it being treated, if you apply the fire cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the fire cautery is applied to each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see fit, apply the fire cautery to each side of the spine with two or three lines of heat, and ensure the points are close together.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After the treatment until it is clean according to what we have said, and be careful not to apply heat in a state of fever where there might be nerve inflammation.
de la dolor des jointes	of joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain is caused by moist substances spreading throughout the body's limbs, and when pain comes in feet which people call 'gout' properly, and when it is due to cold reasons and its cure needs medicines that cannot be treated, then it should be treated with cauteries in this manner: create the cautery at the joint of the foot, and let the olive oil cautery take this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there's need that you touch the back of the foot, if it is heated to the full heat of what we call 'a point'.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains extend to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, then apply heat to each knee with three or four parts of each side, over the entire olive heat; and if you need more, do so more, but don't remove your hand until as much of the heat as is good for the knee has been applied.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains go down to the knees and back, then administer the cautery as we have said in our chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make points between the inner wrist lines II; and if there remains any pain on the wrists, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and take good care of the patient and apply remedies.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if you take good care of him and cleanse the humor, he will be helped by God to recovery.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the rupture of the spleen
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When an opening comes in the stomach, and the intestines descend into the abdomen it is newly so; it must be that when you see them being cured, they do not eat until noon; and use things which let the wind out, so that their insides descend from their belly; after make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to shave his armpit until the intestines are repaired, then take them in your fingers, and observe around the opening above the bone, and take it by the root of the intestine. Then apply the cautery as described here:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	Until it is white and emits pus.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then remove the boils from their place; and let the attendants prick his hand so that they do not turn back; and work well on the thighs for the patient, and apply I crutch and I sergeant to the thighs, and another under his buttocks where you pinch his hands; then put the cautery on every sign on your whole hand, and hold it straight until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, repeat it again as many times as necessary until you reach the bone; and be careful that the boil does not spill when you apply the cautery; that you do not burn him; and that this way the patient does not suffer or any other harms.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not reach bone with the cautery, your operations are worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it must be that the cauteries for children are delicate according to their size, and also large according to their size; after three days cleanse the limb with a balm until the scab is removed; then apply other ointments until it heals well, and let them rest on their back for forty days so that the wound heals properly; and their convalescence should be extended long enough so that the pus does not overflow when they wish to walk in rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when they wish to stand up, help them with a well-made bandage and keep it on for another forty days; and give him good rest, have him work little and guard against overconsumption of drinking and eating, and loud shouting; and when he performs this exercise, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say after about the treatment of tailoring in this chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Of the rupture of the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	And when incisions occur in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, make the cautery with the cautery repeatedly according to its quantity, and apply it for one-third of the measure; after treat them as we have said; and none of the old ones said that one should cauterize at the cautery in three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But the first sign is the beginning of an infection and draw a line across the width above the incision, and another below, and hold your hand in contact with the entire length of the cauterized area.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterizations are lighter and more moist.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from old pain in no limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, or due to falling or being hit, and this pain lasts for a long time, and medical treatment does not help, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "points", and apply the cauterizations according to the length of the limb, its smallness, its weakness, its utility, and its location of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If the first treatment with heat was successful, that's good; if not, try another heat treatment on this one, because such treatments require movement close to the affected body part, so you should perform the heat treatments as long as the wounds are healthy.
de meselerie	In mixture
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The remedies are administered once per heat treatment by great help, and similarly, the disease comes from the putrefaction of blood and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Can't you see the cautery? Take care that if the disease is at the beginning, and it's cured according to what we have said in the division, without it spreading or lingering. If there is a fear of corruption spreading throughout the wound, then do I two heat treatments: the first one starts from the root, and goes upwards towards the forehead at the end of hair; and II on the two horns, and III behind on the cheek bone; let your hand be so that the heat goes until the bone and as long as the scabs come out to allow the vapors of the large humors can escape. And do it with the second one similarly as done before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the mixture is everywhere scattered; and it becomes apparent that you must cauterize with these cauteries we have mentioned on the head, and one cauterization under the nose, and two cauterizations on the spine from the neck to the chest, and six on the spine from the back of the neck down, and one large one on the nape of the neck and another in front of it, and two on each shoulder blade; and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the legs, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and around the creases of the hands; and be careful not to burn any nerves that are behind the heel bone. And do not once make a cauterization on the bone near the ankle, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more I apply the cautery, the more help I provide, and it benefits them; and know that patients do not feel pain from the cautery as healthy individuals do, because their bodies are already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the size of the cautery be large and small according to the limbs and joints, as you will find in methods for metalworking.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment, wash the wound with flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it heals properly.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When there is swelling in any limb that is treated with medicines and oils, and it doesn't heal properly, then apply cautery to the limb according to the size of the limb; and let the cautery enter slightly into the skin at the site of the wound; then treat it with ointments until it heals.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And always make the cautery and on the hand and foot and back, at the exit of the nerve that paralyzes the limb, and thus is extracted the swelling; and no one should interfere with it unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the exits of the moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	From galls
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the illness named "albaras" becomes old, and conventional medicine is ineffective, then apply a small cautery burn according to the amount of the plant in question. Do this until the gallbladder is removed and its color changed. After that, wash with flour and lentils mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, along with blood from colostrum and chicken sand, each using one part of their quantity. Mix everything together, then wrap it with a cloth, and leave it on the affected area until fully healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment for a pustule by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When the gangrene begins and you see it stop, if you notice it, then apply the cautery to the point that seems like a circle, all around the edge of the gangrene.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	Yet the wise ones say one should also apply the cautery in the middle of the gangrene; and this does not seem right to me, as I fear it might lead to an ulceration and putrefaction. I have already decided never to do this again; rather, a more correct procedure is to apply the cautery around it, at the point that's called 'circular', just like we've mentioned using a type of cautery.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling which cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When some have a disease that is called 'adubelati', and it is delayed in dying or due to its excess, it causes death or because of the aging of the illness when it becomes old (meaning too old), and it has little blood, or due to tension; and you see it hastening to die: then cauterize internally with small cauteries by touching; afterwards leave them like that.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it being pierced through the entire cauterization, then heat the cauterizing instrument as described here:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of this disease that is called 'adubelati' until the cauterizations penetrate the body, and make the cauterizations such that the patient feels an escape in this manner that the process of decomposition be relieved.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment until it is completely healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure using fire through a iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another way of disease is called 'corrodens', and it's not another thing but a member infirmity, for it causes members to behave as if they were dry branches that the fire has burnt.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in someone who can suffer from a fire cautery, then heat the small and large cautery blades moderately. According to what is needed for that place or where the disease is; after applying the cautery all around until you've cleared out all corruption, do not leave anything behind; ensure that everything corrupted has been removed completely.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And let it rest for three days, and apply soothing ointment with oil on the burned areas until the scabs from the fire have healed, and ensure all the corruption is gone.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the cure of ointments that produce pus.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if after three days you see that the healthy one has not been born, this is good; and if it doesn't, then reapply the cautery to the one that was left behind from the ones affected by corruption.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this method has been treated with medicine instead of the fire cautery; but nonetheless the fire cautery is more effective assistance. I have already discussed the treatment for medicine fever in a previous section: take it when you need to.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	Of ulcers that come on bones
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Sometimes, when there is an opening in the foot, it leads to a disease that we call "closed" according to our understanding, and it is a large hard lump that causes pain in the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterizations for this disease can be done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This is to know about fire cautery, and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	The fire cautery involves heating it up, and the metal cautery is shaped like a feather, made of good iron to be able to touch all parts of the nail, with thin margins; after heating it fully on the nail, turn your hand completely around the nail until it reaches the end of the nail; then leave it like this for three days until the process begins to create pus; then make an application of mixed fat poultices with lard and let the poultice stay overnight, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with greasing until it is clean.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they have turned under the breast and occur many times in hands and elbows, it's necessary that you bring them the cautery of hot water; and follow this manner: take one from an aragon or iron, or a feather of a goose, and place it on the nail and the thorn, meaning to say for warts; and place the stick so that its entire surface is touched by flame, then add a little hot water, hold your hand well, press your hand back until the edge of the stick burns to the root of the nail, and then find the hot water flowing deeply down to the root; and let the patient endure for an hour the irritation from the hot water; then leave him like that, and it will uproot everything at its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Do this for one after the other, until you have cleared all those that are in your body, then treat the sores that generate pus.
li cure dou trembler	The treatment involves shaking it off.
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone shakes from cold or nerves, or has a fever that lasts four days or another condition, it is necessary to apply four or four cauterizations on the spine of their back, one cautery between each vertebra; and one on the chest at the olive-shaped cautery; if this does not stop the shaking, then hasten the recovery from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	The pus-filled lesions
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	In every instance where a dead body is exposed or oozing sores, or pus-filled bumps appear, these come from large putrid materials.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	When they become apparent that one must apply a cautery to each head of the pustule: a delicate firewood stick from the myrtle tree, with its tip grasped by the flame, or from the long root of aristolochia, or with the lens-shaped cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And in every instance when they are cauterized at the beginning once they become apparent, following this manner, and it cannot grow any pus forwards but the excess which causes them is removed, and they become clean; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times great amounts of blood have flowed from the artery that has been cut at the wound when it comes to the one going beyond, or incision of an abscess, or the cautery on the limb, and similar things; and it is very troublesome a matter to stanch.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet, when this happens to none of them, should you quickly place your index finger on the wound of the vein and press very much until the pain subsides under your finger, and no more drops flow; then apply several small and large olive oil cauteries as long as they are all red. Then take .i., or large or small depending on the wound and to the place where the artery is located, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the pain stops completely.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps out when you remove your finger from the vein, and once the cauteries are extinguished, take quickly another one of the cauterizing tools that are at the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop performing this one after another until the skin is completely incised; and beware that you do not burn the nerve underneath it, nor let any other harm come upon the patient; and know that when hair falls from the artery, one cannot properly incise it even if the artery is large, unless done through one of the four methods we have mentioned: by cautery, or extraction when it hasn't been treated yet, or by strong stringing where a ligature is placed, or with medicines applied which have the power to incision blood; and it should be bound and held in place subsequently.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer the tying or binding with cloths tightly or by putting heat-bearing things thereon, or other similar actions, if it doesn't prove effective.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and they have no means or medicine at hand, then they should place their index finger on the wound of the vein as we said, and stretch it well until the skin is incised over the wound and over the vein; and do not move the hand but moisten it with cold water often that remains very cold until the skin is frozen and swollen and incised; and perform ligatures in advance for those requiring cautery and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book of treatments for amputations
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have spoken in the first chapter about all diseases where it is necessary to use fire cautery or hot medicine. We discussed their uses, causes, instruments and forms of cautery; and concluded that chapter with applying them up to the foot, and I will proceed through this chapter using the same path since it seems easier to find what one wants here.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And when I begin this, it is important for you to understand that in this chapter there is more risk and fear than in the first section about using cautery, and for this reason, greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and treating wounds, and extracting arrows, and making cuts into stones, and similar matters; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I advise you not to undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many ways of people come to treatments.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	Some come from those who are so afflicted by their disease that they die lightly due to the panic they find in their illness, and the severity of their suffering; and for this one must have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And among these there is someone who gives its meaning and says: "Wait, I am a liar"; and the illness is deceitful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not fitting that you should agree with those who come to you in this manner, but rather place greater caution in your honor than in your greed, and do not rashly open your mouth but wisely of those whom you are certain, and from whom you have taken knowledge; use prediction and indication in the treatment of your sick for whose salvation it is turned; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, glory, and lasting memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dear child, our lords give you good understanding and justice, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of their hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have instructed this chapter according to its chapters, following what is before it in the section on cauteries, which I have outlined from the head down to the feet because you will find them more easily than those you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	From the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this illness comes very often to children at birth, and when the mother presses too hard on the head of the child; and it happens in no other case for reasons unknown.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease in anyone other than children, and among all those I've seen, their deaths came quickly; for this reason, it seems to me that I should abandon the treatment of cases like these with partial cures.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw one child whose shoulder joints were filled with water, and his head grew each day to the point where he could not bear it anymore; and feared so much from moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled around the bone above the siphon, between the heart and the bone; and the veins are arranged in such a way when moisture is between the heart and the bone, and abscesses are small, that you make an opening under the head a large crack; and so long as the moisture flows; and see this shape of the spathile:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more abundant, and the abscess is larger, make two openings in a manner like a cross, according to this shape:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is within the bone, and the signs you see show that the edges of the head have opened from every part, and water spurts out when you press it inward with your hand, and this does not stop: then you should make three openings in the middle of the head like this:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all the moisture completely.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After holding the cuts from cloths and powders, and I place wine and oil, and let this way up to the fifth day; then I remove it, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, and let the head also be held in place equally, and finally allow the patient to eat dry meat of a bit moist until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look at where the opening of the abscess is large, and assemble with water; because it does not always appear in front; nor always behind; nor always on the right side; nor always on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut then where the abscess opens, and fill with water, and make a cut according to what you can do; and watch that you do not cut the artery; and look for a flow of blood, so that the patient dies due to the loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Of cautery by fire, command to the unwell that they let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When there occurs a disease which is called "catarrh" to the eyes or at the bottom (of the body), and the disease is old, and the treatment with medicine doesn't help, then the last resort of treatment could be cautery using what one would cauterize their two major arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	So then, so that you can handle them properly, the patients must stand after their head; after rubbing their face with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then remove the patient's neck up to all parts of the cloth; then look where the veins lie, and the positions of the ears from one side to the other, and they are restored; then mark both ears, then apply each with an extremely sharp knife blade for half of them, until the cut reaches the bone, and this should be done in accordance with the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it, stop the bleeding from beneath the artery and above the cut, by making a cut also like one inch through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, let the blood flow out continuously from up top.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery doesn't open upon feeling, it is necessary that you measure the size of the space to three fingers, then press and push until touching the bone; and what needs to be extracted from blood is six c/, and by chance a little more or less depending on how the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone point like syphac, if the abscess in the incision doesn't appear, then press the wound and tie it, and the ointment cure until it heals.
de emigrainne	Of the removal
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old age comes, and acute cough, because of the moisture from tears and heat in the temples and lower back that is beyond endurance and similar things. Medicine is treated with ways of medicinal cures and all this does not help him, so we extract the arteries in the temples and cauterize them, as we have reported.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extracting them is such that one feels beneath their temple hair, and hears about the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its pulsation, and is only responsive in some who are too cold; and if it responds, then strain his neck with some cloth strips, then rub the area with a rough cloth, and heat him up with hot water until the artery becomes clearly evident. Then take the spatula as shown below:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then scrape the skin gently until you feel the artery, then pull it upwards with forceps, and remove all threads that are in each part; and if the artery is thin, if you turn it to the tip of the hook, then trim that part according to the size of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it isn't cut, or jumps not all at once,
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And drain the blood from the .vj. c, until the third day; and if the artery is large, then it should be tied in two loops of a strong double thread of silk, so that infection does not occur before the healing of the wound, nor repeatedly bleed; then cut off the excess between the two threads at that moment, and then, if you see, then apply the cautery gently until the bone with the bones being cut; and this is the surgical procedure, should the patient not have fever and be of warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cautery helps to finish off infections: for this reason it is a greater help against infections.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	When it comes to extracting arteries, one must fill the area with old cotton and place well-made tent cloths over it; when you sever them, apply dry medicinal substances that promote tissue growth, as well as tent cloths until it heals. And if you don't have a proper clamp for the artery, act just as you would during extraction, hurry to use a cautery tool, or utilize the area with vitriol and grip your hand tightly so that the clot stays in place; and if you lack this present tool, apply ice on the clot until it freezes, then immerse the affected area in cold water until the clot no longer moves, ensuring proper restraint. The one who is faster and lighter during artery extraction should cauterize the blood vessel from that cautery trenching for half an inch, but make sure the trenching is well spaced to retain heat for a longer duration.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too tight, they retain less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And there should be .i. inch of space between the two knives, and when you have heated them to touch both ends, place the hot iron until it reaches the bone, then cauterize the vessel in two places; and keep them spaced apart for these shoulder joints because there is no soldering on this cautery tool throughout; and this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When tears of the eyes are descending through the veins that are above the testicle of the head of the arm, and it does not benefit from any treatment with medicine that one might do, and you see the face of the patient turning red, and feel or see a pulsation as if of a heartbeat; and where they are tender and moist so that the hairs on paper fall off, and the papers become heated, and burned by the heat of the tears, it is necessary to have this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called the old "bruise cure", and if you treat someone with this illness by having hair on their head or forehead, then make three cuts evenly across the forehead according to the length of the forehead; and make one cut like two lengths all along the forehead from below upwards until it stops near the nose, and the other two cuts like two lengths above the eyebrows, making sure not to cut the arteries that are above the eyebrows; keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and each wound should be the size of three finger widths in width; have a piece of sponge and some cloth ready to wipe off any blood, then use the sharp instrument that is formed from two parts.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	from the cut that is near the temple up to the second cut; and burn all the flesh that is between the two gaps evenly until it sticks to the bone, then make another cut from the middle cut up to the other gap, and then extract this ague brazier.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you ignite in the first gap the tool called 'cultellaire', and it is very sharp on one side, but blunt on the other, it has this shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And make the cut towards the fatty part of the meat at the bone, and the cut should go towards the bone from the flesh, and stop when it feels halfway through the skin.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And remove all the veins that descend from the head as far as possible until an incision is made through to the flesh; and then proceed similarly in the middle of the cut up to the other opening. And then extract equal blood evenly, press out the flesh for the taken blood; then place a patch of old cotton in each incision, and apply wet cloths soaked with wine and oil and garlic, making sure no pus is seen; and on the third day release the bandage, and provide ample cool water, then administer a cure with ointment basilico mixed with rose oil, and other treatments used for wounds until it heals.
dou reume des eulz	of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When there is an acute catarrh accustomed, and you see the eyes swollen and small, and weakening of sight, and burnt paper; and hair falls out, and one feels a feverish chill, and the patient sneezes. Therefore, know from these events that those substances and this mucus come only from many veins, and the remedy used, if it is such.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you instruct the patient behind their forehead, then make a large cut in the middle of the forehead, and another one somewhat wide below this.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And start from the temple on the left to the temple on the right, and let your incision go until it reaches the bone; and keep away your hand from the nerves of the temples that move when eating; and once the bone is exposed, pour all the blood with a sponge, then drain in between the two lips of the cut and place old cotton and linen fabric; then cover this area with wrung cloths in wine and oil, and avoid any pus accumulation; when it's removed, you should rub the bone until cartilage begins to form, then treat it with things that dry out tissues which could irritate cartilage.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of the flower of wheat and four parts of colofoin, make them into a paste; and apply it to these wounds to stimulate flesh throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	From ear piercing
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Everything that is inserted into the ears is one of the four things: or seeds, or beast, or mine stones or similar things such as iron; or seeds, such as beans, peas; or flowing matter such as water and oil and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it leaks through the ear hole or in any other way that doesn't fit with the ear or doesn't grow inside the ear, put the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, if it distills any drop of blue oil or nut oil, then proceed with extraction; and have him sneeze into consideration, and stuff his nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put pieces of cloth or wool inside the ear; and hold the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	It often comes about through this treatment; and if it does not come out, then he should proceed with the extraction using fine hooks, as follows:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it leaps like needles, that's good; if not, prepare for the extraction using a small, sharp instrument with slight curvature; and if it doesn't leap through these, make an araneus needle and pinch the tip of the needle or part of the ear well, then soak whatever is inside the wax of the needle so that the wick cannot enter with the needle; then press the wax firmly for use because many times it comes in like we said; and if it doesn't come in this manner, take glue from it and pinch its ends, and place in some an instrument suitable for such work, and put a bit of cotton inside; then press the glue onto the stone or anything else, and pull.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it doesn't leap through all these things that we have said, then hurry to cut the ear so an abscess bulges out and spasms; and the way of cutting is such that you first sharpen the edge of the patient's auricular lobe, and extract blood according to its size, then let the lobe lie between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the base of the ear near the fat or what hangs down; and make the cut as round as a moon until you reach the stone, then break the bone according to your strength, and suck it quickly into your mouth; and treat until it is healthy.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it's grains that are inside and it swells, prepare for extraction; and if it cannot come out, prepare this small spatula tool according to this shape:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision on that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think that the grains are moist due to the moisture in the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract using fine hooks and suction, as we said, so that the extractions go smoothly.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In cold thus that the ear discharges, then the patient should use coughing with warm liquids first, and fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And be lying over that same ear or where the cold is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If she jumps for heaven, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	And if heaven doesn't exist, take many stones according to the length of your thumb, and make them slightly heavy. Warm each one in fire for a moment; and place one or several of them inside their ear, pull it out from one foot, and push another stone on the stone that's in the ear; and keep doing this with stone after stone until all the cold exits completely, and then she jumps completely outwards; and if you see this, take a juniper branch, and insert one end of your finger into the ear, and hold the other part of it over fire as long as the most sensitive end of the juniper is burnt. Then do this with another piece of juniper until all the cold exits, just like we have described in stones.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of small creatures like a flea and such, treat them as we have said in division. But if it is of large size that one can feel it, perform the extraction with pincers; this is something more lightweight to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of maggots from the ears, when you treat them in accordance with what we have explained about divisions and distillations therapy, if the treatment does not help, then you must look at the ear under sunlight: if there are no maggots, then apply fine needles into it; if nothing is visible, then take the reed that matches this form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And place the finest needle in the ear according to the amount of pain tolerated by the patient, then insert it completely into the canal; do this repeatedly until all the liquid comes out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they don't want to come out, numb the cotton swab in the canal as I've instructed for inside the ear; and if they do not protrude like we have said, administer distillations that the old ones have proven effective for worm incisions, and you will find guidance on distillation treatments elsewhere; and if you distil your oils and medicines in the ear with this instrument, which is shown to you as follows:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it should be made of silver or lead, being narrow below and wide above for distillation. And to press within the distillation use a properly made arnail instrument for this. If you see a razor and bandage around the tip insertion cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the cane, and the cane be inside the ear. Then press inside the razor all the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled or exhausted from the ear; and feel the patient internally, and let it distillations .i. pox heated by fire as one does when distilling into the ear; and guard against being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	From ear piercing
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without any perforation in the ears; and this same thing happens at home through ear piercing wounds, or of a fetus being born inside the ear, and these piercings happen once within the ear, if one cannot see them; and never does it have .i. hole for the perforation to be seen, and one sees it very well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes within the ear, if one cannot see it, is due to gunk being sanitized in various positions, and you must understand that putting the ear by the fire helps; look inside: if you can see the obvious inflammation, if the work has fully created this pus-like substance described here:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be cut and dug out from front to back all evenly, so that it does not burn the ear; if the inflammation is due to pus or part of the ear, hold your sharp tools gently until that pus-filled part is completely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the pellets are inserted fully into the ear, take a fine, lightweight rasp and gently scrape it on the fire, then place it inside or near the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the swelling that causes the ears to hurt when heard through, gently prick and ensure not to damage the nerves of the ear; then insert a tent into the ear according to its width near the opening, and apply the wax in the Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Continue this action every day until the wound is healed, or take a wick and moisten it with rose water, and apply powdered vitriol. And if you see swelling in the ear, then remove the wick and replace it with another dampened one made from rose oil and beeswax, until the swelling disappears; then continue treating it until it is healthy again.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, immerse a cloth and dip it in cold water, then place it on the ear, and apply other treatments that stop bleeding which are known from distillation processes.
de la char des papieres	From the page's contents
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	When dealing with hair that grows in when wet and then dry, it is necessary to use tweezers and forceps on it. Take a piece from its roots; then place sulfur tincture upon the affected area.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if you don't remove them, cauterize them with a fine cone cautery and the cauterizer after the incision will be beneficial; they should repair themselves many times over, as nothing remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized with fire, those root parts get burned and do not return.
de la gresle	Of the gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times in papers, there come warts that seem to growl due to their shape and hardness, and because of this is called the disease "hail," which is a cluster of large moisture within the paper above and below; the actions are like this: be cautious if the hail moves from one side to another, and it's a simple matter to know; then make it broad, subsequently scorch each part gently, then take with tweezers, and cut.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you can't cover it without piercing a little bit of the paper, and if it doesn't harm the patient; and if there's a large tear, then stitch it together with one thread, and cure until it heals; and if it's small, don't put too much strength into it, for the ointment will heal it quickly and promote new flesh growth.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the granuloma is descending within the ear towards the upper part, invert the paper and place the granuloma under the scissors, then extract and press from both sides; and if the paper is pulled away by the cut, it causes no harm; and when the granuloma has been extracted, remove the salty water, cure the wound until the flesh is renewed, so that the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the granulomas
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that dries on the surfaces of papers above it, and this happens more often in children than in adults, and it doesn't harm their eyes much, but they come down with catarrh in the mornings, and can't look at the sunlight because tears rush to their eyes; and for this reason, they lie on their sides always, sleep flat, and their papers are damp under their eyelashes due to the exinach that appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press on the arm with your fingers and feel the pulse between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the way of doing this surgery is that the patient places their head on your healthy area. Then take one linen cloth and set up a tent in the shape of a circle according to the amount contained by exinach from each part, then place it; press with both hands from one side and the other so that all the exinach gathers inside the circle; then dig in the middle of the moist area with a sharp tool making a cut not wider than the wound when you are done opening a vein; make sure to cover the moist area completely till you see the exinach. From this slit, the exinach comes out in various positions according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Then remove it all in one piece of cloth between your fingers at the front, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is dispersed; make sure not to stick in the slit, that you don't get inside the moist area up to the eye, that you don't hurt it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the incision does not open at the beginning of the wound, so enlarge a little bit gently the wound until it opens; then stretch as we have said, then moisten with cloths and water, and place on the limb, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such individuals who grind salt and place it to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the doctor should treat as long as they remain healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if pus starts to form in the arm, so the doctor uses plasters that soothe until they remain healthy.
des poilz des papieres	The phrase "des poilz des papieres" translates directly to "the hairs of papers". This might refer to paper fibers or could be metaphorical depending on context. Without more information, this is the literal translation.
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hair grows in different places than naturally does and it becomes grey, these affect the eyes causing diseases like constant watering from them and paper-like swelling of the eyelids and puffy eyes, due to being a cause of eye damage; then treatment should be conducted according to four methods: or by fire cautery as an ensemble, or through blood-letting medicine as described in the chapter about cautery, and this is done either through incision and stitches or with bandages, as I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You must place the eye socket in its natural position, then turn the paper of the eye onto your left hand; if it flips over correctly, that's good; if not, sew through one thread from point .i. on top; and do this either beyond the edge of the paper or where hair grows underneath these hairs, pull through a single thread all across the paper and then fold it back with a razor; then cut out part beneath the paper, beneath these hairs, extending to the corner up to the small one; then remove a thread, place a tiny cotton tent and linen on the paper, then draw an emblem onto the paper as round as a bay leaf, but ensure that the emblem matches the height you see when lifting the folded paper.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if there's part which requires using a lot of the paper according to how the paper becomes soft; then apply it all over the two lines you've marked and start with the large plaster until it shrinks. And leave one near the natural hairs in growth, then place the thyme in one of the two corners on the keur, then remove everything. Then join the two edges together using a needle with just one thread of fine wool around each line, and cleanse out the blood; then let the excess thread hang from both sides up to where any gunk is attached if you do this method; otherwise ignore it and leave the stitch and threads for three or four days; then treat the wound without stitches with drying and constraining substances since the paper heals by contact with the wound, as well as its joining together. But the stitches are removed (as the old ones did), making work free of fear; And there's another way: you stamp the paper into a shape like that of an olive leaf, just as we described, cut it into three parts according to the form shown here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then take what stands above the smaller forces evenly according to the shape which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the forceps, and if the thing is not even, take a needle or have thread on it, and stick the needle in its head; and pull another piece of thread across the large artery, and the other piece across the small one, then join the threads equally between your fingers; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin over which you applied it, as we told you previously, then stitch together the two edges of the wound by suturing, and keep it clean until it heals properly; and if pus comes to your incision, soothe it with ointments that relieve pain and inflammation; and every time paper hair turns, you should use what we have instructed about incision; but the stitches in one or both are more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of veins follows this form: and it is necessary that you turn the paper and cut within according to what I have said, and then make two stitches by art, and two small threads as long as the paper width is; and divide each of these two parts into two halves; then assemble both in a delicate manner at the top point of the paper covering the eye, and tighten the two stitch parts in this direction; and leave like this for several days, and the skin that has been tightened will dry out and harden and heal until it exits naturally.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it takes time, and if the patient has strength, then heal him until he fully recovers. And when the wound is healed, and when paper stops bleeding, and hairs do not grow anymore; this is how you should perform the second operation according to this figure, and according to this length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The surgical operations are like this: you take a fine needle and tie it with two strands of silk thread which is fine and strong. Then join the ends together finely, making sure they're long enough for one palm to measure between them. Next, place another strand of the fine silk thread across in your hand, tying its ends around the needle's shaft; then insert this end into the injured person's wound until it pierces through natural hair thickness and then quickly moves back out beyond the hairline on paper. When you have pulled all hairs to that point, remove your hand letting them come out completely from the paper with their original hair length.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the needle is treated and no hair comes out with it, you should pull the needle from all the silk thread that was ordered in your hand, until the needle reaches its end point which is just beyond where it pierced the skin. Then you check to see this visually through the eye; then remove the needle and the thread, and rest the eye for two days or three days, until the hair grows back to its original place and a new flesh begins to form. And if the hairs are small, accompany them with one long hair from a living animal, letting it grow along with the one you left or trim it, once it's grown out fully before cutting.
de la porriture de l’oil	Regarding eye infections
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease, called 'congestion' or 'putrefaction', comes about in the eye, it occurs in two ways: one naturally, and the other unnaturally.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And happens suddenly due to an injury or surgery, or from similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the way of treating it is that you sever this seam and open the eyelids, and place linen patches inside, and keep it closed until it heals. And it must not be the case that in his treatment, you use things that dry and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the disease will return worse than the first; but work with softening substances, such as fenugreek; and apply a wash of water or vinegar and linseed oil, and apply buttered onion to any of the oils, and wrap it in a tent, and treat him with this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your treatment are to be cautious that it does not heal in the shape it was before; and these works which we have spoken about do not exclude remedies for this illness, that it should not return in the form it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	Of the matter that comes to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease, which truly is called 'dislocation', and it is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Accidents come from wounds, cracks, cauterization and similar things; and in this way of operating you take a needle, having two threads on it, and insert it into the flesh, piercing it with your left eye to see through, so that the thread is seen in both sides of the flesh; then the flesh covers all over the needle, and the paste covers the large pustule.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure on the paper returns as it should, that is good; if not, take a piece of sand and place it in the wound, then turn the paper and make two cuts inside the paper. Let there be two points where each cut intersects with the sides of the incision, and let these forms create an angle so that when they are assembled together, the figure resembles one of the letters 'I griesche'; after this remove the flesh according to its size and thickness from where you have placed the sand, then adjust the two separated parts using thread made of linen; then apply the cure that we have discussed about softening medicines and antiseptics until it heals properly.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a wound or stitches or cautery, it is required that you make a full cut along the hair's line of the paper, and according to what was mentioned before; then cut between the two sheets of a tent, as I have said; and must perform the work according to the shape of the illness, for she varies much in form, and the wise surgeons prepare themselves with all sorts of tools to show how they can bring back the figure to its natural form; and even the patients themselves, according to what should be done in operation and instruments used in various configurations.
dou soudement de la papiere	right along the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this seam occurs in the hands so that the paper above is joined with the white of the oil, and cannot move or do its natural works, then it is necessary that you pierce the edge of a razor under the paper, and lift it up; and extend it with forceps until you reach the delicate subtile point which should neither be too sharp nor too deep, so as not to allow the point to cause injury to the eye or to burn it; and make your incision, in which you slightly scrape together that which is joined, so that the paper heals according to its natural shape; and all of it is healed, and no longer causes any pain in the oil; then drain with water, and cleanse it gently, so that the paper heals as it should heal naturally; and all of it is cleansed, and do not leave anything sharp or unpleasant in the eye; then place between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and on top of the eye apply moist wool soaked in egg mixture; and after this, use a colander and other spongy things until it is fully healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	From the edge of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the edge of the eye is in two ways: it is nerveous and resembles a hard piece of wood, and another which isn't nerveous, but is like a white moisture frozen solid. If you touch this with iron and treat it by rubbing with pincers, you can't do it; both these appearances start near the large tear ducts, and grow slowly slowly until they cover all the vision and all the light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of cutting is such that the patient places their head in a healthy position, then opens their eyelids; and removes the paper with your hand, then puts the edge of the eye to pincers for small folding, and holds it above; then take a needle, and place one horse hair, or cow hair, or ox hair, and strong thread on it; and double the needle point slightly and pierces through the edge of the eye, and sews thoroughly all the way through the edge, sewing the edge with the thread and holding it above, and burns along every hair of the edge to where the pupil and silk are at the root of hair until just before the tear duct, then cuts off any remaining in the root near the tear duct from all delicate matter, and leaves the natural tear gland or tear duct, so that there is no flow of bodily fluids through the incision as usual; and only once is the edge extended to one inch, and along the thread, just as we have described; then burns off all the delicate matter around this area, forming thus:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And see to it that the cautery does not touch the fatty tissue and damage it, nor should you puncture the skin. And after incision, pour a little oil on the wound, and make a collar of mercurial paste, and leave it until tomorrow; then clean according to what is needed until he becomes well again.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not sensitive and you cannot push in the needle, and if the nails do not enter, this condition of an insensitive nail is treated with medicine many times; it grows as I described in the division section. And if you see it thickened, the eye responds to illness, take the cautery lightly in a sharp point according to this shape:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Cut the nail gently from above. If you see that it does not diminish and presses the reason there, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of mercurial paste and a red collar with oil, and heal the eye until the other day; then resume another operation in the same way, until all is removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is nothing against your vision, like pus-filled blisters, then you should proceed, and first treat the pus-filled blister until it's cleansed, then restart the procedure as described previously, until it's cleansed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh around the eye irritates your vision through significant harm, then suspend its use, and extract a portion but not all at once, ensuring no leakage from tears; afterwards, apply a red collar to the eye made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows around the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Hair of some men does not turn red when they are born, and covers the eyelid, restraining against papers and turning outside, resembling a rose of ivory; and the veins in such cases make it so that the patient's head is placed in their healthy condition, then they release the hair, and thus all this flesh is cut up into suitable uncinated pieces, and holds them with strength; then remove the first flesh, and go on cutting with the razor until the end, and be careful not to hurt the eye in your operation; and make that incision as described earlier for nail removal and using small forces of what one extracts from the blood vessels, such as a cobweb after this chapter demonstrates; and when the incision is completed and all flesh has been removed, apply oil from a sieve or distill a red-coloured liquid medicine and something corrosive, placing cotton with an egg cover on top to ensure you have enough for pus; if nothing remains, if the shoe isn't there, and you are unsure of pus, leave the eye and cure any symptoms indicating heat in the pus; then return to your operation as long as it is healed, and thus make several cuts into the eye in this manner.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, it is necessary that you treat each weak oil route naturally; and the accidental path, in iron work; and do not thrust your hand into any of these operations until you see that this member suffers from that operation.
des voines des eulz	of veins and eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	When the veins are red that cover over the eye, and cause harm to sight for days.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	So, at the beginning, you must look to see where the eye is, where the swelling is, and nowhere else; there is no other disease apart from this swelling; then treat it in this manner: instruct the patient to position their head over your healthy area, then suspend all veins up to the entire circumference according to your expertise, and have these veins be subtly doubled following this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two inches by degree on one side according to this shape:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then continue to align those veins subtly, and allow the blood to flow after some time, until you see the removal of those veins from the eye; and ensure that you do not pierce the eye at the points of the lancet blades, and perform this operation in midday before the sun, and be very meticulous in your work so as not to harm even those veins. And when you have done this, use a collar of green and red distilled water to help eliminate what remains of sebel.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot undertake all this at once, prepare a poultice with substances that soothe the pain in the eyes, and leave it on for some days until the pain is relieved and there is assurance of an abscess rupture, then resume according to this method as described previously until recovery; and this is the form of remedies:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the duct of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The treatment for what is called "arissati" duct: when you treat it with a cautery and with hot water medicine as I have described previously, and if it doesn't heal, then there's something within the place where you cut into the abscess, at the point of death, and extract all the moisture that is there, until the bone becomes exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is discovered, and you will see the corruption and the blackness, if you take it with all the tool which this has been made from; and call it "hard head", and be made of iron for one hard head, and be sharpened like a file as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place the corrupted part of the bone on your hand, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a bit as long as you know that this corruption has stopped; and do this once, then return the bone to its state of medicinal drying.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the ears are soldered, and there is birth, and the bow's chest is soldered, and it remains like this for forty days, and does not renew itself or become abscessed, and no bad events occur, know that it is healed; if this is not so, then there is only one way to bring back the fistula to the tip of the nose following this form: and cut through the bone again with a tool, and by using cold medicines, and once uncovered, take the wood according to this form, and have the iron head be triangular in shape, and let the shaft taper down to the edge as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place the finger on the joint of the bone and cheekbone, keep your hand away from the eye about an inch, then turn your whole hand until it penetrates the bone and feels the pain where the wind goes if you hold your hand over his nose; and after restore the arm to dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the child is born and hardened the bones, let the matter go to his nose; if a lighter thing comes out to the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are open completely in every direction, and there is no disturbance within the nose or narrowing of the airway, it is necessary that you bind the patient's head; then heal them, then apply suction cups or a cup without iron to suck without injuring, then place over the eye. A paste made from juniper, aloe, incense and sarcocolle, and then compress the eye, and plaster it with strips and cloths; and how you should use the cloths is that you take soft cloths and double each one in four, and then place them one on top of another according to the amount needed by the eyes; then compress from above with a tough strip made durable, and start using suction cups again without injuring; then remove the suction cups and leave the eye compressed day and night, and if the bandages loosen, it is necessary that you compress as much as possible; then remove the bandage after day and night, and if you see the eye healing, it's good; if not; then continue with plastering and cloths and the bandage and suction cups until they are healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	At the rupture of the ovarian membrane
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When tears occur in the scleral membrane, then opens and brings out pieces of paper like a resin grain, and it is observable; therefore if you see this cataract, the eyes are such that you stick an needle at the root of the part below until halfway up, then stick another needle with double thread at the part under the lid; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its position; then cover with the double thread and tie a portion of the membrane inward, and tie it well, then remove the needle and place on the eye wet wool in plenty of egg mixture; and let it be until the thread dries along with the membrane, then treat the eye with soothing substances until the wound is healed; and each part of the circular dressing with the membrane is restrained until she is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the eyes have a great appearance, then puncture them through the delicate lid that comes under the eye, and dry the moistened albumen and sink the eyes down, and enter them right away; then remove them until they are healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	Of the oil of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease which is called "alcunnati" only leaves behind bile that accumulates in the liver, resembling descending sharp pains, and it's not actual pain; and the appearance of the work seems to have you make the patient sit on the instrument of operation and straightly, then take the head between your hands from two sides, and move them until you see the bile coming above to your eyes; then be inserted, and doesn't descend and cleared away the light, observe everything that the patient would; and if it doesn't descend, know that it's pain, and when the descent of the bile isn't prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you are to have the patient sit between your hands, then take the fine spatula and make incisions on the corneous sheet through the continuation of the conjunctive with the corneal sheet and the crown, as long as the bow escapes; and when it has escaped, if you distill into the eye hot water mixed with honey, or hot water made from fenugreek, then apply another cure once it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	Of the waters of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have the indications for incisions in this division and what should be done, so we perform actions according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you have the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from light by the sun, and tie the healthy eye tightly; then place the paper of the eye on your left hand when it is facing upwards or on your right hand when it faces downwards. Then take the tool with which 'almagda' is called in your right hand if it is facing upwards and use your left hand, if it's facing downwards, for 'almagda'. Place the tip of the tool by the corona through the size of a finger across that part of the tear duct towards the smaller part of the lower eyelid; then apply 'almagda' vigorously and twist your hand until it pierces through the tear duct tissue, feeling when 'almagda' reaches the empty space. It's necessary that the length of the 'almagda' tool matches the distance from the edge of the pupil to the end of the shadow area; this is the cornea of the eye. If you see bone in that paper due to the transparency of the corneous tissue, then place the tool until it reaches or aligns with the point where water is present, and squeeze through one channel after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	Let the patient now see his illness before him and the instrument in their mind.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After the short rest, and if the fever rises on the second way, apply force with the tool, and when it is fully inserted and no longer rising, gently pull out the scabbard by twisting your hand in a steady rhythm; then, put back a little of the powdered gem water into the eye and remove the dirt from inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then place the oiled or greased eye shutters or wool soaked in rose oil and a plenty of eggs, and bind it with a healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Yes, and those that belong to our time should be placed on the common broth with plenty of eggs.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye because of its hardness, as there are some people whose eyes are too hard, it is necessary for you to take the tool called "alberit," which has this form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And then pierce only the conjunctive part and do not go too deep, but make it subtle. Then, pour in the scabbard as we have said; and after completing the work, provide the patient with rest in this dark room, for him to sleep on his back in a dark position; and be of no movement, and allow for light meats, and do not move his head neither to the right nor to the left, tie him according to his disposition until noon the next day. Then untie him in this same dark room and check his vision, see if he can see any things, and then reapply the bandage until seven days; it would be inappropriate for you to do this during or after the current treatment period, but you should take care of this because the fever ascends rapidly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When you have to remove an abscess, you should release the eye before the seventh day, and apply the treatment for abscess alleviation; and once it is soothed, then free the sight and place it above its face with an ointment for a few days, and stay in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then leaves the house little by little, and adapts to its surroundings; know that no students should interfere in this situation.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	One came to us who was from Syria and he told us that there they were using some borage oil for healing, where they extract the water but nevertheless I have never seen anyone like this in our land nor have I read about it in old books; perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the signs of the shapes of the amada, for those who do not know them can see them; and they are properly described as being arid.
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And indeed the head of such from this same subtlety, and the rear end in three angular pains.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh around the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	None of them give birth or produce strange beasts. Some resemble scorpions with the foot of a bird; and if there are such creatures or they have a red-colored body, and if it has a body colored in good hue.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	For the body of these furred beasts and not red, you must have the patient lie between your hands facing the sun; work on their nostrils, and apply honey to those creatures, then drive them away; because if you can hold something that is as fine and sharp as a needle from one side until you know that this beast has been completely cut open.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there is no thing that we cannot cope with, if the opening is done with all one instrument delicately and lightly, ensuring nothing remains; and if it does not ascend or have pus at its bottom, then you should cleanse it accordingly. And if there are abscesses, cut them out straight away; and for bad abscesses, act quickly and use a cautery until the pus is drained out completely and all the sinews have been treated. Then drain or bleed freely or with water or wine afterwards.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	In its work, and due to moisture it comes up to the palate, know that there is blood; and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is a living birth in the bone above, for which the tools cannot come to cut: therefore you must take a linen thread somewhat thick, and tie with both hands, and have space between each knot about one inch or less; and put the thread on the sick's nose under the chin, and pull it gently until it comes out through the nose into the mouth; and many times do this with the child at schools, and it is a simple matter for him who wishes to perform it; then hold the head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and distinguish them one after another while attending to those of us who are with thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this until you know that the new meat has corrupted the old flesh. Then remove the filth, evacuate the blood, and apply an Egyptian ointment to the pus-filled area, and then place it back at its original position as before; do this for three days or longer, until the ointment eradicates all of the remaining impurities in the flesh; and then after that, put some opium at the nostril for several days until it is healed. If there's need for dried medicine, use it; and this is how to use a device to cleanse the head, into which oils and medicines or alcohol are distilled.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And use it made of silver or tin, resembling an open lamp, like a rod, and guide it in the same way; and if you see fit, make it into a closed rod, and fill the instrument to purify the head; and keep one hand on the head when heating the oil or any other liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh around the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease is born around the nose at the root of the nose, which is called "telul", it grows and becomes large until you can see it; and because this must be handled in the beginning, and the bone should be prepared completely, then place it under your control with the cautery or the burning medicine; and if you delay preparing it until it's large, beware if it feels hard, if it changes color, if there is a poor sense: don't touch it with iron for it is an infected abscess, because when you remove it once, it brings great harm to the patient; and if the abscess was due to heat exposure, not from changing color, and you see that all can be removed, then empty the patient and perform surgery with fear, and treat the area with desiccating and restricting substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nose is cut and stitched
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when solutions for prolongation come into contact with one of these venous loops, it benefits little, because in some people.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	So when this happens to none of them, then you must check if the wound is fresh up until all blood; and thereafter align both lips with a stitch, then treat it until healed. If the lips are yellow on one side and another, then you should scorch all parts of their edges until they heal, then join both lips together with a stitch, tighten them, and apply dragon's blood powder and powdered incense; put this powder on a piece of plaster glue or any other soldering paste, let it sit until the scab falls off by itself, then treat with ointment until healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of sewing is such that you join the paste: or by needles, as we have said in the stitch for the abdomen; or with thread, as I have informed you.
des apostemes des levres	from abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the hands of someone within the abscess, there are stones like grains sometimes, smaller and larger; therefore it must be that you remove the lips, cut into each pit, take them with forceps and extract in each part; then after the vitriol incision, apply pressure to the wound until bleeding stops; and then clean the wound from dry things until it is clean.
de la char des gencives	from the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times, a hard flesh forms on the gums, which the old called "albulus"; it must be held with forceps and cut to its root, allowing for bleeding or blood flow. Then place under the heat of vitriol broiet powder, or other powders that restrict and dry out; and if this flesh returns after cutting, and does so many times, then cut it a second time and cauterize it: if it doesn't return after being cauterized; these are the forms used for cutting.
des sordens	Of cauteries with fire command the sick person to let the hairs grow long and evenly; if they pierce at their root, hold the eyes firmly so they don't move until they fully grow.
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Many times teeth assemblies are gathered at the main part of the teeth, between the mouth and gums; you'll find ugly and harsh layers here. And many times blackened and citrine teeth along with worms exist until the infection reaches the gum line, and the teeth become stinky too. Therefore, it's necessary to place the sick person under your hands, have their head on a holy surface, and hold out any teeth or layers that are visible till nothing remains; then you should take care of blackness and greenness, yellowing, and other colorations until they disappear. And if one removes what is at first sight obvious, it's good; otherwise, start again after the second day and the third, until you have everything removed. And remember that teeth require different types of instruments to be extracted depending on how the work is done, as the tool used for extraction differs from those placed between teeth; these forms along with others should be ready with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It's necessary that when you treat the tooth for its pain, you delay the extraction as much as possible because one should not do this in haste. As it is a very delicate matter, there should be no reason to rush during the process.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	So when the patient is constrained to bleed, it's necessary for you to know exactly where to puncture.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times, the pain of the patient will occur, and be careful to determine whether it is a painful tooth or not, and let bleed from the good tooth; and throughout this time, do not completely relieve the pain until the evil has been removed. We have already done this for our patients as we know how to treat. And when you are certain of where to puncture, you must sear around the tooth very deeply so that the gum is protected all around; then move your hands or with your fine tongs at the first try and try until it is well embedded, then firmly hold the tongs in place; and have the head of the patient between the painful tooth and your knees, and keep it still so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the right tooth straight without breaking it, and if it doesn't spring back, take none of these instruments and insert them gently into each half, and move it like you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is torn and splintered, you should fill in the gaps with bandages at the point of the breakage; and if it's extracted subtly using tweezers, without causing it to shatter during extraction; and you must carefully open under the gum line for removing the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be sure to handle it well so you don't break it, and if any part remains, inform the patient of the greater pains caused by the remnants of the root after the initial extraction.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And be cautious not to do as the ignorant surgeons do, who break the tooth in haste and by their boldness, without considering the instructions we've given; but instead, they often cause further damage from this disease by extracting parts of the root or tooth itself, just like we have shown many times. When the extraction is done, wash the mouth with wine or vinegar and salt; and if bleeding persists, which happens quite often, then you should fill the mouth with nitric acid solution; and if that doesn't work, apply cauterization.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the instruments you first use should have long points and thick handles, ensuring they don't double when you pull the tooth; these are their forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And may have large limbs that do not bend while being used, and be made of strong iron well-crafted, with teeth for gripping.
de la racine des dens	from the roots of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains at the extraction, it is necessary to place cotton moistened with butter inside for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	Until the nails are softened, and when you use the tongs called "algefri", which make the patient's nails look neatly trimmed; they should be done as if with a file and that is their shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out completely with these pliers, it is necessary that you uncover the entire flesh up to the root, and place the instrument known as "althali," which means palmache, as it is formed thus:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be hollow and thick so that it does not break at all, and if the root jumps out through this, that's good; if not, use all the tools you have, as their shapes follow after these descriptions:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if help is taken from this tool which has two points, as it is formed thus:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are in front according to the size of teeth, and this tool which seems like large pliers, as it is formed thus:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let there be this instrument so it may not break, and know that few of the instruments of dentistry are; also other instruments which are not counted among them. And as such, skilled masters find their own instrument by themselves, according to what their works and diseases reveal to them, for there are some illnesses for which old teachers did not teach any instrument due to the variety within them and if any part breaks from the tooth or of another bone, or it rots, they look for the instruments that suit them, which I have mentioned, and help through gestures, as is this form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be large and well designed to hold the bone, so that it doesn't escape, but can be held and removed; and then restore him with medicines suitable for this situation. If there is decay in the bone, and if it's small, when using this instrument take care of all these aspects:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth do not appear naturally and their form is ugly, especially in young girls where teeth are born after the first ones and cannot be pulled or filed: in such cases you must know that it's due to the teeth being born in a crooked position. Therefore, extraction is necessary; and if they are alongside another tooth, take this tool described here with this shape, similar to one small hook each, made of sharp iron:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the tooth is ground slowly with my hands day by day due to the hardness of its root, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can be filed, then I file it in a single piece like this:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it's also like the file used for making needles; and I grind the tooth slowly with my hands day by day gently, so that it doesn't move until it chips; then in the end level off everything completely with no sharp edges left, and if its edge is too sharp and hurts the tongue, then you must grind down the roughness until it's even, so as not to hurt the tongue or ruin speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth rots
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth is behind the jaw bone, through percussion or by pulling it outwards, and when the patient cannot press against what they are eating so that it does not cause pain, and you have treated with medicine that restricts it; if this is ineffective, it should be restrained by a gold thread, because silver threads turn green and rot but gold never changes. And choose a thread that is neither too thin nor too thick, according to the size of the space between the teeth; and if you see that one tooth needs pulling, take the thread and hold it in place between two healthy teeth, then insert the diseased tooth between any other teeth present, until you can feel the healthy tooth on the other side; then continue the covering process up to where you interrupted, gently and skillfully tighten your hand, without causing any movement; and secure your ligature around the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then take the teeth with a thread on some pincers, and join them together, placing them between healthy tooth and tooth; and then keep it like that without hurting the tongue; and leave it like this as tight as it can stay in place, and if it dislocates or the threads break, tie it back with another thread; if stays properly and serves like this for all its time, and this is how teeth are aligned and the position of the two healthy teeth and the two missing ones appears just as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the teeth are set back in their place, they should be reinserted gradually, as we have mentioned; do not interfere with anything that is not cautious and can tolerate it, and never shape them like an osseous tooth of a calf. Place them in the spot where the defect exists, and secure them as we have said, and let them stay and serve for as long as they can.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	covering the wound of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	None of the threads come from beneath the tongue or its natural position when one is born; or by accident due to a healed wound. The procedures are as you work on the mouth for treatment, having your head in good health and keeping the tongue lifted. Then take hold of the nervous thread until the tongue has moved out of its place, and if there's stiffness or swelling, particularly from an abrupt wound healing process, remove the hook and cut the loose end. And make sure not to let the incision be too deep as it would go through the artery; when finished, lift the head up with a pinkish hue and slight coolness, then place over the tongue a linen cloth; and soothe your patients every night so that their tongues do not stick again.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if bleeding begins, set it with the iron tool on the wound; and if it doesn't stop bleeding, apply the slow-burning cautery, which is good for this purpose; then treat further until it has healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you notice anything that appears to be bloodied, black or hard, and your patient doesn't feel it, don't touch it as it could be gangrene; and should it start to turn into pus, and there is moisture, then use a hook to drain it and make a small incision from both sides, removing it from top and bottom; and if the pus remains in your body operation, place sulfur powder until it's healed, then continue with your operations as long as you have strength. Then lift the head with cool water and salt, and proceed with other treatments until complete healing occurs.
des apostemes de la gorge	From throat abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	No matter comes within the throat valves which are called "godath", and they're properly named the II almonds. And when you treat them, as we've said in division, and if they haven't healed, then be careful: if these are tough, small-seeded abscesses of a hard color, don't touch them with iron at all.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it's red and the root is large, don't touch it with iron for bleeding; but leave it until it heals, then you will remove it, or it would burst on its own. And if it has a whitish color beneath and the root is fine, prepare your instrument to cover it, but first ensure that the abscess is calm and at rest.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Therefore, make the sick person sit in front of the sun, and his limbs be in their natural position. Let him open his mouth and have the surgeons press his tongue over the entire tool, as it is shown; and let there be a fine silver or thin iron like knives nearby.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can't you press the tongue on all this instrument? And you see pus. Take the incision and put it in an almond, then pull it up more than you can; and don't remove any thing with, then shape it with your hands as it should be, which resembles some strength; and always both parts of head are corbed, and one part another, and are very sharp, and made of iron or fine tin:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you don't have this instrument at hand, then shape it with pliers, which should resemble the form described above:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And be cutting on one side and the other part of the name; and when you have done with one of the almonds, do the other in the same manner, and after making the cut gargle the patient with hot and cold water, or with water that is cool and mild. If bleeding occurs during this, then gargle the patient with hot water, or with cooked pieces of pomegranates, or leaves of myrtle, and similar things, until the wound is healed; then finish the treatment when it becomes healthy again. And do not let anything else grow in the throat other than the two almonds if you proceed thusly regarding them.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was inside her throat, which is the small abscess; and had successfully sealed off the entire throat, so much so that the woman could not breathe through the blocked passageway, and could neither eat nor drink. She died if she had remained in this condition for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscesses were so high that they had required two drains each, at both nostrils of the nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I hurriedly performed the procedure and inserted an incision into one of his lungs. Then I removed that lung segment with a large piece of tissue attached to it. Next, I made another incision in the other lung's lower part near the diaphragm, then opened his mouth and pressed on his tongue. Afterwards, I reinserted the lung into its wound and took out some pus; only a little blood came out from that. Then he was released from his illness through this surgical procedure of removing the lung segment. He began to drink water immediately after that, followed by wine. I did not stop cutting into that wound for a long period of time. The wound was recovering right away and filled the place where I had removed the lung tissue completely until it became quite large again; then I cleaned him up and cauterized inside his throat. This way, he stopped getting worse and recovered. I left those places, and as far as I know from what God did after me, he healed perfectly.
de l’uve	from the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When it descends to the womb, and it is swollen and elongated, it is called 'perpendicular'; and if it is large and spherical, it is called 'ovum'.
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the cure doesn't help, and you see that the extraction of pus has calmed down, and it's fine texture suggests you should take action; and for the one that is spherical and not long, and whether it's red or dusky or black, you need to avoid making an incision.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	So when you see it, according to the method I have explained earlier regarding its size and length, you should make the patient face the sun. Then press their tongue onto the tool as described previously; after that, insert an ounce into the ovum and pull it outwards, then cut with the second instrument of the two I mentioned for incisions in the treatment of tumors.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you should not remove more than the surplus which is beyond the natural boundary; for if you take away too much, you harm the voice and speech. And after incision, use what we have said about incisions of the two mandibles, and treat it until the wound heals.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if they are in danger from excess, you should apply the instrument of cautery to remove them.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the method of cautery is done with an incision tool.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And when the disease places its head in your health, then press the tongue onto the tool that we have said or the section on cautery, and rub it with a moist live coal, so that it is neither too thick nor too clear; and use the movement of this instrument, as shown:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place our head with a hair or where we apply the medicine, like the movements of a spoon, and place the instrument with all of the medicine on the elbow; let the patient remain still on his side so that saliva and fluid from his mouth can be drawn by the medicine internally, without it descending into the throat or causing distress. Then hold your hand on top of the medicine and press it onto the elbow for about half an hour until you see it absorbed and the medication's effects are calmed; if necessary, take cotton and wrap it around any tool, soak it in the medicine, stick the tool with all the cotton into a wick from above, until the cotton dries on the elbow. Repeat this often until the cautery of the medicine is perfect, then let it dry, and clean after four or five days. If you need to restart the medicine cautery procedure, do so, and after that, use a cotton plug soaked in butter inside the elbow area, cleanse everything around the medicine; rinse with cold water and gargle until fully healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is safer than incision, nor than the cautery; if it's treated with fumigation according to this method, take calamus and myrrh and oregano and rue and chamomile and borage and similar herbs, and assemble all of them or any of these in one pot, and put it there, and bring it to a boil; and the pot must be well sealed with strong clay, and in the middle of the pot place one tool stick according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And whether of silver or lead, and if it is one of the shoulder bones place in the mouth at the wound as long as vapor rises to the ovule through the canal, as long as the ovule is necrotic; after which you repeat often, until the ovule dries out, and ensure that you do not perform this method at the beginning of the abscess eruption, because many things occur; and do not use this method during the decline of the abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a stick and place an eggshell inside the mouth of the patient so that the heat does not become too hot; because the eggshell does not allow the steam to accumulate in the mouth, and it is a good remedy altogether for health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times there's an opening in the bone or spine of a fish, with nothing else happening; so it would be suitable for you to extract what you can see and press your tongue at noonday on all the instrument, so that you can see movement happen; and that which doesn't open up inside the throat, then you should make the patient vomit as soon as possible so that the meat is cooked in the stomach; by chance if it escapes through vomiting; or if the fish has swallowed a piece of sponge, or a bit of navel, or a root of lettuce, or one piece of dry bread; and tie a thread to the sponge, then swallow it again; and when she comes back up to the top, if it smells good, and then proceed with extraction; and if it doesn't come out from what we have said, then take one tool of thong according to this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instruments be directed towards the throat so that they can enter more lightly into the mouth, and have the head elevated up high; and guard not to touch the epiglottis, that nothing goes beyond it, nor push any bone inside; and move in such a way that the patient pushes the instrument, because if there is movement or if something becomes slippery; if she pushes the swallow, or pulls forcefully with all the instrument evenly, until she has the strength.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the substance of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Never is the blood treated without (medicine), as I said in the division, through the administration of medicines; and if this does not benefit, then look into the throat of the patient at noon, then press his tongue with the tool I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the vessel, guide it with all your skill, or use delicate forceps that are suitable for this task.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this doesn't suffice, take a hairy stick and place it in the throat of the patient, then press where the hair of the stick bends, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if you wash the patient with water every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take full glasses of cold water, and work it in the mouth, then pour it down without letting them swallow, and move it around with their hands often; and as soon as the vessel senses the water, they will defecate.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if she doesn't defecate as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafetida, using the instrument we mentioned for the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, because it will come out without any disturbance.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the method of fumigation is as follows: you take a pot that contains charcoal and place it inside a screen in the middle. The head part of the instrument should be put into this screen. Then pour your fumigation, have the patient hold the tip of the needle in their mouth, seal the mouth so no smoke escapes but enters until it reaches the lungs; now the breath will come out, and if it doesn't, repeat the fumigation several times. Allow the patient thirst, consume salty things and similar items, do not drink water. Then it is necessary for her to expel this through that method.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the instrument to treat the discharge is like having hinged curved scissors for it to enter into the throat; and it has the appearance of a surgeon's hook, and it also has a roughness like that of a file, so whatever she takes, she cannot leave; and here is its form:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	The appearance of pus discharges can be likened to what the memory brings forth from one and another in this book, and they vary in perforation and cutting; and there are two ways about it, one being in its likeness itself, and due to which it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for those who have them within their body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses in the head are different from those on the foundation, and the abscesses on the internal muscle are different from those that come to joints, and each has its judgment in action.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And for abscesses where one should not prick until the bowels are dead according to their completion; and for those that need to be pricked as soon as they are ripe, but do not die according to their completion, like abscesses that are below joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come below joints, if you leave it ripe inside by chance, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint are corrupted, which causes a contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	For an abscess is in the main body member, and if you delay incision until it's dead, it will harm the principal body part. Or if it's beneath the foundation, if you puncture or do so even when it's dead; it should not be that you puncture an abscess without digestion completed, unless it is beneath the foundation in which case it might grow fully and be inside, causing a fistula; and cannot heal in a large manner.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	It is necessary for you to know the time of abscess perforation that corresponds with maturation, and this is when the pain subsides, and the departure of fever, and reduction of pain and redness, and with the movement and hardening of the head of the abscess, and other signs; it is recommended that you have the perforation placed in the location below the abscess or at the point where it opens up, and also in line with the body length. The piercing should be made longitudinally along the body, whether the abscess is near hands or feet, joints and nerves, arteries, or any other place without a fold.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In such cases when they bend, according to that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are within the fatty part of the body, it is better to wait until you have completed digestion before making an incision as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you were to puncture before that, it would spread the poison of him throughout his body and be filled with many maggots; and by chance harden his skin and the parts beneath him.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if at no abscesses they puncture across the width of the body, according to what the limb requires.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary that you introduce small abscesses, small cuts; and in large ones, large cuts, and many incisions according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it is customary to use a knife, and cover; when it has become as soft as cloth, and hardened, then you should do so like how one does with milk blisters: and for those that split into three angles, and those that are covered in the same way as the leaves of myrtle, like abscesses from angles; and for those where a round cut is made, and other cuts and similar cutting techniques.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who do not have a head, such as superficial abscesses, it should be that you pierce them completely; and it is appropriate when the abscess is large, and has grown with great pus, and you pierce it, but do not drain all the pus in that moment, but only remove a part of it. Then let the abscess go until to another day, then leave nothing untouched; do this several times gradually, until all the pus has come out; likewise if the patient's strength is weak, or pregnant women, or young children, or aged and decrepit individuals.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For when he tries thrice with the release of the bow, that perhaps kills the patient, and you do not realize this.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have punctured your abscess, if the wound appears, and look to see if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it's a flat cut, use linen or old cotton bandages; and if it's a large abscess and there are many pus pockets, then you should stuff each one with a bandage so that they stick together; and if you have cut into the abscess part of the skin, and sewed it inward, then you should fill it with old cotton or linen rags without moisture, and bind it until the third day; then set it, and dress it with ointment until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if blood should start to pour out from your vein, cool it down with cold water and ease it off gradually, and hold the wet cloth there for many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if blood continues to flow persistently, then you should apply governance and treatment, using the powders I have mentioned in this book, and if it is due to an animal bite or an abscess, and if your vein or the area under the wound is very nervous, it is necessary for you to place wet cloths soaked with wine and oil on them; and if it is due to heat and the wound is reddened, it is necessary for you to apply wet cloths soaked with water and oil, or cold wine and oil, until the third day, as we have said; and then remove the pus and clean it up according to what should be done, until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this one should be known universally in treatments of abscesses: now I have told you how one must proceed before the treatments of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	of the stomach
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	In the head region, small abscesses come about, and their manner is like those on cloths, similarly to a jeweler's work with a catkin, and many have similar appearances.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fatty and of such kinds with moisture as peas; and there are some that are hard like stones for the tailor, and there is no doubt that if it affects them, it will act contrary to this.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the scalpel is that you must prove it with every instrument which is called 'intermediary', from which the form comes after, something it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, then make the cut above for its length.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is drained, scrape without leaving anything behind on the skin that contained the moisture, for it will return immediately if you leave nothing behind. Then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment if present; if not, in water and vinegar, and apply to the wound, letting it stay until the next day; and those who are healed by night come through this method.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And proceed to reapply the cotton, as before, on the second day and also on the third, until you are sure that it does not stay moist at night. Then dress the wound with ointment as appropriate, while it remains clean.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds on to be fatty, treat it in this manner, long ways; and cut your incisions, and burn all around, and put all your treatment of bleeding on the cloth where it is; and if the artery goes against you, do what I have told you after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And similarly handle the abscess if it is made of stone, and cut and treat it as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And when cutting on the stone-abscess and the wet one, it is lighter because they have little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if in any of these abscesses or head or there is no moisture, and from these newer abscesses that I observed or head of an old woman; and found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and unable to break; and even if one had punctured none of them, it would have been treated equally well like a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming or head, it was the case that those which come from the heads of children and the roots of ears, the opening should be entirely free for as long as possible depending on the patient, in order to allow blood to drain; and treat them as they should be treated.
des scrophules	regarding the pock marks
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times this abscess occurs in the throat, and close to the glands, and in the necks, and do not come to any other parts or on the body, they are hard, and are entangled with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scab is properly within its coat, as with the new and the abscess at the head, as we have said; and the appearance of these scabs are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that do not want to submit to health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In those where you see good arrangement on the pillow, and it has a color similar to that of blood, is mute from each side and not pierced through the neck or artery nor in the ducts; so it must be handled by placing over them, and cauterized from each part, and elongate both ears at the nostrils if necessary, as we have said about abscesses on the head; and handle it little by little, and be sure not to touch the nerve or vein, nor cut too deeply that the sputum does not spill out, and do not go ahead too much that you don't remove what you should.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and this does not allow you to open it, then insert powdered vitriol or any powders that release blood in the wound, and restrain the wound; and leave it like this until the abscess is appeased, and the wound becomes soft, and begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the skin is covered with blood, return to your work until you complete it. Then seek out your skill's indicator if there remain any small pustules, if you cut and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein in the root of the pustule, it should not be that you cut the pustule at its root, but tie it with a double strong thread, and let it fall out through it without harm; then apply an old cotton pad soaked in Egyptian ointment to the wound, then treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you are dealing with all of the ulceration, it is necessary that you gather together the two lips of the wound, and now suture them, because there should be no excess remaining due to the size of the ulcer.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	It is necessary that you understand how to cut into it, drain the pus, and suture it, just as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those ulcers that have excess, cut where it is open; and cut in the same way as previously described, from top to bottom. Then treat with ointments and similar things until they get infected by the corruption of what's already there; and when the wound has been thoroughly cleaned, apply ointment until the flesh grows back completely, so long as it heals properly.
de squinance	"De squinance" translates to "on squinting" or "concerning squint". This term could be referring to medical treatments or observations related to eye disorders where one eye may be turned inward (intorsion) or outward (extorsion). The specifics would depend on the broader context of the text that this phrase is found in.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old ones told and spoke of the surgery to cut the throat; but I never saw anyone perform this in our land, it's written down from their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have strabismus, it is necessary that the incision of the throat known as 'the epiglottis' be made; and one should not attempt this by oneself, because all the veins and the lung are connected to those who have an abscess either in their mouth or in the throat or between two cheeks.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is within the channel of the lung, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis in order to prevent the loss that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	So, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary that we make cuts through three circles or four small slits across, between the two circles where the slit extends in proportion to the size of the slit, not into the cartilage. This allows for the cutting of the epiglottis without leaving any flesh and ensures that the blood vessels are well distanced from it.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the surgeons are fearful, it is necessary that they stretch the skin of the throat to all the inchin, then cut into the keur until it reaches the cheneil; and avoid any blood vessels, should you see anything, and then close off the syphle, just as we have said; and this can be demonstrated through the section of the fluid flow of the cheneil which jumps forth from the side that is broken, and through lack of voice; and leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the time has passed in which one doubts strangulation, gather the two edges of the wound neatly, and all along the skin up to the cartilage; then administer medicines that create flesh until it is clean.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albacus suggests that one should not perform this until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged dead, and the deficiency has been made.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then stitch the epiglottis because the disease cannot leave, and he breathes through the wound, so you are spared from death; and for that reason, the old ones commanded to keep the wound open until the illness of the sickness passes, and it has passed in three or four days. And then they commanded to stitch up the wound and cleanse it, until it was cured; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a maiden took the knife, and stuck it in her throat, and cut off part of the windpipe. And I was called to treat her, and found her as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood that was issuing from it, and it was well that she did not have a cut vein or artery but rather the wind flowed through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurriedly treated the wound and cured her until she was healed. And it turned out that all that the maiden needed was for her voice to be hoarse, then she returned to her usual self; thus I say that in the surgery of removing the epiglottis, one should not fear.
de la grosse gorge	from the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Cysts called "throat hernia" are known as large abscesses of a deep chestnut color, and they occur frequently in women. They can happen in two ways: naturally or by accident; natural ones do not have any cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidents happen in two ways. One resembles having fat inside us, and the other way resembles an abscess coming from our artery. There is fear involved, and it's not appropriate to open with fire except when the condition is small; prove this method thoroughly for all types: if you find that it matches exactly like fat we have, cannot reach any vein, then cut it out just like how we would remove fat, and remove everything cleanly, if there's nothing left. Thoroughly search again, treat according to need until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	from nails
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many ways are there, from which I will mention all similarities; now it is fitting that I explain the entire difference between us and issues.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I state that dislocation is characterized by fever and heat persisting until the emissions have passed, and then completed decomposition; therefore, the fever and heat should subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the new (condition), there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sac and is along the color of body tissue, and begins in a way like a boil, and becomes large; and they are according to two similarities, oily or moist, and much of the color is as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of a new injury, that you first test and inquire about all the instruments which are called 'intermediary', according to whether their shape appears or after chapter which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the way of extracting pus from us is that you squeeze it more moist than you find in the abscess, and twist your thumbs a bit by a bit, until you know that the instruments have pierced the core, then according to the size of the abscess; then extract the central material, and be careful not to rupture.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If moisture is involved, regardless of what color it may be, if it causes it to split in the way I have described for other abscesses; and if after the incision no more moisture comes out, you know that it was greasy, then cut right across, and take hold with forceps, and gently scrape off from each side, and cover the wound where it is, so that you can take out the object clean. And if you cannot take it out cleanly, remove it piece by piece until there's nothing left to stay behind.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if there is nothing left behind, it will come out again many times; and if there's a little bit that stays in place without causing any harm, then fill the wound with corrosive powders, keep the wound clean, apply antiseptic dressings to the abscesses, and treat it with other remedies until it heals completely; and if the pus is large, you should cut both edges of the wound open, and treat the one that discharges pus.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein is too large or otherwise opposed and you hasten it, hold the site of the cut with vinegar powder, and let it rest for two days or three days, as long as the wound heals, then resume copper treatment that has been in use for a new wound.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	This text describes the forms of surgical instruments used in operations and mentions three types: large, medium-sized, and small. There are also three different sizes referred to as 'albaret' or 'breb', respectively, for each type. These sizes allow for the proper treatment of fistula abscesses by encircling them effectively. The instruments resemble needles used in sewing clothes and can be made from citrine quartz, iron, or silver. The yellow-colored ones are said to work better than black tar in enclosing the deformities of the fistula. Lastly, there are three sizes for these: large, medium, and small, depending on the width of the incisions.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of scalpels resemble these: large, medium, and small. There are also scalpel blades that have two curves in three different ways, those with three curves and they too come in three forms, those having two curves and there are ones with just one curve as well, each again coming in three forms. All these are necessary according to their use.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The head of this one they make to be sharp-cutting, and among such ones who do not cut power but from one side only, these they sear their limbs; because in this way they do not cut the vein nor nerve; and as for these introducers, their tools are held by hands, so that the patient does not sense it during abscess opening; and there are three ways: large, small, and medium, just as you see; and none of them use power but only in flesh cutting parts like legs, arms, nipples, at angles, and similarly on these; and no other tool is made too small that resembles surgical tools, according to this shape, with which one stops the bleeding.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And it should never be placed at the site of a healthy artery or veins, and under no circumstances follow this large form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	None of the men's breasts swell when they start to be corrupted, until they look like breasts of women; and they remain ugly and swollen, and those who want to cure them should proceed according to this form of this line .b. up to .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then remove the fat and apply medicine to treat the wound, afterwards stitch together the two edges of the wound and continue the treatment until it heals. If the nipple is tilted downwards due to its size as in women's cases, cut it into two parts above by two similar slits; one should stay connected to another after each slit at the end of both, ensuring that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. up until the line .g.; then burn off the skin between the two edges and remove the fat, applying what we have said about stitching and powders, as well as anything necessary for treatment until it heals; if not healed or when the incision isn't fully complete due to the inability of the flesh to rest or from blood clotting, fill in the wound with gauze soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it until it diminishes with the removal of the gauze and fat. Then continue treating until it heals.
des apostemes des asselles	removal of abscesses from the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Wounds that come from abscesses are manners of hard scrophules where there are nodes, and if there are any containing moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. up to line .g:.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, you should fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and apply ointment until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses resemble scrophules, cut them as we have said in cuts on scrophules, and if the wound is full of pus, apply a cautery as we have said previously.
de la routure de l’artere	Of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is injured and the skin is sutured above it, many times abscesses occur, and this happens similarly with veins and abscesses; and if one knows that it's due to the artery, then the abscesses are long outwardly; and when you touch it with your fingers, you sense a hardening; and when it's due to the vein, pus is evident coming out; and it's foolishness to treat this abscess, and similarly when it's below joints and bones in various other places, and is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, one should avoid iron treatment. With respect to the one at the head, one should also avoid this method. If it's about an artery inflamed, cut through the skin as long as needed; then proceed with surgery using inches and separate the artery from the tissues as much as possible; then insert a probe under the skin up to the other side of the body, and stitch the artery by a double thread on both sides, following what I have taught you in extracting two arteries that are in temples; then pull the thread through between the two lines using an introducer until all the pus is released and cut off the abscess. Then apply the cure that follows, until it stops bleeding. And if the pus is due to the vein, one should dye your hand with a little of the pus on all the skin, then insert a needle under the line held in your hand, pierce it through, and attach another double thread, so you can pull from the other side; then tie off the abscess as I have said before, or bind one part of two arteries by a thread; and if you doubt whether the thread will release force, insert another needle under all the pus at the first incision point, and secure the threads in four places. Then cut off the superfluous pus, then cut off with the knife and leave what is tied. Then place a wet cloth on one side with wine and oil, then apply treatments of bandages and ointments until it heals.
des apostemes des ners	The removals of nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Similarly, when an abscess forms in the artery and vein, abscesses also form on nerves when they are cut, or due to excessive labor, and similar conditions.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more often with shoulders and elbows and in all places that have joints, it is the concern of abscesses, and its color resembles the color of flesh, and is found in many positions without pain; and when it's constrained forcefully, the patient feels pain, and is not merely inside like from flesh but below to the neck; and moves well everywhere, neither going forward nor backward, neither downward nor upward, and one who is in joints should not cover with iron: by chance a contraction would occur; and that which is on head or forehead makes the skin go numb.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscesses are small, and you have some tweezers, grasp it at its root; and if they are large, hold them until the elbow, then cut, then remove the scabs, then unite the wound to the seam, and the treatment until it becomes healed.
des grosses boces pendans	And for the larger blisters, hang them.
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	No part of this text ever occurs in the womb or anywhere else; it's a disease called "fungus" by its appearance and has a subtle root, and large lumps; and there are also small ones and some that are quite large. And I knew a person who had two bellies which resembled fungi more than anything else, and there was no difference, they were white and had small roots, they split open and immediately rotted due to moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I found them and weighed one at eighteen ounces and the other at six, and in the incision when you look it's that the patient is moist, and the color of the artelul is white and moist with a subtle root; if you check it in spatumile large ones, and they are under your presence then use fire cautery.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For the surgeon often encounters many times excessive blood losses during surgery, and if they cannot withstand this, then you must hurry with the cautery; and if you see the patient frightened and fearful from the incision of the iron, take a properly made plonc thread and bind it around in such a way as we have said before, and leave it for two days; and then rebind it, not stopping to pull the plonc thread until the bandage copes with the binding, and it feels no trouble; and if the roots are large, they fear even in coping towards the belly, but you can well cope half of it, then cauterize so that it does not bleed again; then treat the wound and ensure that you do not over-tie the thread which is white in color and with a poor feeling and milk appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess that's been incised, and I will come to the treatment of gangrene after this.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the boil burns
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	The appearance of the burn comes from the burn wound or cut in the bladder and is on the belly; there are some in the bowel; as it occurs in other perforations, or blood that escapes through veins or arteries according to what precedes, or due to windiness; and if this is by the perforation of the bladder and by the exit of the pus, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of flesh, and is a light matter without pain, opening from different exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it's due to the exit of the intestine, then it is more varied, and when one presses it with their fingers it returns, and then comes back again, and by chance it might swell, and grows much at the entrance of the bath and through strong labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it's a light matter and opens well when you press it with your hand, not constraining; and if it's due to blood, it opens through these signs - the abscesses are large and hard, and lie according to their quantity; and if it's due to windiness, there is swelling at the touch, and in the work you should look to see if the appearance is due to the blood of an artery or vein or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	If it is necessary for you to allow the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear involved, as I have told you or in the chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the kidney, it's necessary for you to instruct the patient to smear his urine, and let it stretch completely straight, then pinch it entirely around the kidneys; then command him to hold it in between your hands, then press into the part that you have indicated on the body until you find a vein, then cut there completely. Afterward, operate with half of the abscess stretched over the mark, and tighten your index finger against the intestine; if you find that it's caught by the thread, remove it, and push the intestine out from under the belly; and if you find the kidney, take hold of its edge, and cut off the excess; and if the artery or the vein is opposite, or goes in to the body properly, then return to your work and prepare two needles, and press two threads on each side of what you made a cross with, and pierce the abscess three times over these needles. Then pull out the contents in four parts through the needles, and if you see that it's done, remove the needles, let the body heal naturally, and clean away the dead tissue by itself; or cut off when she has become tender and cooked, then treat the part according to what is required, and tie up the abscess as we have said. Remove any blood or moisture that you find, then treat the body as it should be treated, and sew up the wound.
dou chancre	and gangrene
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have discussed the symptoms of gangrene and how to treat it with medicine, as well as how to avoid iron treatment. Now we will say that gangrene starts in the armpit, requiring great caution during treatment. It is said by the old ones that if gangrene appears in a place where you can scrape it off like gangrene found under breasts, on cooking areas, and other such places, it must be completely removed when it begins; but for large and old gangrene, you should not touch it because I have never seen anyone heal from it, nor has anyone healed from it before my time.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operations, when they are in place where they can be removed as we have said, is that you purge once the black lump; then let the surgeon know if there has been a manifest swelling, and then prepare the wound. i.e., clean it up so that the operation can take place; then wash off all your onions or gangrene, and all around them without leaving anything behind; and let the bleeding go on freely, and wipe your hand well against any surface, and if the bleeding goes against the cut of the artery or vein when you cauterize, do it until the wound is healed; then proceed with other treatment until it is healed.
de ydropisie	Regarding dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have discussed in the division indications of erysipelas, and how the assembly of water is made, and signs for each indication, and treatment done by medicines, and that which is treated with iron: this can be seen clearly; and it should not use iron in these two indications: to know, peritonitis and dropsy, because they are deadly things; therefore when you treat the indication of erysipelas known as 'eclites' using medicines, and if the treatment doesn't help, you should look at whether the patient is weak or has another disease other than erysipelas, like abdominal distension and similar conditions; if not touching iron, because there's doubt; and when you see the patient with very dark coloration, and they have no other disease except erysipelas alone, and they are neither too young nor too old, then do this: place the patient straight on your hands, and the helpers press the abdomen upwards while pouring water to the lowest part of the ankle, then take the sharp needle according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And may you have a depth of two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And make a point, and let it not be so deep that it might reach the intestines when you place it in there; then see if it is infected as far as towards the intestines: if you find this to be true, you should make an incision above the stomach up to three fingers from your thumb; and if the infection has spread throughout the intestines due to liver disease, you must make your incision on the left side of the stomach up to three fingers from your thumb; and if it's because of bile, then do so on the right side, and it must not be that the patient's fluids flow through this weakness towards this weaker part. Then pierce all the skin with the tool, push it inwards, and remove your hand along the entire fatty layer between the skin and fat just as you would when roasting to the size of a fingernail or inside the meat; then pierce the fatty layer until the fatty tissue appears at the eighth part of the way, and this is the water mark, then pull force and take out that tool which has been formed like this.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it resembles a slender silver rod, or a fine piece of chainmail, and there is a small nub on the part below I; and from one side, III nubs; and II from another side, and I from another; and the shoulder joint is cut as if it were a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that the writer cuts the feather into:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top is the axe, so when the instruments come into contact with water, they now separate above the instrument; empty it then leave half or a third of it. For if you empty too much in that moment, by chance, the patient may die due to the resolution of their spirit from the weapon, or they might faint, or they could approach death; but empty according to its strength quantity, and according to what the virtues' dispositions indicate for the patient, and their pulse. Then remove the instrument and hold the water back, and it is held now because the fog that stuns the nub on the scabbard I spoke of, from which I talked about piercing in this manner; then start using the instrument again another day if you see the patient suffering with this, and withdraw a little amount of water. Do this for no day, and protect yourself not to be mistaken so long as it doesn't linger but just a bit of water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the patient, and you keep them in water for a while, if they are being cured of burial or sand burns, through sweat or bath and under the sun, and get tanned by drinking; and cure with drying medicines as long as they are sane, cauterize on the stomach and liver after removing the water, just like I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Regarding the operation to correct a curved penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born without defects in the penis, or if the defects are small, or it doesn't stay in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary immediately when there isn't much pus to drain at all, very finely according to this shape:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then place or insert a thin cork into the urethra, and hold it in for three or four days. When he feels like urinating, remove the cork, let him urinate, and then put it back; and if by chance he doesn't need to, because the urine that comes out no longer lets it stay closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those who have lost their teeth, if it has a remedy with a poppy's root, as we said, should increase its dosage.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have teeth in their mouth are blind, because no one is born with teeth at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting their penis upwards; and they cannot copulate because the matter cannot come up to the prostate gland, and it's a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method of opening is such that the patient lies on their back with their penis and scrotum at least as large as a feather's width, ensuring there is a foreskin in the middle just as it should be; and guard against any bleeding that occurs frequently during this procedure, if it does happen, stop the blood by the one who stops the bleeding, and treat the wound until it heals completely.
des pustules de la verge	The pimples of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times, this stone comes in the testicle, and there is an appearance of a bad mark; and among them, some are malignant and others are not. It is necessary that you weigh them on a one-twelfth scale, and remove them thoroughly, then place on cotton with an Egyptian ointment; then cure it with finical ointment until it becomes clean.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the infection is malignant, with pus and discharges, it's necessary that you apply a cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have coped with it, and if there's pus inside the penis and part of it is within the skin and part outside, it's necessary that you remove the pus that is inside first; and when it is healed, then treat from the outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat together, see that not even the head of the penis be pierced, and blackness and corruption enter his penis and prostate; it is necessary to remove everything that is dark and corrupted, then coat it with a pouder made from walnut shells and honey and flour, after which you treat it with other cures until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And when the bleeding ceases, if blood drainage is occurring, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The lunar cauteries assist in two arrangements: that is to say, during bleeding and corruption. If the head of the penis becomes corrupted and removed, it's necessary to insert a thorn from a poplar into the penis and pass it through; and when the hair is turned inside at the head of the penis which corresponds to those who have never been uncircumcised, or due to disease or abscess, then it must be burned with a metal tool until all ligatures are released, and relieve the head of the penis from all sides; and if it's hard to perform this task, then it's necessary to burn it with a knife edge at the base of the penis and skin; then cut thoroughly between two fingers, and place a fine linen bandage in cold water so that it doesn't turn inside.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not an interruption like other injuries; however, when we perform this work of our own will and on infants, it must be that we do the best job, and cause the least harm for their health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that old people did not advise circumcision for their children, as they did not practice it in their law, and we only have this knowledge through our acquired experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I wanted the largest part of the masters and surgeons who performed circumcision within one day, and with force, and at every single operation; if it was correct because there are two layers, and by chance if we cut this above and leave that below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the surgeon receives criticism for it, and the pain is doubled, and at the dissection which occurs at one day, the point of the member isn't secure; and in the dissection of the nail by chance the tool escapes and goes inside the body work, and many times they grow like this when unnecessary dissection was done and I wanted to address that.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the dissection done forcefully at every part of the thread I found out that it was good to experiment, for the force cuts as well above as below accurately.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you press your hand, cut it in an I shape equally; but let the child be well tied inside the skin; and make the method of the first chapter so that you make the child think that when they hear, you only tie the thread inside the penis. Then do this process for all possible ways until you are able to make them leave their position. After that place the child between your hands straight, and use your strength equally between your hands or under your feet so the child can't see nor any of the instruments; then push your hand into the penis and blow or guide it upwards till the head of the penis is in sight, then clean well of the dirt that's gathered. Next tie around the neck with a double thread, then continue tying from one knot to another. Secure this by threading between the two knots during second layer tying process on the waistband and index finger mark, make sure you pull tightly but not too tight so it won't break or hurt the child. Then quickly lift the head of the penis away and guide the head upwards; then let the bleeding stop little by little because that's the wound's nature. Apply powder with rose water mixed in, wrapped in an omelette cooked egg and steeped with fresh rose oil, and leave this on until another day, then continue treating till it heals properly.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of forces at creation is thus: let the two shoulders be joined and cutting into each other, and let the shoulders be as large as the elbows evenly.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of creation is when the kidneys inside do not align with the incision; hence it is necessary to extend them to your nail, so that they create an abscess; and shape evenly, and if you cannot hold them by your nail, take them with tweezers, then shape.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they penetrate for three days, and the one near the penis is swollen, let him stay until the abscess fully develops and then apply a gentle scraping; shape it as you can move, and keep away from the penis area, for this will not harm it.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then cure the rest of the black wound with powder as we have described in treating powders, and if you cut too far into the kidney and it goes above, it will cause no harm; so cure it accordingly as we have said until it heals.
dou retenement de l’urine	Regarding the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine can occur due to the obstruction by stones, or blood clotting, or bowel obstruction, or newborn blockages, or similar issues that we have discussed in the division; and if the patient's urine is not released and you see it being retained because of a stone blocking or the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be made to assume a kneeling position with their hands behind their back; and their feet should be placed under their buttocks, spreading their stomach from the top part of their back, and restrain them until they urinate as much as they can; and then force the neck of the bladder to express urine above by this means; and if it does not come out, just like we have said, and if the patient feels intense pain, then you should administer extraction with all equipment known as 'syringe', whose form is as follows: made of subtle thin wire easily bendable, like a bird's feather; and made of a palm long and half, and it should be subtle at its tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the way of releasing urine is that you take a double thread and tie it at the tip of some wool or cotton, then put the knot inside the syringe; remove the excess wool until it reaches the tip of the syringe, then smear the syringe with oil or butter and with beaten egg white, and place the patient on the seat, and lift the bladder and penis using wet oil and olive oil, and vinegar. Then gently insert the syringe into the penis up to its root, then double the penis upwards towards the exit hole; then fill the syringe up to the bladder, let the patient feel urine coming out up to the empty thing, this is not done following this order but because it leads or goes wrong; then slowly untie the knot from all the wool little by little and the urine follows the wool, then squeeze it forcefully, make the urine flow correctly; repeat the process until the bladder is emptied, and tie the patient in place.
des maladies de la vessie	Of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When burns or blood come into the bladder, or corruption is assembled there, and you see distilled waters and medicines, do so with all the instrument that is called "clepsydra", and it has this form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is finished, and if it has three parts: two of one side, and one of the other, as you see; and the legs are through this place where medicine could be such that it soothes well the penis without addition, so that moisture can be treated and expelled when necessary; and when you see that your medicines are flowing into the bladder, place the head of the nozzle in the moisture, and direct it to the one who is treating; if expel the moisture with the nozzle, and then re-bone forcefully afterwards; if enter the moisture there, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it; and this is the form of a subtle bladder stone which is treated by enemas: thus it is like this:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it can be made of silver or copper, and the shoulder is placed higher; and from one breast or where urine is excreted. Then take a goat's bladder and put in the moisture you want to enema into your bladder, then sew together between the two breasts forming with strong thread, and heat one end of this moisture on the fire. Then insert the head of the enema tool into the penis, then press your hand onto the bladder until all moisture is squeezed out until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder; and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment paper, make it into a circle, and cut it roundly inward. Then sew this end of the thread firmly in these parts, then join the circle as you would assemble a clasp, and put inside what you see from urine, moisture, and water, then tie it with the tool; do this like you did with the bladder, pressing your hand until all moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	from the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have spoken of the methods for stone division and extraction together with remedies; and we mentioned the difference between the kidney stones that float and all the signs, and on which stone one should operate by size; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone in the bladder occurs more often among children, and this is a sign that the urinary tract infection behaves like an inflammation in its subtlety; one should open the urethra, and massage the patient's penis several times, and then try to insert something; and many of these infections involve the foundation; and it's easier for small children to recover until they are four years old, it causes more distress in older individuals, and it is at a middle age for those between youth and old age; and the treatment is easier for those with large stones than for those with smaller ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient by purging, in order to extract all the pus that is inside.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it clogs up every time when trying to cut into the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, and lift them up and move back so that the stone descends towards the bladder, and exits no longer from above him; then have him sit between your hands, and his hands be below his thighs, so that the bladder is fully hanging downwards; then look inside and touch it. If you feel the stone in space, cut now onto the stone immediately.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it doesn't pass at all during the touch test, moisten your left hand's index finger with grease of the palm side, for if the patient is female; or your middle finger if male, as this indicates a smaller stone. Press into its base and feel for the stone; when you sense it on your finger, pull it up to the neck of the bladder; then apply pressure near your finger and press out the area you see to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with their hand, and command them to extend the testicles up with their right hand, and hold the skin that is between the testicles on the part where cutting takes place with their left hand; then let him push out the semen, of which this is its shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And they place between what's in the kidneys and the base, not midway but at the edge of the left snowflake; and be straight on the stone, and let your elbows touch or rest on the base, and have them fit through if it's wide outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too big; by chance squeeze the elbow that rests on the base, so that she jumps out without effort; and know that there is a part of the stone where there are angles and edges: if it gets stuck; and in some parts, shaped like a walnut, round, from which the exit is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And where there are angles and edges in it, make the opening larger; and if she does not jump out, then you must use force on the tongs that resemble a file at their tip, to push against the stone so that it doesn't escape; or you can use something sharp curved beneath like a drill; and if you cannot engineer it this way, then widen slightly more than half of its length, and if it is too soft, force it out with vitriol; and if there are multiple stones, first extract the largest at the neck of the bladder, then proceed upwards, then push with force, and do so for smaller ones if there are any others.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if she is very large, then one must cut her out, and create a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or his urine begins to flow immediately when his kidneys cannot heal; but you must still strive to draw it out, or break stones with tongs, as long as you are able to remove them piece by piece. And once you have completed your task, cover the wound with incense and aloes and dragon's blood, then bind it tightly. Then pour oil and wine over the paste on top of the bandage, or oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the inflamed area; then re-bandage him above his kidneys, and do not untie the bandages until three days have passed.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you untie it, be sure to raise the head and torso very well with oil and water, then wash with ointment of laudanum and ointment of basil until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if there are abscesses and erosions in the wound, and blood clots in the bladder, and it causes urine retention as this is known in certain ways without jumping with urine: then you must apply your hand in the wound, and remove that blood. For if it remains, it will corrode the bladder and damage it; then cleanse the wound with water and vinegar and salt, and help him in all manner you can until he feels better; and when treating him always tie both legs, and gather the remedies around his body.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it's located where the penis goes, stuck inside, and urine cannot come out; when you treat as I've said, that you cut many times, and forgive this cutting for this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already gained this experience.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one piece of iron according to this shape, and let there be three pegged points in it.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the penis near the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then push the needle gently in the penis until you reach the stone; and pull the needle slowly in the stone bit by bit, until you can pierce the stone from another side; if urine starts coming out, then press your hand on the part of the stone that is stuck inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it breaks at once, and urine starts flowing with it, then rest assured of the patient's condition. And if you cannot do this due to any obstruction, then tie a thread around the stone and another above it, then place the penis between the two threads directly over the stone, pull hard, remove the thread, clean the coagulated blood from the wound; and treat until the bleeding stops.
de la piere des femmes	From the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It occurs that there is stone in women, and if it happens once, then the cure is difficult, and is forbidden for three reasons: one is perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that no one can find a woman who knows how to protect herself from looking, even when she is pure.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third method is that by chance one cannot find a woman who fully understands this skill of hands; and the fourth method is that the stone of the woman is more prominent than the stone of the man, so it requires deeper surgery and great fear. And if the situation demands such action, you should hire someone very skilled for this task, guide them by hand placement, and if they fail to find a suitable one, do not hesitate to seek another; then present them with a woman who understands some part of this art, instruct her according to your orders on the investigation of the stone; and carefully inspect whether she is a virgin: then she should force her finger into its root or base and seek out the stone; and if she finds it, force it out from there, and instruct her to press her left hand firmly onto the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, then it is necessary for her to move it from great to great along the entry of the bladder until beneath, while she comes to the root of the thigh; then cut up the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the knee, there where the stones appear and feel the stone in that part. And do not move your hand over the stone or under it, keep it at first very small; then push out the kidney into the waist, if you feel the stone increase the wound until the stone may come out forcefully, and know that many kinds of stones exist: that is to say, small and large, hard and soft, long and round, and those with edges.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you understand the symptoms to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if it doesn't hurt you, then put vinegar on the wound for an hour until the pain subsides; then return to your work as long as the stone is hard, and use the tools I've told you about in extracting stones to help you with your task; and if the pain continues, and this comes from a severed artery, apply powder on the wound and on the bandages, and don't repeat this process again, let the stone stay and do not remove it by chance, as the patient might die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has calmed and the wounds are healed, return to your work while the stone remains intact.
de hernie carnouse	of fatty hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Of aqueous blisters is nothing else than the assembly of moisture or white pus, which is present in the skin of the kidneys, that contains the egg; and it's called 'pus', and never properly within the fabric of the egg if one thinks there might be another egg. And this is the skin under the kidney containing the white pus we've mentioned; and this does not have a hole.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the formation of these blisters is due to weakness that affects the kidneys, and spreads this substance.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And no other time comes from percussion on the kidneys, and this moisture has many colors: or it is color declining to jaundice, or there's without redness, or black, or aqueous white, and this happens more often; and these are signs to recognize this condition. Because if it is white like we have said, then it's pus, I don't know how long it is compared to the figure of an egg, and doesn't open the kidneys, for there is moisture throughout.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the actual tissue, then it's pus with a part of the egg, and because this makes us think it's another egg; and when the moisture is between the skin of the kidneys and the white we said before, one senses it well; therefore when you know the color of the moisture, you test throughout the whole interior square, as shown previously.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this following text which comes after the introduction, judge based on what is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, the patient should be healed according to our strength and their body's recovery. Then sit behind them on something slightly high, and put down cloth around them; then sit beside them on the left side and order a minister to sit on the right side, extending the rod to one of the II ribs from the kidney region; then take the wet sponge, and scrape the skin between the coions up until beneath the knife, making sure to cut the wound straight upwards along the length of the skin up to the white line, and gently burn it. Then pierce the white line fully with water, completely remove all water, and then place strips on it, extending down from that point; and don't touch the kidney region, but only let the white line do so; scrape away everything or piece by piece along the backside carefully until it is done correctly, for if it's not done smoothly, it will result in water again. And if the egg jumps off your work when you're done with the operation under that area, reposition them inside their body once you've completed the operation up to that line; then join both sheets of skin at the kidney region into a seam and heal it as other wounds are healed, until they are healed properly.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another illness, it is necessary to fasten the ligaments that are hanging down, in doubt of blood discharge; then remove the testicle up to the hanging part, and extract the egg, then treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the wound has been divided into two parts together, you should know these are two branches; if you handle the other part similarly to how you handled the first equally, then let out any blood and place moistened wool in olive oil onto the wound. And place another piece of moistened wool with wine and oil on top, putting it over the two parts, then cover this with double cloths, and secure them all according to this shape along the entire length of the bandage:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take II cloths, and use them like torn pieces of cloth according to this appearance, having them joined together by sewing in the waistband. The first piece should be placed under the foundation up to the back, while the other one is at the part near the elbow; and on either side of the two joints, place it all together with the restriction in the loop of the breeches; and this branch of cautery is treated like its size of a metal tool, having you take off the skin over the joints, then heat it according to what we have said, so that the white substance containing the fluid becomes visible. Then take the cautery according to this form, and puncture this opening in twos, and burn it with this sharp cautery until the water within is exposed:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the operation in all ways that you can, until you have completed everything; and remember to keep the fire from touching the egg; know that this work is more safe; and always guard against the leakage of blood, and be sure about the proper sizes of your cuts; and if anything goes against you, or pus escapes, or blood leaks out, or any other issue arises, then address what goes against you according to what was said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is afraid and cannot endure this operation due to its horrors, then perform a puncture as I instructed, and know that when you are well certain based on our explanations that aqueous fluid is there, make the patient sit on the elevated seat; then pierce the pus in the lower part of the whole mass wide, and place the puncture long along the center; and if the incisions are large, so that all the liquid can drain out. Then put cotton onto the area and bind it, leaving to heal through drainage of the liquid, and treat until the wound is healed. And if the white skin does not allow liquid to escape from the mouth of the wound, then you need to plug it with a feather or a tool used to handle the pus in people suffering from dropsy, as its shape is mentioned before; and widen the gap of the wound, knowing that the liquid will return and gather after six months or so more, and when it gathers just like before, and then this patient's days pass.
de l’aposteme des coions	from the pus of the ears
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in this part of the tree there is more fear in several positions, for which I believe it would be better if one leaves it alone; and I will tell you the work and the appearances of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	So then I say that most abscesses come from wounds or cuts, and similarly with breasts; this is due to the nature of such things.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is to know about the bitter and feverish maladies that spread among people or through percussion; and it has the color of the abscess according to the body's color; there is no pain, but rather a foul-smelling pus; and sometimes an abscess may be hard and pebbly with a greenish hue, and never comes from arterial blood or causes vein inflammation.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it comes from arterial blood, you can recognize the condition by the way pus feels when pressed with your fingers; and it is not appropriate to touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Those made from the swelling of veins can be identified by their position during the palpation of both hands, and one may well make a size on this resemblance, and on other characters; and you need to count the mother's months, then is the egg high up, and the white membrane near white fluid exists, and release the hanging cord from everywhere around the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	When the egg is already bound by these signs, then you should take out the egg and count; and if it's near white fluid or inside veins, you should release all that fluid, and count round.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the beginning of the body is or behind the head, it is necessary that you hold it all together and remove the egg, just as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your operations are finished, apply the wound with wet wool in oil and wine, then proceed with other treatments until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	from the pus of the ears
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a resembling sheath around the bellybutton, with the softening of the veins, and when they do this, the patient experiences severe pain; and the treatment for this illness is very similar to what was done before, although we will still tell you about it according to how the ancients did it.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary that you make the patient lie on the elevated seat, then tie him with a tourniquet above his testicles, across all parts close to the groin, and bind them firmly together by their masters, stretching them out in order; then cut the artery deeply up to the veins wherever they are exposed, and then sear each side separately as we have discussed in the extraction of arteries from limbs. Then you insert a needle where there is double thread, and tie it at the first site where the nerve came through, and then tie it together immediately with the other end; then cut them halfway straightly along the length of the body, according to its breadth, removing any corrupted moisture; then treat the wound as others or when bandaging bowels are done, so that no vein leaves nor grows from one side of his master; for this brings no harm, and if all veins emerge in this way, you must drain each side with all cuts on veins; so that his body does not lose its growth due to incisions on veins, and dries out and cannot help heal.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the rupture of the spleen
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	Events of this kind occur through sections causing rupture, or expansion above the belly in the area of the lungs, because the intestines descend from that route to one of the kidneys; and this rupture is either at the site of the rupture itself, or due to expansion, and these are two ways of causing this: by percussion, or jumping, or shouting, or by lifting the breath, and similar actions; and the signs when it's due to expansion caused by coughing, show that they happen gradually, over a long period, and do not come suddenly; and the abscesses are equal until around the forehead because the cough forces the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it's about cutting through the muscle, where there comes a sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses show various appearances close to the skin, because of the exit of the intestine and the body behind the muscle.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the loops descend with the intestine and get stuck, causing great suffering to the patient when pressed, even if it's just a pinch.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these fevers where there is fear, one should avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	The manner of the operation is such that you are commanded or instructing the patient to pull out a portion of intestine from its interior in the wound, if it can be inserted back; then encircle his neck with your hands. Lift the thighs; then lift the belly to the top and peel all the skin around the kidneys down to the long part; then place within the abdominal wall slices about half an inch according to how you need to open the wound, such that they might be able to come out; then scald the cough which is under the skin of the kidneys, until the white part of the cough turns white all around; then insert your index finger into the area near the kidney, where it's between the white part of the cough which is under the egg, and between the second cough, and remove that which is behind the egg and between the second cough; and when you move with your right hand within the belly of the kidneys, lift the white part of the cough to the top of your left hand, and lift the egg towards the lower abdomen; and command the attendant to extend the egg upwards, and free what's behind the ligament. Check with both hands if there is any piece of intestine or tough white cough that has escaped, and if you find nothing, release it in the belly immediately; then take a needle with thick thread made of ten strands, and insert it into the back part of the cough which comes after the skin of the kidneys; after the tail, then peel off the heads that appear from the threads until there are four; then join them one on top of another like a cross, and sew up the cough which we mentioned is under the skin of the kidneys with strong thread of two parts; then cover the heads of the threads, and join them firmly in two layers so that none of the strings that pass through them can enter them, ensuring no abscesses form; and tie it down at once following the first long line of two fingers, and after these two lines leave a part of the cough which is under the belly about one finger's width; then proceed according to the roundness that the egg brings along; then remove the skin in the area near the skin of the kidneys until it doesn't cut off or cover, such as we said before; then apply moistened wool in oil and place it on the wounds, then administer the thread which we mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And once you have sealed with the white wax that we said, after the incision, due to concern about blood leakage.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens many times, and let the bandage until it discharges from him; and if he delays to fall off, if you are by hot water, place on him what we said, until it discharges; then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is fully healed.
de hernie carnouse	of fatty hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch I never see anyone who dares to perform the iron treatment.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the old ones said that it is done in such a way like a twig that is assembled by twisting, in this manner that you tie the veins, after gently cutting them below; then cut out some and treat the abscess of whoever works at it, until the veins discharge; and treat it as we have said, until it is completely healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	No times come a rupture in the stomach, as we said, and cut open their sides; and no intestines come out of their place with the liver, and if any do, it is little, and repair them hourly; and even so, if he stays too long at this point, then consider that the wound or syphilis has occurred where the intestines are coming out; and this happens through the extension of the syphilis within the stomach, as we said, because it is extended, then becomes softened and inflamed their sides and open; and the treatment is by cautery, as we had previously said; and not once is it treated with a metal rod in this manner: and let the patient lie on his back between your hands, then cut out some of the inflammation around large to about three fingers wide; and then remove the syphilis beneath the skin that follows, then take hold of the ligament and place it over the apparent part of the syphilis; and press it fully against the abdomen, then stitch the two visible parts of the syphilis on top of the ligament, and stitch both; then remove the head of the ligament, and do not cut or spread the membrane or any other thing, as I have informed you in the treatment of intestinal worms; then treat with the treatment for wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you hold the children, if they die and treat the wound, until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The uterus is constrained, and does not show any sign in labor, and the cauterizations are effective in this area, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	from the softening of the skin of the heels
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin of the heels becomes soft in some people, due to the softening of the bones within, and it is something to be seen; when one wants to treat it, he must make the patient walk on his heels, and then pull out the soft skin over the natural skin; afterwards, join the two halves at one stitch, and if you can see, sew a row of stitches on top of this for 3 rows or firmly sew 4 times; then cut in between the seams, and treat it like other wounds until it heals, and remove the stitches when finished.
dou chastrement	of chastity
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	You know that penalties are excluded in our law, and for this reason it would please me not to mention them in this book; and they are only necessary for two reasons: one is that the judges must be able to respond when asked about them and must have knowledge of their treatment; and the other, because we often need to punish some animals to help us, such as sheep and goats, cattle, and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	So I say that penalties are done in two ways: either by attraction or through a breach.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In this way, by attraction, we make the beast sit in hot water until its horns soften and remain. Then, we take them with our hand while they recover, feeling no more when you touch them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	For the butchering of cattle: you should mark the animal and press the belly skin on your left hand, then tie up the testicles, and cut around each one individually when you have cleanly excised them; and leave no small hole or slippery hole that lies inside the veins; and this method of castration is preferable to that which is done by attraction, for in attraction there might remain some part of the genital organs, thus making the animal desire excess; then treat the wound until it heals.
des hermofrodites	Of those who are hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways according to the home's customs: one way is such that between the two genital openings it resembles a woman's form, or it has hair, and sometimes during urination.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	The other way occurs in women, and it has something like a penis above the belly button, resembling two genital openings.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment for abscess and inflammation is that you cleanse all stitched wounds, and treat them as other injuries; in the second way, for those whose urine jumps through the skin of the buttocks, there being no treatment.
de la tentigene	Of the eczema
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Tentigene is an attached wound on the natural part, as long as it's too ugly to see; and some women have had one so large as a hand, and that's what needs treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you dye the excess of the tentigene with your hand or in small amounts, and remove it lightly; and do not apply too much pressure for fear of causing bleeding, then proceed to treat it with another method until it heals properly; and on another wound that appears at the mouth of the vagina, and during intercourse, and accidentally jumps fire, and according to the appearance of a knot, and because of this they called it the old "knee disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it's necessary for you to handle it, as we have said about the pustule, and the treatment until it heals.
de erratique	Concerning the erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic menstruation occurs when the nature of the woman is not fully perceived, or if the uterus is small; it is naturally determined by birth, or accidents caused by illness that has come upon her; or it's due to sexual excesses, or subtle or coarse fluids, and it manifests throughout the belly, or in the ribs, or underneath, wherever it may be. And one must understand how this happens, during childbirth, and occasionally while having flowers (referring to menstruation). And knowing these things comes through observing the appearance of the woman.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the strikes are closely visible, one should look at your hands or on the road.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it's due to a subtle syphilitic affection, and it closely resembles II the breasts, if you're in haste, here's how to do it: place your II index fingers together, and have the woman on her back, spreading her legs; then position both breasts so that the subtle syphilis is covered by them, with no gaps. Next, take wool or wet cloth and apply it over the breast, making sure the woman lies down every day until she can no longer heal it.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if it's firm and dense, then you must shape its surface as it appears to be when resembling the leaf of a myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is an injury from metal, suspend it by the neck and treat; have the止血 medicines ready, such as myrrh, dragon's blood, incense, mixed with enough egg; then apply a thick bandage wide enough so that the wound cannot heal together; and do this for a long time, then cover it with a linen tent; then apply other treatments until it heals.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when there is metal in the wound that's from birth, if it should be treated according to this method, assuming it's embedded foreign objects that need extraction.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an embedded abscess in the wound, one should not apply fire to it.
des emorroides	Regarding hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Bleedings are openings of veins which without due caution, and when bleedings become old they become chronic; and we have mentioned the likenesses of these in the division, and their signs, and I will say about those that receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that the hemorrhoids and their chronic issues, when they are impacted by maris (most likely referring to a type of treatment or substance), do not appear at touch feeling, except for the remedy through iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are by the mouth of maris (most likely referring to an opening or entrance), can be felt, and those that can be cured are these.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore, it is necessary to put the woman in a cold house, then make the altar with tongs there, and the copes at her roots, then apply powdered medicinal remedies that restrict blood flow such as aloes and dragon's blood sap and incense, and similar things; then bandage her feet with ice for an hour, then put her in cold water; if bleeding occurs due to this, have her sit in a decoction of sumac and peel of apple-like fruits and mallow and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and almond oil, and make a plaster to apply on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops bleeding, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, apply suction cups to the back and breasts without cutting; then take wool, and its milk in the juice of plantain or in the juice of agnaller with old wine, and apply it to his body.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess has settled, apply ointment to his body while it is still clean; and that which is called 'albathir' is red, resembling a hard head, if it needs covering like I have explained with the thelul; and then treat him until he is clean.
des apostemes de la marris	The discharges of maris
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many forms of abscesses come about in the female body, such as gangrene and pearly abscesses, herpes, boils, furuncles, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	Therefore, it is necessary that I explain in this treatise the removal of pus coming from the mouth, which is not among the abscesses that are sealed; and if you want to understand the art of metalwork, then observe when the pus begins to appear at its onset, and is full of heat and fever, and if it turns red as you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore, do not rush to pierce, but let the pain subside as long as the pain is alleviated; and then have the patient sit on his chair, and prepare two small seats where he can lean, supporting his back and assembling his feet at the parts below the leg; and spread his thighs, and place his arms under his knees, tying them well with a good bandage; then guide him to cough towards his right side, and I bring the instrument that works on the mouth of the gumbood, from which comes later its form; it is necessary when you see this instrument being brought into action, that you make the first effort in order to know the depth of the gumbood, so that what enters inside the tool does not go any deeper than it should and does not hurt the patient; and if the instruments are larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the gumbood with cloths, so that the instrument does not weigh on him; and he must place the funnel of the instrument above and sharpen the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess opens, and one lets it heal by hand gently, if it should be covered to head, on the neck, with oil; and when the bowl is drained, then it must be that you put in the wound wet tents in rose oil, or in green undried oil; place the tent of the wound at the edge of the marron, and place by the backside above the marron and above the clean blade of the knife moistened with water or those cooked in malves; then treat it after two days of ointment suitable for this, until it is healed; and no time lift the marron and the wound by a blister of water and honey, and then by water where the roots of lilies and aristolochia are cooked long; then revive with the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is healed in the marron, then you should avoid cooking with iron but treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Proficiency is first in knowing the form of natural birth, and its signs are these: when you see a woman nearing delivery, and wanting to smell perfume: then she presses strongly inward; thus one learns that this birth proceeds according to natural form, and comes from her abdomen, with her second child accompanying it; and when you notice these signs, gently press her belly, so that the child comes out quickly; because when he descends through his head, he brings his second child along, and is freed of excess through good birthing. And any other birth proceeds otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it comes at no time to his feet, and goes through the body or the shoulders, or the hands, if it goes to her belly or womb, then turns by chance under his neck, and by other evil figures; so it is necessary for a woman to be wise and subtle in these matters, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures on how one should assist.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	When the child comes out through its head by natural passage, and the woman has intense labor pains, and her strength is weak, have her sit on a stool or be held by women; and from this position where she stands naturally, let fenugreek be cooked, and then place the midwife between her hands with a small sponge, as depicted here:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	And cut the second stage, and remove up to his moisture which is inside until it leaves; and pull down her abdomen as long as the child descends; if not, you should administer castor oil for a hot fomentation with woman's urine to the lady. Then make her drink and sneeze with cassis extract, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now the child will come out.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the legs come out instead, you should gently pull them in and out; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on her chair, and raise her feet upwards; then remove the chair from the ground, and cut the woman as she stands up to prevent defecation during childbirth. If the hands cannot enter and the child is dead, you should cut the woman with the knife that was previously set out, and extract the child, pulling in evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	From the birth of the child at its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes out at its feet, it is fitting for them to be flipped upwards; and then twist slowly and gradually, until they are level; then grab the feet and stretch slowly and gradually.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it can jump up to the thighs, if one commands it and makes it snort with consideration; if it jumps hard, may God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if he isn't better as we have said, if it twists little by little, until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	And so it becomes slightly easier.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not jump like what we have said, say take magnesium sulfate and castor oil, and melted gum, and grind all in a mortar; and place this ointment inside and outside the woman's nature, then make her sit in tepid water until under her ribs; and when she is moistened there, make her wear a turmeric collar, and put it on her, and let her rest an hour; then have her sit on the stool, then make her snort and restrain her mouth and nose, and rub her stomach gently, for the child now jumps.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From the issue of the child on its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, if she holds her baby's hands gradually and gradually; then support herself on her neck, and let the baby hang down the back, and lie sideways by the bed; and bend her hands gradually and then take her hands up to her belly, and pull out her buttocks until she is ready to descend; and if the child does not jump, grab her feet and shake vigorously, then shake her belly upwards, then I squeeze my hands; and guide the child gradually; and tell the woman to keep breathing as long as the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the exit of the child that comes from a wide hand
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It's necessary to engineer to bring back the hand: if she can't bring it back, then make the woman stand up and walk; if she can't walk, then have her sit on the bed and extend her legs; then apply the rubbing technique that I've mentioned; and if there is no birth, then ask her to sit on a chair, then try to guide bringing back the hand; and then give the baby as natural position, and make her sneeze, and instruct her to keep breathing until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the birth of the child at its neck, and extends its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is necessary to wash your hand, then turn it little by little, and pinch it gently; when it becomes equal, place it on the muscular motion of elevation and oil, as we have said, then command that she move little by little; and once you have done this, make her sit down, and command her to pray; and have her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In this same manner for all the second part
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it proceeds in this manner through the second part, until the moisture has been emptied; and if the fetus can move on its face and neck, you should guide it from the mouth, ensuring it is not held back, and that the fetus does not die; then push the child inside, as long as you have placed him correctly, and once he is within you command the woman to pray only once: then gently press her.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the birth of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes they are born three or four at a time; and this is not an unusual thing, it just happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are extracted things, and do not live anymore, if I am not named; I know this, that they multiply and are divided by the syphaux that devises them, which is bound to the bud; and every time come out naturally as all under one, just like we said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they come out painfully, as we have said for the treatment, and it is with small, subtle movements, do what she does immediately and lightly; and do so as best suits your health.
de plusors enfans	from many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	They are never formed in the sixth, seventh, eighth or any other up to fifteenth, and they are all formed like children by the measurement of their glory, and it is necessary that the midwife know all this, for such a thing may happen to her; do so according to what is appropriate.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman who has had an unborn child or is miscarried, as I have explained in the division, and if it doesn't come out, forcing you to act with your hands; it's necessary that you know whether the woman is of good health, and hasn't experienced any accident or has not been stricken with fear from death; it's necessary that the woman be positioned on her back, and her shoulders inclined downwards, and her legs lifted; and guide the minister through two thirds, or tie her to the bed if she isn't being treated when the child descends; then rub the woman's mouth with moist olive oil using a mixture of myrrh and fenugreek seeds, then apply these oils and this mixture onto her hands; then gently pat them on her. Then seek out I at which point or position should you place the fingers if they are applicable for this task, and watch that the infant is fully equipped to descend through its head; if you insert the fingers into her nipples or around her neck or mouth or tongue or under her chin or beard, or near her collarbone or beside her ribs, and if the descent occurs on the feet, place a knife halfway between them; it's required for the finger to follow behind while descending inside as much as possible until reaching the empty passage; this is the shape of the tool:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then look for another small bone or the third one if needed, so that the extractions are equal; and then it should move equally from side to side in order to pass out, and keep the bones with sharp edges to hold them steady, as shown here:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if there remains a part, if the disease touches any of his limbs from where, and he applies it to that part, and pulls out the other part; and if nothing remains, then place this bone or higher in that position, and do this until everything comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other and it cannot be pulled back by squeezing, then you should wrap around its sleeve until it exits completely; then cut in the joint of the sole or at the wrist, and similarly do this with the other hand, and for both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the child's head is large and it becomes stuck at the exit, or if there is a sharp union of its parts, it is necessary that you thrust the spiny spur between your fingers, and make the union and extract the sharp part; or you take it to the tool which is called 'almidach', from which the tool arises with the tools or chapter after this one; and in like manner, give birth to children naturally with large heads; and then pull out the bones using tweezers, and if the child's head jumps out forcefully and can be held by force until it breaks; and so long as there is moisture that comes from below; and if she cannot go out, you cut her piece by piece according to what you can; and if it swells on the belly or around the ribs, it should be necessary that you make a hole until the moisture runs.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, then it has light attraction, and the connection to the mouth of the womb is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is squeezed in the belly or in the breast, you should remove it at the opening of the sac on the hand; and stretch out the belly or the breast as long as there is moisture inside. And when other limbs are affected by bone inflammation and the head stays put, then take hold of its tail from the fur at the back of the hand; then pull the stomach or the bottom straight through until you reach the opening into the fur; then pull out the thumb or two, and pull firmly. And if the opening in the fur is narrowed due to an abscess that came before, it doesn't require much work, but it requires administering moist and fatty things; and apply plasters with a mixture of water, softening agents and moisturizers.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if it is under its ribs, and you can make it level, then administer what we have said about live birth; and if you cannot do so, then pull it out piece by piece, and don't leave anything behind.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have accomplished this, take the precautions that we mentioned in relation to wounds with pus that come about at the mouth of the wound; and if there is an emergence of blood, then it should be treated with hot water while restrained, and other treatments should be applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whom an unborn child had been bitten by death, then consulted with another on that, and treated the other's bite.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After much time, an abscess came in his stomach, and swelled so much that it burst, causing great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was summoned to the treatment, and I waited for a long time, and could not support the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I placed it on a strong plaster, and out came a bone, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very surprised, because that part of the body doesn't have any bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was a bone from a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I was to look at the wound and with my hands on its bones as far as the woman could endure; and I kept her long in this position, and so there was a little blood coming from it. And I have remembered this chapter only for when, if the masters find an unfamiliar thing, they should know how to provide help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring back the wife to her place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Following this comes the form of the applicator, to which the books refer; and in it are two parts for each of four limbs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	In short, the horns should be finer than that of the restrictor and made of ebony or boxwood. The mouth should have a width equal to half the diameter of the shaft, and the edge of the teeth must match it, being one and a half palms long; and in between the two points, there should be two attachments of the same material as the shaft, which should be firmly attached on both sides, either halfway or slightly longer. These two attachments are placed in the mouth of the vagina so that they open when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, can be made of ebony or buckthorn wood according to the shape of tongs; it includes two handles attached at a joint, as you can see here, one palm length long and one width wide. And when you observe the opening fully with all the instrument parts, have the woman lie down on the table, her legs hanging and her feet apart, then place both attachments together into the joint of the marris (possible medical term for a bone or joint), hold the head of the instrument between her armpits; then move your hand along the entire instrument as you would with tongs equally, according to the amount you can see opening the mouth of the marris. Do this until she achieves what she desires.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	All these instruments are mounted and multiplied in various forms; and when you have them set up, the work proceeds more quickly, and you can use them higher up for their respective sizes.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Don't lose hope in the tool if you haven't set it up, because its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second stage of childbirth is being held back by the mother, it's necessary that you instruct the patient to hold her breath and then make her sneeze with consideration. Afterward, restrain your hands at her mouth and nose; and if she jumps due to this, all will be well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If this doesn't work, then take Ipot (pot marjoram), and make a poultice or cover, and put in the pot herbs that can open the mouth of the marrow, such as calamus, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia leaf and comfrey; any of these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or steeped in water on fire; then place a reed or poultice over the pot's opening, and the other end of the pot is placed in the mouth of the marrow, and let it lie until the vapors emerge inside the marrow; then make them sneeze as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second tooth springs up quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if she remains after this treatment, and is not cured, command her to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or musk extract, and then insert the bottle into nature, and desire the second one. And when she finds it, take hold of it little by little straight, so that the marrow does not break during extraction; but you should gently move it back and forth to the right and left, then pull; if this happens, it will desiccate.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the mare is too tight, we have said the cure for sneezing and herb fumigation; and if she does not respond to all that we have said, then be careful you do not force the milking; but it should be that whoever is at the mouth of the mare ties her to the woman's womb, then anoints her with tetraform medicine; she will expel and return powerfully; but nonetheless, when she does so if there comes a bad smell to stomach and head, and irritates the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	So, it is necessary then for such treatments: none of the old remedies have proved that fumigation with sowthorn and dried figs works.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument used to fumigate a woman during retention of flowers and the second stage is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it's as if you're seeing a cane, and the head is placed subtly in nature, and the shoulders are spread over the fire; and apply fumigation above the coals, and the lancing until the meat is released, then start another.
de percier lou fondement	To pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Newborns come forth who lack the piercing foundation, instead have been stunned by a subtle poison: henceforth for the sake of the cure, she should puncture that poison at its proper spot, and not pierce it with an excessively sharp tool, and guard the placement so as not to touch it; then apply moistened wool in wine and oil, then the ointment treatment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not reoccur, then put a thorn in or near the place and leave the person immobile for some days, and remove it when the child begins to walk around indoors.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And there should be no sudden setbacks from wounds or abscesses; if you encounter such setbacks, apply the same treatment as we have described for thorns.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the fistula from its foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that originate from the foundation are swelling, and those that come from deeper in, or in the space between two parts, if it's one fistula or multiple; and when this swelling is old, if it's active, and has accumulated moisture turning white or opaque matter, and any of these fistulas are palpable; and they can be recognized by whether there is expulsion or gustation when the patient defecates, and sometimes a sensation moving towards it.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if to fistulas that penetrate up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; and extend up to the knee joint, and up to the root of the testicles.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows the sinus persisting at the foundation, and not persisting: and it is that you bend your index finger or foundation, and insert a subtle needle like a spider's leg or iron into the sinus when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is twisting, should you stick in a subtle tentacle like a manta ray or a horse's tail, as long as you feel the tentacle or hair on your tool; and if you don't feel it, and no pus, wind, or worms come out, as we have said: know that it has not pierced yet; so hasten to treat.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is almost through to the bladder or where urine flows, if it jumps with urine, and cannot be united by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it has pierced up to the knuckle joint, that's as far as the tentacle goes; if there is no twisting and internal pain, then it's inside, and it doesn't benefit from medicine or immediate ointment application; and for these persistent sinuses, there is no cure but labor and vanity of those who interfere.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In this that is neither Persian nor ancient, there's the hope of healing with iron, as I have experienced, and it's that the wounds lie between your hands on their back; then lift their legs up to their thighs, and keep their thighs inclined towards their belly; afterwards place a spider's web tent, or if tortuosity exists in this area, continue until you know where the tent comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the wounds are inside the foundation, it is necessary for you to place your index finger on it, then when you feel that the tentacle has penetrated; and discover where you can sense between your fingers the fat or the sinew, then you will know that it's Persian; if there's no movement at all, one can't heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One can still manage to heal some cases completely, but this happens very rarely; and when the help is given, it's that we heat the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula as previously described; then you apply it thoroughly into the fistula until it goes beyond the foundation; do this procedure two or three times, until you're sure that all those fatty remnants have been burned down, which resemble a feather of an oiseau; and then treat with greasy moistened tents until they are completely gone, then apply healing balm to the area where the fat used to be and seal it.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus healthy, that's good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If it's so high, no other way can make him healthy. And if you try to insert it further, and doesn't pierce up until the inner lining which is the foundation, and in between your needle and this lining there's a thick layer of flesh or sinew, and you see the fistula at that point under the skin; when the process begins with this fistula, and pushes forward before the tent, then after using the cautery right away, until it reaches the top of the tent; and will remove the tent, and drain; then cleanse those fat layers that seem like a bird's feather, and leave nothing behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if it doesn't satisfy you, and there's a gap between you and the operation, then apply a fire cautery or an ointment with medicinal properties.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cauteries include two good things: that is, the burning of these fatty substances in their position, and the bleeding off of blood and the drying out of moisture; then treat damp tents that are greasy or ground-up into a powder, until the fat becomes liquid, and goes out through this burned fat; then heal wounds with dry medications which stick to hard flesh, and they become dried medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it has been restored,
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes up just below the entire foundation, and is away from the body, then plug its tip or foundation, and inquire about it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent (possibly referring to a surgical procedure), and it is in the place of the suture or stitch where it's about to puncture, if there's no other way out than a vein or artery, then by administering one of the three methods: or you sear it as we have said, or you remove until you hit bone, or if you can remove and cure it like the first; don't go too far in your procedure that you cut into the structure holding the foundation, allowing for voluntary ejections; then proceed to treat by cleaning, just as we've said; perhaps after this they recover. Or you remove that covering and clean it thoroughly once it's been cut off from below the foundation, or through trial or another pointed instrument; then cleanse that newly formed scar in the wound area as much as possible; then study how to heal the wound and manage the fistula in the part beneath the foundation: if this is a lighter issue for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And always make incisions according to this manner: and when you puncture the fold in the incision, and it is located at or on the base beneath the skin above, take a fold penetrating the head following this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I bend one thread into an 'S', and place the needle with all of the thread in the abscess until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is Persian in the fold beneath the foundation within, then extract that thread of the torn one, just as you puncture its base or foundation; and pull out the head with the thread, and assemble the two edges together, and hold them together, and let them be for one or two days; and hold it no more times until the threads join those parts that are between two, and become fused; then treat the wound until it is healed and cleansed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not perforate, make it pierce in every way you can, provided it's not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For one should not make the incision too deep through the puncture stitch, and then treat it as we have said, while it remains clean.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the spineous spathile from which one makes an incision is many and varied, either cutting; and on another side no, because we do not join what we should not, as you see here:
des emorroydes	From hemorrhages
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Wounds occur in two ways: either they are within the foundation, like a seed of resin, and if there are small and large ones, and they fill the cavity with blood, and if there is one or more, and are outside the foundation and close to the edge of it; but those that are outside have little moisture, and still contain a little yellow water or some blood, and have the color of skin; and the treatment for these that have them within the foundation, you should instruct the patient to bleed in chambers until the foundations come out and they can be seen by their filaments; if you hurry, and hold it with tongs, or keep it with your finger, then cut at its roots. And if the seed cannot hold because of its moisture, take them with a sponge, or on cotton, or from camel wool; and remove them with your hands, then cut them, and apply heated powders that are equivalent to cautery; you should cauterize them as it is said in the chapter about cautery, and treat with other treatments until they heal. And if the foundations cannot come out, you must force the patient into a purging by having them take bitter and sharp purgatives to wash what is inside the foundation, so that it may be able to come out completely; until the patient has improved, and when his filaments are strong in relation to the foundation, then this treatment will be mild; and you should pinch them with your fingers or tongs, cut them, and treat them as we have said until they heal and fear surgical incision.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you stitch according to this manner: take a twisted thread and place it in a needle and then pull the thread upwards, cause the needle to pierce from another side, then loop twice over the thread on the needle and do so evenly; and firmly hold the thread, then knot the thread, and remove the needle, and repeat for all others. And leave some for the excess bleeding; then place an oily cloth or ointment on the wound bed and apply it, then place another bandage on top of this. Instruct the patient to rest; and let them lie until they have healed completely, when they are settled in their health, then treat with ointment and other treatments, until they recover fully.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	do drying by sweat or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times it causes bowel dryness within the intestines, and due to natural constraints, and when the illness is old and medicine no longer works.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you scrape at the tip of a spatumile or above your nail's edge, which should not remain moist. Then treat until it hardens as it should; and if it does not harden, re-shave more forcefully than before, until it heals somewhat and becomes scoured; then treat until it has fully healed.
dou fremit	with trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	A small trace appears before the body, and goes completely forward; and whenever the pulse is taken it cools down, and one can also feel it like a death tremor, and comes throughout the whole body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the treatment is that you take one of goose feather or a powerful vulture's feather, and place this stick on the tremor until the purplish circles encompass entirely the tremor. Then move your hand with all the stick until you cover entirely the tremor, and place it forward, thus uprooting the tremor from its source.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see this, do as follows with a spider's hair or iron according to this shape, and let it be slender underneath and sharp above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Don't pierce it, but hold it between your fingers and squeeze it firmly. If you see this, apply the cautery to the tremble, as depicted in front or chapter of the cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	Of the shape of the bladder
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never make a bladder of silver or tinplate, or iron melted down or lead; and never make these tools big or small, according to how they are ordered.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those thus take on the task of healing children and those who are weak and painful, being little.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the bladder is small at the top and large, or the belly is bound in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and I'll tell you about when the stomach seems to be twisted, as if you can see it, and is pierced inside; there's two holes on one side and one on the other; then place your medicine in a beast bladder or parchment near where the stomach is, pierce thoroughly with small needles, leaving an inch of space between each needle. Then insert into these needles a strong thread twisted in an X or zigzag pattern, sew the stomach like a sheep would be stitched; once the medicine's inside, attach it to the tool before with a thick thread, then you'll enemas this medicine out and that will create the shape of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And make sure the medicine is neither too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head with oil or yolk of egg balm or something similar, then gently rub it in. Then direct the attendants to use both hands together on him until he can see everything clearly; then remove the cyst, and raise the patient's legs at the edge of bed, if the medicine is meant to come out, do so as much as possible; and if they sleep all night through, that is a greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you use it to treat illness characterized by the loosening of abdominal contents, and the medicine seeks to quickly emerge, then continue using it as long as it is effective.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if there is bleeding from the root or base of a wound, or an abscess, even if the cyst is as subtle as for an infant; and this is the form of the subtle cyst under which the skin is constricted:
des plaies	from wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have discussed the treatment of wounds in the division; now we will talk about hand treatments and medicine according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and where on the body they occur, and why they have occurred.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The causes of wounds are due to penetration by stones, the size of a sword and knife or a lance or shaft or dart, or similar things; they can be done according to the parts of the body like a wound on the neck, head, chest, abdomen, liver, or other body parts. I will tell you how to treat each wound, starting with simple wounds on the head because my memory will come into play in this chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes or the head is involved, and if no bones are broken, take care to determine whether it's caused by stone or similar things, and if the skin has been fully torn and the wound is large, you lightly doubt abscess formation: in such case, perform immediate surgery on the cephalic area immediately if there is little blood from the wound, and treat accordingly depending on which part was affected; and allow the patient to drink a fullness of wine and consume heavy meats afterwards.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if they don't want to undergo surgery, if they reduce their meat intake, and do not drink wine, nor eat heavy meats; and place on the wound, if an abscess forms there, moist cotton in rose oil or in a wine that stops bleeding. And if there's no significant abscess formation, place it on the fresh wound, as long as it retains all its blood, and isn't disturbed by air. Use the powder I will mention shortly; and if it has been disturbed by air, apply some ointments until they heal completely.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like that of a tailor and similar, and the lips cannot be joined together by stitches, then join them with suturing, as I would say for wounds in the belly, from the suture.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound exposes the bone, and if it stops for a bit only in one place, then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh instead of skin. Command the patient to eat large meats, such as testicles, cooked wheat, like peas, and similar items.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find or discover a putrefaction, and it does not reach the bone, then remove the putrefaction entirely, and bleed out; then treat it. And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, without clotting, and cannot be stopped with medicines, then tie off the artery, and if you find that it has been dislocated, fix it with a thread; and if this does not work, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and you should apply this powder which binds like this when the heat has affected it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the way to use the powder is as follows: take part of frankincense; dragon's blood two parts; living charcoal three parts, and finely ground powdered, then apply it to the wound, and press it firmly until it aerates well and joins with all its blood; then tie it tightly, and leave it untouched if it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And this must be done with a salve alone, not with incense or the blood of dragons, but when the medicine has healed the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient has healed the wound, immediately in that state, neither oil nor this powder should be applied; but ointments prepared beforehand or oat flour mixed with water and honey are to be placed there until it drains. Then other treatments can continue until the patient is well.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if bone fracture accompanies the wound and it's small, then use fine needles to fix it; and I will tell you later about fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	from the wound on the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	This wound originates near the neck and is straightforward, if there's no distinction between it and beneath the chin, but if something within the neck or artery has been cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it's the nerves, let no treatment follow except for its natural cure, and don't apply anything restrictive; doing so harms the nerves and causes them to recede. Don't put anything cold on the wound as nerve substance is inherently cold, and its continuity is with the head which is the highest part of the body; instead use warm medicine such as water lilies in gentle water, mixed with rose oil, and similarly washed cucumbers in gentle water, along with other ground substances in this manner. Apply moist ointments too.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, bind it tightly with bandages, then treat until it heals properly.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and filled with blood, you must puncture or go deeper; and if an artery is cut, and bleeding occurs, you should open it up, sew it, and cauterize as required; and if the windpipe has been cut, or the ribs, and the passageway is preserved, through which meat travels, so that the rib rests on the throat bone, but not touch the throat, let it be done according to its natural shape; and then make a fit addition, and leave for several days, then treat with desiccated ointments until healed; and if there appears an impression in the bone, you should remove; and if there are pieces of bone, if they can all be removed, take them out, but leave any that cannot reach; let the wound heal, and drain thoroughly from its source; and if the wound is fresh, apply a powder as I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound and it has an abscess, treat it as described in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	From the wound of a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it's from a lance or knife and the wound is deep, look to see if there's an outward breeze near the wound site: you'll know that the wound is mortal; and if it isn't deep, and it's fresh with all its blood, then don't apply powder at the first hour nor bind it up for fear of bleeding too much and replenishing in the depth of the wound, leading to heart strain. But instead use an attractive ointment and bind it twice a day; and if you have no ointment, place old cotton into the wound to suck out moisture and let the patient rest on the wound for three days, or four, or more; so long as there's no spasm nor tremor of heart, and once you see good signs you'll know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat with various remedies and other treatments until it heals; and if it cannot heal and work, know immediately that there is a fistula; conduct the treatment as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple or worse or on the back, depending on how to treat the one in front; if it's large, stitch treatment; and if it's small, powder treatment; and if it's seeping into bone, and has extracted pieces, then you know about the wound, and remove the impurities; and if they are not removed, leave the wound to heal on its own, if aids in extracting (impurities); and for other wounds on other limbs, judgments are similar as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	From the rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	Abdominal injuries are large, medium, and small; from a major wound it may have any of the intestines or parts of the intestines, by means of insertion of foreign bodies; and stitching is more troublesome and in no case is worse than smaller wounds compared to larger ones, because we can insert the intestines back repeatedly if they are not already returned piece by piece; because when the intestines swell from the cold, they do not return properly into position. And you should know that a rupture of the abdomen occurs through four ways: the two common stitches occur during abdominal closure, and other stitches for other body parts also have common closures with other wounds; however, they are even more suitable with the closure of the abdomen, and I will mention each one and explain them.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I state that when the wound is small, and no part of the intestine is involved, and if there's any damage it can be healed by one of two methods: either because of the size of the wound as we have mentioned, or due to the fact that the intestines are swollen from cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm him in this way: soak an sponge or dip a cloth in warm water only, or cook him in hot water with vinegar and pepper and garlic, until the intestines are released from swelling; and after each time you perform this treatment, make sure to release his breath so he can deflate.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you notice the swelling dissipating, rinse or heat the intestines with water or wine and make sure they are cooked until tender, because with this method, digestion can handle only a little thing; and if it cannot enter, then widen a bit of the wound using the instrument by which one removes hemorrhoids; and the first treatment should be to relieve any pain, not to cut without substantial need; and these are the tools for incision: you cut inside in the curve and outward not, and visualize this pattern:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines escape, if you can set them back according to their natural shape in their own proper place, because this is what matters, for it counts.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is broad, and it's in the belly area, you should make the patient lie on their back and raise their legs higher than their head. And if the injury is in the belly region, place their head and bottom higher than the parts below; similarly, when the abdominal rupture is in one of the two sections, adjust so that the part being repaired is higher than the other; and thus you should follow what I'm explaining about large and smaller wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, use whatever is at hand. Use the sacred needle which pierces through all the tears with its tip across the entire wound, and join the edges; this is a common way of stitching, and you should thread one or more needles depending on the size of the wound's width. Leave an inch from the edge of the wound as space, and insert your needle at that spot, leaving plenty of strong thread; then pierce both sides through the skin with both ends of the suturing instrument which is inside the skin, until you have pierced through that part completely, and join the three points together; then sew using a double strand of thread on either side of the needle. Then join the edges of the wound properly, leaving an inch as space, then insert another needle; then sew with this thread like your first stitch, stopping only when all of the wound is held in place; use needles that are medium-sized, between slender and thick ones because slender needles cut through all flesh, and very thick ones can't fully enter: so they should be medium sized. Don't stick them too deep into the flesh and skin for fear of cutting and worsening the wound when stitching; then tie up their ends to prevent bleeding during sleep, and cover their points with cloths or bandages until the wound is healed; this way of sewing works best in small wounds because you use only one needle for a second stitch which is common, and it involves joining both skin sides and both suture points together on one needle with medium strength thread. When you have pierced all four points together, pull the needle back to where you started, as when stitching linen. Leave an inch space between each stitch as wide as two fingers; this stitch heals the body, and I stitched a wound that was once made by a knife across the belly, which was torn with scissors, and the wound was more than one palm wide, it contained several intestines of two palms in length, and lay in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine until it had been out for twenty-four hours, and the wound healed up to fifteen days, and I treated him, and he recovered.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the doctors had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in an area where none could be found, nor any medicines; and I put new clean cloth twice a day on the wound, and washed it with honey water until he recovered.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you two proper methods of suturing: take the needle, and start from the outer side until it enters within; when it has pierced through the flesh straight in and out, then guide the head towards the siphon or stitch line where you have entered the needle, and make another puncture on the inner side until it pierces the outer part; and with this stitching method, you do so as the leathersmith sews fur, leaving a gap of the siphon from one side, then take hold again from the other, until the entire suturing is completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of suturing, which Galen described correctly, is as follows: none of them perform this naturally by uniting the two parts together and placing one needle close to the other, doing it in this manner: use a needle or point similar to that of the silk thread, make only one incision on this side, then leave both ends of the silk thread. Then turn the needle and make an incision from below through to inside by both ends of the silk thread; next make two more incisions on both sides coming down to the inside by using two other needles or points that are from the opposite end. This is the manner of suturing and the most common one.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen said this word and none testify against it - that one should stitch the belly with two needles, each having thread in them. And you must sew one needle from one side, and the other from the other, as those who stitch corroies do; know that when the wound is midst the belly, the stitching there is more grievous than of their others for the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgements of the wound are similar to those of other wounds: and this is that when you find the fresh wound filled with all its blood, just as the surgeon has treated it, then sew up the intestine, and the skin; afterwards place on a stimulating powder over it, and if the surgeon has treated it, then apply no ointment at all until the wound heals; and change the stitches, and have them joined by the suture, and the dressing; then treat the wound as usual until it is healed; and if you lack medicines, then for now when it begins to heal properly, use old cotton, and stir it twice a day until it heals.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you need no other medicine besides those in several preparations for simple wounds; and if you doubt that the wound may affect the principal limbs, it is necessary to soak light wool in oil heated with heat or in rose oil, and put it inside the joints, and apply it around the elbows; and if pain or gangrene occurs at times, then perform a bowel cleanse with black wine, and similarly if gangrene appears up to the intestines; and puncture inside, and know that when it's the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine that is called 'the young' cannot heal when it's injured, and this is due to the position of the veins involved, and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and the approach of its nature towards nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the bone jumps out of the wound, if you reset it back in the same manner as the intestine, while it is still fresh; and if it has aged and turned brown or black, then it is necessary to tie up what is black there, so that no blood comes through, because there are veins and arteries; then cut into the skin where the wound is, and place both ends of the bone below the wound until outwards for easing extraction when the bone jumps back in, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	from the rupture of the bladder
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is ruptured and the wound is small, it can be restored in some animals, as I have seen that a healthy person was pierced by a lance or through their stomach; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach and became stenotic, causing loss of appetite and gas. I applied treatment according to my knowledge, not stopping until it healed completely, and sutured the intestines.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it fused together, I wondered if the patient might have hurt himself in his belly. There was no harm, but he stayed in much better conditions, eating and drinking; and an experimenter said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be treated like this: take large leaves, then join the edges of the wound together, and once the leaves have opened their mouths, place them on the two edges so that they force her mouth up. And then close the leaves, and hold them in such a way that they cannot escape, then put another leaf after this manner, as before, until all the wound is covered; and thus the wound heals.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	In the case of inflammation in the intestine and no harm to the patient, there is no difficulty in joining the intestine using a fine thread cut from an animal's intestine, as follows: take the beginning part of this intestinal thread that is most hollowed out, then tie it with a fine thin linen thread, afterwards knot the thread on the needle and sew through the intestine. And stitch it at the opening; and this way of sewing threads is only according to the route of faith and hope; and if the wound is large and broad, especially when it is in one of the bowels, there being no organ or muscle involved, because of the fineness.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	from a fistula or wherever it may be.
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that every wound or abscess, as it matures, is universally termed 'fistula', and even when hairy and round in shape.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	A fistula is according to the true swelling of hardened and white tissue, where no pain is felt, and it is also covered like a bird's feather; and at times it appears clear in shape, and at other times thickened; sometimes small, and at other times quite large; and I have spoken about this under the division of wounds: that every wound which has not healed and contains no flesh, leaving only through one of the eight causes: this means by a tiny flow of blood or pus; or due to its malice; or because there is hard flesh inside and on the skin, which doesn't allow new tissue to form; or there's too much pus; or your veins or bones are diseased, and the matter is of poor quality; or because the medicine used isn't good for treatment; or it behaves like a pestilence due to corruption; or because digestion and health are delayed in that region, and then overcome by nature; or if there are veins or bone: and I have already shown all these causes, along with their signs, and treatments with medicines under the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	So it is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of fistulas which is done by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	You should know that fistulas occur in all limbs of the body; for there are fistulas that originate with large veins and arteries, and nerves, either inside or outside the thorax, or intestines, or bladder, or any part on the ribs, or spinal column, or joints of hands or feet; and indeed if they come to affect the primary property of the main limb, or their characteristics.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas of this manner are in need of healing, and there is no other cause but injury or ignorance; and if any fistula does not lead entirely to its root as I have said, then you are at the point of treating it, and you come to recognize it. Take a spider web tent or iron, should the fistula be straight, take it; and should the fistula be twisted, seek out a subtle plumb line tent, for the plumb bobs will bend with movement along its twist. Should this fistula have lost tips that cannot properly be sought after by tents, flush it with a catheter through one of these lost tips, as moisture is conducted from one to another through them; then cleanse it carefully with your strength, knowing if there is bone or nerve within, and it goes all around in fullness. Ask the patient about the pain they feel when you press their hand, and where that point lies. And once you truly know that point and whether it's far from a joint, or bone, or artery, or vein, or any of the places I've mentioned, if your method follows what I have said, remove the pus and decayed matter within; then treat it until it has healed properly. If this fistula is well and truly deep in its right place, it's fitting to fill it fully with a forceful technique, as much as you can manage, then insert wet bandages soaked in medicinal water in from that point at the top of the fistula, allowing the medicine to corrode what remains left within. Then apply healing salves until it has truly healed; and if it hasn't healed through this, cauterize it just as we've said, and should bone be corrupted by the fistula, cut it out.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If you do not obstruct the vein or principal limbs as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there's decay and darkness, one must drain it until all decay has been removed. Then cleanse it with healing ointments until it heals properly; and if it does not heal properly and returns to its original condition as before, you should know that this far you are on your journey: keep uncovering and treating until you reach the bottom, remove all the decay, then restore it in place; and if it remains healed like this, it is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If it is not like that, you should know that the corruption has become too extensive, you cannot restore it; if there's nothing but to let it follow its natural course. And if there's a small corrupted bone, and you can extract it with forceps, use an appropriate instrument for this task. If there are many bones affected, remove them all, do not leave even one. And if moisture causes contradiction, with no fear or caution, operate, handle the moisture, and cleanse the bones, freeing them from their attachments.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place something against the wound that aids in putrefaction and leave it until the flesh is thoroughly rotten inside the bone, then they will break more easily; and if it's a large bone like from the leg or thigh, only continue with the corruption process until all of the blackness has been removed, then heal the wound; and if there's a great part of the putrefaction that extends to the bone, you should remove and cover up until right at the point of decay, then treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in someone's leg where you can take an example and guidance for your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	The young man was around thirty years old, who had pain in his leg due to something that came from within the body, until the substances reached the leg, and he developed a large abscess, and there was no reason to open it; but the surgeons worked on it so aggressively that when they opened the abscesses, they ate away at a lot of flesh, and it became a fistula. And many people suffered a great deal from the body's pus and moisture; and for two years, many surgeons attempted treatment, with no expert knowledge in the art of surgery until I was called, and I examined his leg and treated him with medicines intended to heal him, along with what was eating away at the body through the defects; and the parts of the body became red from youthfulness, and had a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these depressions, and then searched all the depressions, finding that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hurriedly did then, and cut into one of the depressions until I uncovered a part of the bone, finding that it was rotten and perforated. I observed that the corruption extended all the way inside the bone; I identified this as the sign appearing from the rotten bone, assuming there wasn't any further corruption beyond what I saw; and began to heal the wound with medicines over an extended period, unable to stitch it up. Then I started again, uncovering the bone in the same manner, finding that the corruption continued within the bone. I treated it accordingly and removed it, worrying about stitching up the limb. However, I could not do so because I cut into a part of the bone roughly half its width, and it was healed over entirely by all its flesh; then I applied medicines to treat it; and it healed rapidly and did not require further work on the operation except due to the weakness from fear caused by illness, which couldn't be endured, and due to my fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For blood evacuation often occurs, but it was completely healed. In its place of the bone, a hard flesh formed, and it had good disposition and didn't cause any harm or opposite effect at all from beginning to end, neither inside nor outside.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, as it should be treated in this manner: take a thread and pull at the end of the bone that is open, and command it to extend upwards; and put another thread of thicker fabric than the first thread, and tie it over the flesh that is inside the bone, pulling on its head so that you remove the rotten flesh below, exposing the flesh where the bone should be, making sure not to harm the flesh; place a poker or a table under the bone to cover the rotten flesh; and continue treating until as much corruption can be seen and felt, and treat again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is decayed and does not open, and corruption exists in middle or a part of it, then reveal all the flesh. Then put the brand over it and then pass the corruption with your hand from one side to another. And allow the healing process as long as the corruption lasts; just as we said before; and if corruption is within the joint, correct the corrupted joint, and open or cut through the bone on the other side; and if corruption is in continuation of two joints, there should be no other angle than that of the connection; and if corruption is at either end of a finger or toe, it may seem very difficult but you must still seek to identify this corrosion as to how it opens; then cleanse every part using all possible methods without opposing the skin or nerve. Know that the cutting tool and needles for treating bones vary depending on the arrangement of bone pieces, the appearance of the wound, its size and subtlety, its dimensions large or small, toughness; accordingly, you need to choose an appropriate instrument according to each type of operation. Know that your experience will reveal what tool is needed based on knowledge of this craft and observation of disease patterns; then think about the appropriate tool as per necessity, considering it wisely.
dou feu	by fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The joints swell either due to an internal cause or a external one; and when you have treated that corrosion through medicine and found no improvement, it is necessary to operate on that limb until the source of the corrosion is reached, so that the patient escapes death or harm from the greater evil that lies in the defect of the limb; and signs for this are that the limbs turn black, as if burned by fire, and after this blackness comes the corruption spreading from limb to limb throughout the body; so you must hurry to operate, and if it's due to the impact of venomous animals, like sea scorpion, snake etc., if the corrosion is at the head of the second bone, cut it off without giving it space till the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it has reached the hand, cut at the joint; and if corrosion does not reach up to the arm. If it reaches the arm, cut through the flesh; and if it passes through the flesh, it's death, and there is no remedy other than what remains of its virtue; thus do what follows when corruption comes or passes: if it comes in the first joint, cut after the second bone; and if it passes elsewhere, cut throughout that place. And if it ascends to the leg, cut at the joint near the knee; and if it reaches above the knee, there is no other way than allowing the patient to die. The method of cutting or treating limbs is such that you tie them up from above and below, spread one pair of dressings on each ligament from beneath, and another pair from above, and open the flesh between the two threads as wide as possible until bone is exposed; then cut or treat it, and apply a strip of linen to each side, so that the treatment does not touch the healthy part, causing further injury or abscess formation.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if blood comes out when you're working, if you cauterize the wound immediately, or apply some stoppers powder; then return to your medicine until it's fully applied. Then bind the limb with an adequate bandage and treat until it heals completely; and I'll tell you what happened to the man in his own foot: he had a blackness that seemed like fire burn, and this corrosion came first in his left foot, covering all of it; and when the man saw the corrosion, he hurried to cover his foot, and healed. And for quite some time after that, the corrosion returned under both palms of his hand, and came to me, and I applied things responsive to the body's purification after its dissection, but could not stop the corrosion; and he asked me to cut off his hand, and I didn't agree because I had hope in redirecting the substance. And I also doubted whether if I were to cut off his hand, it wouldn't die, as man's virtue was weak; and he lost all hope entirely, returned to his land, hurriedly covered his hand himself, and healed. And this story is only told for future reference, should you need something like this elsewhere.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	No wound arises in the inner flesh and lasts so long that it causes a large gathering of pus; and then spreads and bores into the flesh, and the pus jumps about inside, staying there like vessels; and the skin above is as delicate as silk cloth, and does not go down to the bone or nerve, and such ailment is called 'abscess', it is not called 'fistula'. But if it extends so far that it reaches the bone from the inside completely, then it is called 'fistula'; and the skin like this, you can pinch all of that skin together, even when it is delicate, just as silk cloth; and it does not burst due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you have married that the skin is heated, and corruption does not reach to the end, and the skin is filled with pus, then treat with a cathartic medicine as such: look if the glands are big, and the swelling inside is of unpleasant odor; therefore use an Egyptian cathartic medicine in this manner: take silk, oil, and stannic oxide, equally, and place them in a vessel on fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey. Then follow your need to create water solutions with these, combine them with water and honey, then catheterize the glands and restrain it for so long; let the medicine stay there for two hours before you drain it by pressing. Do this repeatedly until the glands are freed of pus and completely empty; when no medicine or Egyptian ash is available, use a water solution as a cathartic instead. If you gather ashes from vine wood, mix them with water, then drain it afterwards, and use it as a cathartic. As long as you know that the glands are well emptied, use a cathartic made by char; take plaster of Paris and mix it with rose oil and wine. Alternatively, make a cathartic using various medicines and ointments, whose properties or effects I have described in other treatments. If the pustule is small under the gland, and the entrance for the catheter cannot enter, widen the area slightly with a metal rod, then place an Egyptian ointment tent there; or use basilic ointment, as long as it has been widened sufficiently. And if the wound is too large, make a cut just enough so that the catheter can fit in, and if pus lies beneath, you should drain it from slightly higher than its original position, making sure not to touch any healthy tissue.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bowe is correct, do not let it swell. And if you cannot cover the breast directly as you see, adapt in such a manner that the bowe goes to its highest point possible since the bowe is correct and do not let it swell if you cannot cover the breast directly as you see, then adapt in this way: make the bowe go gently downward, and leave nothing of the bowe; and take consolidating medicines to place within the healthy area, and be on the cloth that covers the entire healthy area; then put them at the lower part of the breast about half wider than the first one, because apply ointment of oil on the other cloth according to the size of the lower part, and put it on the healthy part of the bowe to relieve it, and do not take off the large cloth before many days once; and whoever is in the lower part of the breast, take often to remove the bowe, knowing where the bowe goes, if it is poison or fat or enough, or digested, or indigested; and watch so that if the patient feels pain or no longer, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in such a manner until you see the nature that jumps on the lower part of the healthy area, know that the breast starts to grow now, and draws near the healthiness; and then release the wound in the morning, or on the third day, and when you release the wound, change the other cloth, renewing the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the child vomits undigested food after many days, you should know that the child has not been born.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if venomous bites occur after a long wait, don't lose hope for your health, for the healing is coming.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are people who take longer to heal in their wounds compared to others, and those who do the opposite. If a baby doesn't start to move from its mother's womb after many days, know that the womb isn't working properly; if the womb takes too long to expel fluids and remains distant, adjust your remedies using dry and moist substances, like an ointment called diafinit. It contains large amounts of vitriol, which is the last remedy. Take an ointment called diafinit, mix it with rose oil, then apply it diluted in equal quantities of old wine. Then cook this mixture and use it; do something similar using cooked honey to thicken other substances when an ointment called diafinit isn't available. Or take myrrh, aloes, and incense, crush them together, and mix the powder with honey while still on a flame. Apply this paste over the chest and perform this procedure repeatedly; if you are unable to give the prescribed dosage long-term using these remedies, know that there is corruption present which affects bones or hard parts of the body or the limbs. If you cure an abscess with these remedies as we discussed earlier, then your understanding should be correct.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of the abscess under the nail.
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that arises under the nail of the finger or toe, or by chance might arise in other toes; and when it becomes old, if one does not take care, then the abscess spreads, runs and grows till it reaches the root of the nail, and by chance may reach it all. And comes corrosion up to the bone until there is unbearable pain, causing the finger tips to become large and the color to change.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have instructed in the section on treatment, and if the cure does not help, then it is necessary that you remove all the excess from under the nail. Then after that, cauterize the wound.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cautery should be relatively large if the bone is healthy and the nail is healthy. If the nail presses against the flesh, starts to pierce it, and becomes inflamed, then you need to place coal under the nail where the flesh is punctured, and press it up high. Remove that fine and gentle flesh, and place corrosive and caustic ointments above the wound to remove everything. Then treat with poultices until it heals properly.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, you should remove it and press strongly, because as long as the bone is rotten, it cannot heal. And if you see that the bone has decayed, you should cut out the decayed part as previously mentioned, then treat it until it heals. And if it becomes hard and bony, and feels a great pain, it's necessary to first remove this from its place; then cut off the nail with an incision on the side diagonally upwards, and be careful that the cut doesn't go up to the flesh under the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain. And if this happens, put something above to soothe.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain is originating from the hand.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	I must adjust what is born in the hands of some people by chance and has thick flesh, and by chance it may have bones or there's none at all times, and often there isn't a nail, and none of them are born at the root of the joint, where the birth is within any of us.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those who are born in any part of the body do not move, and those who are born at the joint might move; the size of the robust one is so light, in this manner: cut it from its root with a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	The one that grows at the root of the joint is a cause for concern in treatment: hold it firmly with your thumb.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the one who is born or should be at the rear joint, it is necessary that you first handle until you reach the round flesh up to the bone, then cut the bone with a suitable tool according to this, and then treat until it is clean.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The decisions that come together at the elbow arise from birth, or from an injury to a wound, or from the application of fire, or from similar actions.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	If it's necessary that you cut this seam, so that it can be repaired according to its natural forms; then place between two wet cloths or oiled linens, ensuring they don't stick together; or you place between two fine pieces of tallow, until the seams are joined, as is appropriate.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	When we perform soldering with her palm, if she applies the soldering paste as it should be done.
des vils	of the villages
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Vices are large, full vessels enveloped with melancholic excesses that come from the body's many members. And more occur in legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry things, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	So you must give them once purging of bile, and then heal them from the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The iron treatment is done in two ways: one involves pulling out the clots and bleeding black blood. The other way is that you open the vein and bleed it completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The procedure is as follows: first, immerse the leg in hot water very vigorously until the large veins become thin. Then, tighten the leg from the ailment up to above the knee; after that, open the vein on the left side of the body or number one, two, or three, with a broad cut, then lift and bleed black blood by your hand from one end to the other as much as the veins can withstand the effects of the ailment. Then reseal it and command him to dye his meat with that dark red; and repeat evacuation and cleaning when the veins are full and it harms the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The treatment procedures are as follows: lift the leg from the wound, if there is any hair present, then dip it into a bath, and heat up the leg in hot water until it turns red, and causes veins to swell; if no bath is available, heat it over fire instead. Then apply it at the site of the vein from heel to knee, or on the part above ankle; afterwards scrape skin along each side, until you can feel when it has separated; then you will see that it appears red and black, and when it cuts like a string inside skin; then pull the string out immediately as long as it is up to skin level. Then apply pressure gently once, then apply pressure on another spot above three inches. Then scrape skin near vein until it separates, then lift it with fire, just as you did before, and apply again using another ring, just as first time; then apply a different size or more if necessary, then lift it, then press at point of foot then pull and lift until second size is reached; then stretch from size to size until everything is free, then cut. And should you not be able to pull and lift fully, then insert a needle through all three strands thickly doubled over, tie and pull it out again, and if necessary cut the needle off, then twist your hand on each side, until it comes out; make sure that it does not stick as it can harm patient if it sticks. Once all is out, place moistened wool cloth in wine and rose oil over wound site, and treat until healed fully.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the head is tight and twisted together in one bundle, and it's not straight, as we have said, then you should cut it forcefully, but do not twist it; and handle it as we explained previously.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron with which one cuts the screw is curved, and does not slice through, so as not to cut the vein; and it has a large curve, for if it were fine, it would cut the vein, but being large, as we have said, and this is the shape:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is found in the legs, in warm areas where no herbs or trees grow, and on land without moisture; and it sometimes appears elsewhere than in the legs, which happens due to infection that arises from beneath the skin, just like serpents and worms do inside the body, penetrating between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein so are that there comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then change the blood, and it begins the vein to exit outwards, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And when the shoulder is open, it should be wrapped around with a piece of wood of one and a half to two thirds, and bind it, and let the wood remain on the leg. And every time there's need for more, wrap it in again along with the wood, and if it's too long, cut off a part, wrap it back on, but don't cover its root until all is out. Because if you cover it, it enters the flesh and causes pus formation and decay or disease; so it should be treated little by little up to half length, without leaving anything behind. And there mustn't be any time when this vein has been treated for five palms long, or ten, then one hand's worth from me, where the wood comes out of ten palms long, and when you cover it, keep a ring or piece of the tendon, and drill until all is out; and empty the contents that are inside, and apply healing remedies without any pus for a day, then treat as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never at this vein with cold hands, and especially when it opens in the joint of the foot, or ankle, causing much damage, and where there is a break; then treat it accordingly as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "the cow disease", because it has often affected cows, and it's a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and travels throughout the body upwards and downwards. The pain is felt at the onset from one limb to another, until it reaches the skin where it goes, and then it jumps; and it is infested with pus from some fluids, such as worms, snakes, roundworms or threadworms in the stomach; one wonders about its maliciousness because when it travels through the body, and when it ascends to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance enters and destroys the eye; this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it being treated and drained, one cannot do much when it happens: hence, it is necessary that you bind the arm above and below with a strong rope very tightly, then cut upwards and force out the pus, and if it moves into the flesh, and you don't find it, then cauterize it with fire until it heals; and any major damages it causes, are when it hits the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming near the eye, then bind around him the eye form, then cut upwards, and force out; and it is necessary to use the hand of purification from body medicines of soluble substances for illnesses caused by bad humors, and be wary of meats that cause putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	The pain coming from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes into any limbs, and then moves from member to member; and I have seen what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to attend a sick woman and saw her arms uncovered. I noticed a small swelling in the vein of her arm. Soon after, I observed it ascend as if a worm moving up to her shoulder, faster than anything else, just like molten silver when it's cut away from its source; the pain left that part of her body and entered her shoulder. Then later, it spread throughout her entire body until it reached the other arm; then she began complaining about pains within her body as I had seen.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled much at how it moved from member to member in such a way, for I had never seen this disease in this manner before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Indeed, I wanted to ensure that the movement of pain from one part of her body to another had been done properly, but I did not do it myself as I observed in this woman; and I thought that was due to her having a dry body, with exposed veins, and because of this constraint wind becomes visible; and does not become apparent according to this reason for those who are luxurious and have moist bodies and their veins closed up.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see to treat this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it has opened as we said, then press upon and around it quickly, and then apply pressure until that constriction of air escapes out; and cauterize the area; and if you do not see this at your fingers, treat him who debouted the air, such as foul pills, serapin pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	The phrase "des saiettes" refers to arrows or projectiles that may be embedded in wounds. It is often used in medical texts of the medieval period when describing treatments for injuries caused by projectiles, such as those sustained from battles or hunting accidents.
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, depending on their appearance and the location of their impact on the body.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The variety in their nature is that some have large points, and small ones, and those that are barbed or fused together. Others have two angles, and there are those with tongues, and those where pieces exist; and among these arrows, some that don't release anywhere do so according to different ways: Some discharge primarily in major limbs, such as the head, heart, liver, spleen, lungs, intestines, bladder, and other major body parts.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When the chest thus is in no place of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, presents itself: it becomes necessary for you to undertake the extraction of this arrow, because death comes after in several dispositions; and when that bad sign does not appear and the arrow has not been entirely extracted, then remove it, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when the arrow penetrates and pierces the bone, is when there is bleeding from a wound above the brain, it's also when blanching, swelling, and inversion occur in the eyes, as well as redness of the tongue, and convulsions along with confusion in understanding, and vomiting of bile; and sometimes it affects neither nose nor ears; and sometimes it results in loss of speech and voice; and bleeding from the wound appears white like pus, and also burns like flesh; and if that sign appears, you should attend to treatment, remove the arrow if it hasn't.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the needle when it bites or pierces is that it's near the left breast, and feels as if it were stuck into something hard, not empty; and accidentally the needle also ceases like a pulse, with black blood coming out, and brings coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: know then without doubt that death approaches.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that never lets out pus is when there's no foam bursting from the wound, and the throat swells up, and the patient's face changes color, and they sigh loudly with a cold chill.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow exits through the buttocks cover, it's deep in the back; and there is great pain and sighing; and all the limbs from the shoulders are moving.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if an arrow or stomach is hit, by chance if there's any undigested flesh from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow or stomach is hit, and there's no meat passing through the intestines in the jump, then there's no hope for treatment, nor for extracting the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow hits the bladder, and urine flows out during the jump, and patients feel intense pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, such as the arms and neck, throat, shoulder, elbow, forearm, back, thigh, leg, and similar limbs, are safe depending on various dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is within your nerve or artery, and it isn't venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because that's how you should handle such a situation.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to one of the servants that an arrow fell into his left rib near the nose: I probed it and pulled it out from the other side through the fat behind the ear, causing no serious harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And I pulled out an arrow from one's play that had fallen into the fat behind the ear near the paper, and the arrow was stuck in such a way that only its tip pointed towards the shaft, and it was as large as a Turkish bow, with no metal to pierce the ears; the game went well, and no harm came to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And remove an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the Arabic arrow was in his ear: I would cut off his whiskers, and skillfully extracted it as I pulled it out, and the Christian became well.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And removed an arrow in my home, that was stuck in his chest or stomach, and I thought he would die; and then after passing thirty days, he didn't change his position. I cut on the arrow, pulled it out with forceps, and removed it, without any bad incident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see in my home that an arrow has fallen or hit the back, and the wound was sealed up; and kept the arrow inside it, without changing its natural positions, nor found any harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And consider another man, who was hit by an arrow in his face, and the wound was stitched up; he then endured great pain for some time; and many others like this.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And one day an arrow was shot at the home of the princes' king, who had it stuck in his neck, and he was slightly leaning towards the right side; and the arrow was completely inside him. I was summoned for treatment three days after it happened.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound to be greatly constricted.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I tried every method with great care and did not feel it; and he felt pain and discomfort around his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I placed a drawing plaster and digestive one on him because his ears were not inflamed; and I noticed the ear of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the poultice to her hands for several days, and treated the wound immediately, then had her rest for a long time afterwards. The patient felt a pain deep inside their nose each day over that period; and I explained this to them.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied corrosive mercury medicine to the wound for several days until it opened, then tried various treatments and felt the tip of the arrow moving towards its entry point. I filled the wound opening with that corrosive mercury until the head of the arrow became visibly evident; and kept treating it well for about four months, and then cleaned up so thoroughly that I was able to pinch off the entire wound edge from both sides, unable to remove anything further; therefore, I continued inventing various tools and methods to create instruments, just until one day I succeeded in using nicely crafted pincers according to what will be described at the end of this chapter. This way, I treated it and then left the wound to heal.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And those who judge decide that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I will restore it thusly, and after sealing the wound, and completely healed the patient.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or I've told you about the quality of extracting some arrows, so place your treatment on what I don't mention, because books can't understand everything; but wise doctors compare well on quite a few small things, and based on what is present and lacking, they find new works, and new tools, for the removal of foreign objects that occur in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows penetrate the limbs where they are stuck according to two methods: either through the side where they enter or from another direction; and the one that enters or goes in this way, it is an arrow penetrating the flesh, and such arrows now no longer occur.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it doesn't jump now, let it be until the body heals internally, and the discharge comes out; similarly, if it's stuck in bone and can't come out, leave it like that for a few days, and try to remove it every day; then it will jump. If it doesn't, pierce internally with all subtlety until the chest is enlarged, as long as the ribs internally are spread wide, then take it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone at the head, and goes up to one of the stomachs at the brain, or any of the accidents that I have mentioned appear before the patient: do not remove it immediately, but leave it until she is equal after a few days, because if the arrow reaches this far, it's death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is only lodged in the bone and not to its full depth, and does not pierce any organ, causing no harm for days without a bad event, then the removal device for extraction should be used.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it's firmly stuck like this and can't come out by force, then administer internal remedies, as I've told you; then treat the area until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow has penetrated within the body so deeply that it cannot be seen, and you have to rely on feeling alone for its location; and if you sense it, try extracting it without any suitable instrument; and if you can't due to the size of the wound or depth of the arrow, and there are no bones, nerves, or veins involved, then extract as much as necessary leaving a large wound. Once you feel it, pull out the arrow if possible, and if it has ears that hold it in place, remove the flesh stuck on both sides until you can cut it off; then break or bend the ears of the arrow, continuing as long as needed to extract it; be sure not to break the arrow, as this would make its extraction harder.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you can't achieve it in one go, until the arrow reaches your hand, let it get stuck there, then pull it out because the extraction is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if bleeding during the procedure contradicts you, then follow what we have advised about treatment in our chapter; and be cautious with incisions near nerves and veins, and use technique to safely extract the arrow without risk, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and place the patient according to their position when the arrow fell out, for this is the greatest help that it should be like that. If you cannot do so, then place them according to what the symptoms show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that came from the other side, or where no part of it is visible or feels swollen when you see or touch it: then cut upwards as far as your forceps can grasp, and then pull: if it jumps now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held within the bone, turn your hand around, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then guide it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it can't come out, leave it and start extracting again until it does; and if there's still part of the arrow inside when you see or feel it, press firmly over the entire length of the shaft; and if it is at the tip, if you apply pressure evenly, then use your tool with a curved tip so that the arrow point goes into the curve of the tool; and then push hard, and if the arrow is caught in place, then press the tool where its tip enters to facilitate extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow has struck him, then it is necessary for you to remove all the tissue around where I am entering or have entered, if possible, and then treat the wound as is fitting.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow has hit him in the leg or arm or stomach or bladder or side, and it's close to vital organs, then if possible you must cover over; and should you be able to cover, do so; but avoid covering the vein and nerves. Then remove (the arrow), and then stitch the wound, if necessary; and treat until she is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows resemble bird beaks, and here is the form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways: large, medium-sized, and small, depending on the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the arrowhead is similar to the feathers of a bird, for it points at the tip of the arrow, as this shape illustrates:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape for pressing and holding, as shown here, is like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the veins of the common body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are XXXI veins that we cleanse, from which there are sixteen including their head: two batons located behind the ears, called "the herbech"; and two arteries in the two visible temples; and two veins in the two eye sockets, known as "aspires"; and the vein found under the forehead; and the vein near the nose tip; and two glands located on the collarbone; and two veins above the mouth, which are called "augeherich"; and two veins below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins that are commonly treated are the following in each arm: one is the cephalic vein, and it's located on the left side of the chest, and they call it by the common people "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called 'fascia', and it consists of the cephalic vein and basilic vein, and they refer to it as the common people "vein of the heart"; and the basilic vein if it's on the right side of the chest, and they call it by the common folk "vein of the belly", and it is situated above the collarbone, and this is the one that gets treated, which opens up clearly on the pocket.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	The salvevatula is the vein located between the little finger and the ring finger, it has two courses; and in the leg and where the foot joint is there are three veins: one of them is under the bend of the pocket on the left side of the chest, and the second is sophene which is at the ankle on the right side of the chest; and the vein that's called 'ness', which is at the ankle of the other side. And in the other leg there are three veins under these.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The healing of veins behind the ears that assist in hearing loss and migraines; and the qualities of a surgeon, as I tell you, and it is that you rub your head with the part of the skin or around the veins that is rough; then pinch the skin around the neck of the vein to a needle, until the two veins are seen behind the ears under two parts dependent on the head: then with your hand, where you feel your pulse beneath your ear, seize it; then take the lancet, and pass it below the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein upwards, slice through skin and vein well twice thick, and let blood come out until you see; then pinch it tight and tie it, until it is healed; and I have already spoken about incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	Surgery on the two arteries located in the two temples, if it resembles ancient operations and includes bloodletting, and so forth, along with treatments for feverish eyes; and this is what a physician's qualities are like as I describe: and that the patient restrains their throat until the two vessels appear openly; and feels the pulse all around your thumb, then checks for its rhythm; then lifts the arm above the vessel at your thumb's base, and holds the lancet underneath, then lifts the vein above, and cuts it, just as you would in other veins, and control the blood flow according to need; then release the patient, place your thumb on the vein for an hour, then apply cotton; and then stitch properly, leaving them until they heal; and we have discussed this along with their bleeding and extraction, or at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The treatment of the vein on the forehead is as important as the treatment for cephalalgia from ancient facial diseases, and migraines, and heatstroke; and its quality lies in causing the body to constrict by twisting, until the vein appears; then take the tool called 'drill', which has this form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand or something else, letting a little blood flow according to how much you see; then untwist the body to free the constriction, and bandage the vein until it heals completely and there is no trace of an operation or a wide scar.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Always, it is not fitting that the flames be too close; and they are applied across, because the bone is near, and by chance break the flames when they are fine.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The treatment for the two veins located in the two nostrils helps with the eyes, and heatstroke, and colds, and earaches in the ear, as well as facial diseases; and the quality of their healing lies in causing the body to constrict by twisting at some point, just like before, then heal. It's a scar that's somewhat long and slightly wide because there is no tissue there.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, perhaps they break; then channel some blood, as much as you need to, and then bind it with cotton, binding it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The treatment of a neck injury involves agitation and rest after its occurrence, and ailments affecting the face such as migraines and reddening that occur in the face, and especially when it is old; and the qualities of this treatment are to constrict the throat, then pinch the nose with your left hand, take up a slender flame long, stick it into the lip where the space is between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open properly at once, and the bleeding will now begin; do not proceed too far or too deep, bleed the blood gently according to your neediness, then close it overnight as it heals very quickly; this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The treatment of the two joints helps with tightening of the ligaments, and initiation of intertwining, and many diseases, and pneumonia, and corroding, and herpes, and indurations; and the qualities of this treatment are that the patient feels constriction around the neck from both sides, as we have said; and may masters are on the head of the disease, and the disease lies at its site, then heal the vein a bit widely along, then bleed moderately, or as much as necessary; then redo another part in the other vein, then release the tie, and hold medium on the veins, so that the patient doesn't choke; and leave it until morning, for the wound to be healed.
de la sainie des leivres	Of the healing of wounds
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The care of veins in the mouth aids in their condition, and it deals with gum decay, cracks on lips, nosebleeds, and inner cheeks.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of healing is to have the patient stand in front of you, and hold their neck as I said; then turn the cheek, and look at the two veins, one being on the right cheek and the other on the left. You can recognize them by their black color and because they contain small black veins inside: so cut both sides, and if you do not know which to choose, and are uncertain, cut the larger vein from each side, and treat both upper and lower veins in exactly the same way, for it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	Of healing beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Healing under the veins near the tongue occurs after the healing of the cephalic area, and this is done in the constriction of the throat, as well as for eye diseases, and mouth illnesses; and the quality of a surgeon is that the patient's head should be heated by your hands in front of the sun, then lift the tongue and look under each side: heal both sides, but do not go too far into it, because underneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the arm which are commonly healed have two methods of healing: or they are heated with a large, fiery red-hot iron, or with an olive-oil-soaked fine thread for cutting knives, and they are called 'anesil'; and they are wide and fine according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the flame dart is quite famous and very wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it requires to open the veins filled with large visible blood, and containing much blood and disturbance; and that is shaped like the olive flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more slender and pointed, and used for clarifying subtle veins, or it has subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The basilica healing, which is one of these veins, helps with illnesses that occur in the throat and neck, as well as stomach and abdomen; it is necessary for the healer to heal carefully, and they must be aware of the artery that is present.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if it touches the artery, and bleeding occurs, should be clamped immediately as I have said, and must not be lit with fire but cut like before.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilica does not clearly open, it is necessary to extract it and use another one. Or you do not want any vein from him, or you cut in place of that vein into the arm: it opens clearly; and heat it with fire as we said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you understand where to cut, it is necessary that way for you to stretch the arm so that you touch the place as long as you can feel the pulse; then mark the place of the artery, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein with heat as we said. And be careful not to pierce the artery when you see the place swelling, because this is from the artery: listen to it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it projecting upwards as much as urine from a child, and the penis is red and delicate, know that it's an artery: then rush, place your finger firmly, then remove your finger when the bleeding stops, as has happened many times; hold up the arm, and leave like this, do not move the patient; be cautious and do not move them until they are healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the wound is not cleaned, and it needs to be done, and you do not have the medicine at hand, then cut through the artery if it opens, for the head of the injured party retreats; clean the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take the peel of a garlic clove, and cut it, and take one half and bind it well up to the other end; if the bleeding stops, it is good; if not, treat with the powders that stop bleeding as we have said, such as those which stop blood flow; and the stopping of bleeding should be done in various ways according to the size of the wound and the strength of holding the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The treatment of the vein in its middle aids the draining of blood from above and from below where it is close to the head and torso, since it consists of basilical and cephalic parts as we have mentioned before. It requires that the surgeon be cautious about the nerve which is near this area; if it is cut too deeply, and he finds the nerve, then it inflates and harms the patient's health, so he cannot heal them; and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any individuals due to its intricacy, then one should save the vein using surgical instruments before cutting the nerve; and feel for the nerve with your skill.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there's a vein between the two nerves, cut it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The treatment of the cephalic vein helps in draining blood from above and assists the process; it's best that a surgeon cuts close to the olive flame or near the mirtin flame because this is the safest among all veins, as there are no nerves or arteries nearby.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Always aim for the lightest touch, and don't worry if it needs to be done again, you can attempt several times. In some cases, certain individuals might swell after the first attempt, but this doesn't cause any harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of healing depends on your thought process.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you should know about sanitizing is that it is managed merely to preserve health and prevent future illnesses; and so the sanitation should be done in one of the three veins: namely, cephalic, fast, and basilic. You need to sanitize at the beginning of prayers on your knees, during autumn and winter immediately after eating, when signs of fullness are seen; you need to sanitize either on the first or third day, two or three days after eating.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	Sanitation against diseases has no fixed time, but it should be done as needed each day or for nourishment in all hours and at all times; it is not suitable to sanitize children until they are twelve years old, nor pregnant women only up to seven months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	And one should not nurse the elderly who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone seeks to heal themselves in any way, if they are advised to empty their intestines with a gentle cathartic, if there is a buildup of waste that the body retains, so that the veins do not drain the unnecessary fluids causing harm to major limbs; or else it fails to heal those who are overly full of meats, or those who have consumed too much alcohol, as long as they are strong and not suffering from anemia or debility. And if advised to heal after a cramp-like pain, vomiting, abdominal pain, frequent menstruation, childbirth, overwork, insomnia, or anything causing weakness in the body due to exhaustion from physical exertion or from wounds; then refine your fluids, if they are too much from foods and drinks and medicines; provided you have means for it. Then bathe yourself or take a dip if nothing prevents you so that you refine your blood, heal by purging through your anus halfway down the lower third of your backside as we said; and protect yourself from work, pain, excesses, and any similar actions; and be bound in restraint and joy, let the healer's hands be higher than those being healed, rub their back twice or three times, then pinch lightly on the waistband in the middle, because if it is too tight or loose, they cannot correct the stomach. And then massage that area with your palms until you feel the veins swell; then anoint this healing with a small amount of old olive oil, and put your left hand's palm on that vein just below their waist where they wish to heal, so the vein does not burn when the iron touches it.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flow like strings under the skin, and there are such that are full of wind, so when placed near the flame, they retreat from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus belong to these; and if it opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, because in this situation one should be knowledgeable about these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if they operate on the vein for the first time, that is good; and if not, then attempt it again slightly near where the limb was or above quickly, while the limb isn't swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the limbs are swollen and the wounds are inflamed, let it be for one or two days without binding the arm: by chance it may produce pus filled ulcers. Do not enter bath water then, until you resume surgery as desired; and if the wound is small, or the skin around the incision is thin and you doubt that so much blood will come out as you see, cut straight into the wound throughout the flame; and work a little hastily, in such a way that the limbs are swollen. For this happens many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the limb swelling, don't stop washing it and apply a little olive oil instead. This lightens the body of blood, and is good in that area where the oil is applied; and do this after each wash when treating veins to stop the flow of blood. And similarly apply thyme and garlic when you place them on the limb; make sure the mixture isn't too thick as the oil could be easily spread but becomes hard when too much is used.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there appears a large abscess which happens many times, even when washing it once and the opening of the vein is small the first time, hurry up, apply a moistened sponge with hot water and a little salt to that area, and hold for an hour; and you should do this after the blood has flowed out from the vein. And if it stays on the limb for several days without any blackness or greenness appearing, it doesn't harm it; and if you see so, apply anything made of aloes or myrrh taken in a juice of calamus, mandrake, or similar substances.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often, pus and appearance would occur at the healing of the basilica: so then put your hand over, and if you find the body soft under the pressure of the hand, that is the sign of bad health.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Hear then that you do not place upon any thing of what we have said, because it could happen in the middle without the artery; but make one plastered area dry to harden the body, then treat with other remedies until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And lead each person to have blood according to the amount of its virtue and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the heart is black, let him bleed until it becomes red; and if you see that it's large, let him bleed until it thins; and if it's too hot, let him cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it befits the strong and well-built person needing extraction of blood, that you make a larger wound for them, and let the flames be wide; and for the weaker one, do the opposite, and this suits them better with more frequent care, and they should be treated by slicing diagonally, not straight through; and this way of treatment saves from bleeding and constriction of nerves, and is deemed better than a long cut over a wide one.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for the person whose body requires treatment, it is fitting to give them juices made from pomegranates for nourishment; if they are flushed, treat them by bleeding three or four times. And for those with a cold constitution, consume some food before treatment in the form of juice made from moistened pomegranate fruits, or sweetened syrup with aromatic flavors like honey, along with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves; ensure the syrup has a pleasant aroma.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if it fails at the surgery, after a little blood has flowed out, it should breathe in a broth of meat, and an aromatic syrup, and use other things that we have mentioned in the chapter or section on fainting, for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if they wish to breathe more vigorously in their arm, and seek another bout of sweating, whenever they are weakened by extensive sweating, it should be that they sweat gradually, according to the strength of their constitution, continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if one wishes to fumigate their arm after the first cleansing, and it has strong odors, if they are cleansed seven hours after the first cleansing, or after the seventh hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if one wishes to cleanse another part, then they should do it on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there's much blood within the body that has started to heat up and cause fever; if it should be that you need to draw out a large quantity of it, and widen the veins until they can relieve pressure. Then when all conditions for healing have been met, place your hand on their pulse as they recover, so death doesn't come before recovery, and this has happened many times when healers are careless; and should not occur if you see blood leaking out once more, and the veins have closed, then pressing firmly would be wrong; but let it be until there's a second recovery. Or place your point at the tip of the flame, until the pulse frozen in the vein of blood releases force, and place some oil that has been renewed into water, and gently press on it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if a vein has been cut, leave it unclosed and do not compress it until the abscess is relieved.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if there's need to draw out blood the second time, heal it in that same place, or on another vein, or on the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein inside the arm is healed at its own location instead of the neck because it's composed that way.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the way of healing is that the patients dip their hand in hot water, until the veins turn red; then they bind them moderately so the vein becomes visible, and now heal through it, not wide nor long; and make them rather wide, and heal well near to the joint of the hand, and if unable to bleed properly, then re-dip the hand in hot water, letting blood flow into the water until you have enough; and if this is so, do not dip the hand again in hot water as it stays warmer than cold; and healing through this vein is safer from all other veins, because there are neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	Healing of the salvation of the right hand is valid for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it's done: stretch out your hand and dip it in hot water until you see the vein, and heal through it straight across, making sure not to cause any pain; do not go too far inward or outward because the nerve lies under all that flesh, then re-dip the hand in hot water if it becomes frozen in the wound, and if unable to bleed properly.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as your skill allows, place on the vein where and how to sew it quickly to close, and do thus with each case.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The cure of the one in his left hand corresponds to the disease of the mouse, and do everything as I told you for the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The healing of the liver is valuable for all diseases that occur in the body, such as female diseases, retention of fluids, and kidney diseases, as well as ailments of old limbs and legs, and similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of this healing is that the patient bathes in hot water and rubs their leg on the ground until it begins to heat up, then binds it above the ankle joint; and if there is a vein at the ankle, or up beyond the leg, heal them where it is wider than usual, or at the ankle, as it suits.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you cure it at the foot, be aware of the nerves that are there, and treat it crosswise as in cutting wood; let the flames pass through quickly.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot come out without pain, put the foot in water and allow well to drain the vein.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the healing is required for the first time, then start again on the second leg a little higher up because the legs are salty; do not doubt about nerves as we have said, and thus treat the liver of the other leg equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The legs of the sciatic nerve are at the knee joint, and its health corresponds to the pain in the hip, when it's due to blood clot.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of her health is such that the patient bathes inside it, and pulls on it above the ankle with three turns, because otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, you heal it in all ways you can, and by going across; and you must turn when you take hold of it, as the limbs are without it, and she responds greatly to manual actions.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you cannot find it, heal nothing of what opens or behind the heel, and go to the little toe, and guard against the nerves; and make such a correction in the blood that you see, then undo the knot, and put on cotton and tighten; she is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of suction healings
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Blasping devices are made of horns, or spiders, or snails; and bloodletting is performed in two ways: either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this suction process which can cause injury is done in two ways: either with fire or without. Suction done by causing injury and bleeding extraction takes place at fourteen places on the body, out of which one is entirely at the top; and another one just below the neck; and two others are located on each side of the neck; and the suction cup under the chin; and the suction cup on both shoulders; and the suction cup on the thighs; and the suction cup under both arms; and the suction cup on both legs; and the suction cup at the ankles; and this suction process does not treat bleeding, because it affects scattered veins spread within the body tissue, which do not weaken any of them. It should be performed in the same way as bloodletting procedures are done, and it should not be administered with fire or without it, during any illness caused by accumulation until all organs have been emptied out.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if suction is necessary due to illnesses, or by habit, we should perform it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and continuously during that period; for there are those who, when they need to suck out, have heavy heads; and for those who find congestion and redness in their face, and on their head, and around their neck, and pale complexions among them; and those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongues, and cough up blood; and there are those who think, and see through the nose bleeding and dead and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially during the last month before giving birth, we instruct to breathe after three hours each day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The healing of the nose helps with diseases of the head ... that come to the ears, and it should not be done after the removal of everything from the body; this suction is for the healing of the cephalic ailment, and it should not be used by those who have a pale complexion or catarrh, as it causes great harm to them; therefore, it should not be used by those who sleep in its application, nor by those with cold diseases of the head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And he who often gets relieved from it, becomes oblivious, and because of this one must place the suction cup somewhat further down due to the confusion.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventilation in the neck is located near the healthy part of the head and the basilica, and thus it values at compression by the buttocks, and incision on the channel of the heart, and everywhere else, and for this purpose you should not push too hard; because if it holds too tightly, it may cause loss of consciousness or stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	Ventilation in the area of the second ribs of the neck relieves head pain and eye problems, as well as toothache, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of teeth. It is located near the healthy part of the basilica; you should instruct the surgeon to apply his hand gently, without pressing the artery or causing repeated blood loss.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	Ventilation around the chin can cause mouth diseases, gum decay, and other ailments that occur in the mouth; it is located in the health of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Ventilation of the shoulders comes from diseases caused by heat and congestion.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	Ventilation of the ribs is as effective as three veins in the arms because it takes blood from these large veins; instruct the surgeon not to press too hard at the sides, for the skin on the chest is bare of flesh and knows over the nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup on the back is as effective as those near the heart and in the vicinity of diseases, and it is necessary for the suction cup to be large and made of metal, so that it must be well treated; and by chance, if it were thin, it would break and cause major injuries.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction cups on the legs if applied firmly bleed well from the entire body and are valuable for old pains of the kidneys, bladder, and uterus, as well as reducing inflammation; they are located in the two knees and ankles and all at once weaken the body after prolonged use and cause loss or weakness in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying the suction cup is as follows: you should place it initially empty and apply suction consistently, then do so quickly, move evenly, and continue without stopping until you see the skin turning red and swelling. Then remove them and be careful about body positions because there are those with thick skin and clear pores: it's necessary to pierce only once, and to make wide incisions that are somewhat deep; and suction lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the lump is large, it's necessary to prick twice: first time for the purpose of making a passage for the larger blood flow.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the hair is very thick, it should be pricked three times. And when we wish to drain some blood slowly and gradually, we only pierce once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we refrain from blood loss, we often repeat this practice; and if the wound is deep, you press firmly upon it, and the final stages are such that your knuckles are pierced suddenly. It's suited to someone with thick skin and hardness, who has suffered many abrasions, for you must cover their limbs in leeches: if it's blood, use leeches of a reddish hue, or of sweet almond oil, or of pumpkin seed oil; and if it’s yellow, use watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or other similar substances.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of melilot, or turpentine, or oil of nutmeg, and similar.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the person to be treated has thick flesh and large abrasions, it is not suitable to apply oil at all, but after leeching with pink water, or cold water, or water from a rose, or water from a pumpkin, or water from porcelain, or other similar substances, you should wash them.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And to those who have much moisture, if they rise from sweat, or water of myrtle, and of sumac, and of similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large excesses may rise from old wine, or water from the spring, or decoction of thyme or chamomile, or others like them; and they should not be treated with suction cups before bathing or in a bath, but after the bath an hour or two. And do not sleep afterwards, it is necessary for them to warm up, when they should be sucked and when they have been sucked.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And watch for those who are purging and are of hot temperament, and if they are too vigorous and inflamed; it is necessary for them to consume cold things, such as pomegranates, endives, and moist lettuce, and similar items; and they should eat small portions, and meat from castrated animals, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those with cold constitution should consume honey syrup and moderately fragrant old wine. They should eat small portions and small pieces of meat from castrated animals as well as little birds and young pigeons. On the day they are to be treated with suction cups, they should drink more than they eat; it is necessary for some individuals to give them senna or muscat before or after treatment in order to strengthen their main limbs. Keep the belly cool but avoid having those who are hot consuming it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The suction cups meant to cause injury are those placed on the liver, and under the kidneys, and in gout, and on the belly and groin. This member does not suffer from being injured by punctures, and it is done forcefully only to draw blood from one part of the body to another; similarly we place them on nipples when newborns are healthy; for removing viscosity present in parts, we also apply suction cups under the belly and on the groin for reducing the size of that part. It relieves pain when there's swelling or stone, it can remove a lump by its attractive power accidentally, or vacuums out the stone from its place; thus it operates when placed under the liver and kidneys where viscosity is retained, and these suction cups are used empty to suck only once; they are not used together with fire in any case, and some are filled with boiling water or with water that has cooked herbs suitable for this purpose, so one might fill a suction cup with hot water from this source.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction cup administered by fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it has two fingers wide and half a palm in length, and at its middle one small notch is made, as to pierce like an awl, either of an animal or iron, such that when placed on the body it does not hurt the patient; and there is a metal rod in the middle, be it from an animal's leg bone or iron, for placing a candlewick, with them being large and small depending on the illnesses and age of those using them; because children's suckers are different than adults', and those from thin people are different than those from fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And we should thus place this sucker on the body: hold the candle or thread in place, and insert it through the rod inside the sucker so that the light is at the bottom of the sucker, preventing it from burning the patient; then place it on the body, with your fingers on the notch as we have described, so that when desired, if vapor starts coming out, remove the sucker; and hold the thread in the same way, repeating often, should you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the suction cup therefore which is administered in pleurisy disease, at all acute times, there's neither a needle nor a point used, and it's only administered forcefully when it's full of water, and placed solely on the limb; and that's its form.
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Poultices are administered only in limbs where suction cups cannot be placed due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas; and in those shaved bald, like ears or armpits, and other similar conditions. The quality of the poultice is that when you find poultices that are in gentle water without impurities, you take them; then immerse them in gentle water until they become familiar and have nothing in their stomachs; and then cleanse with a vein and suction cup, then rub the limb until it turns red, and place the poultices on it. And when they're full and secrete, if there's a part where a suction cup can be placed, you do so, as this is of great value afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, raise the arm with hot water first, and then cold water quite well, and afterwards apply oil. And if it's still inflamed too long after the cuts of veins, moisten a linen cloth in cool water and place it on, until the cut heals; and if there are multiple cuts, apply powdered vitriol or garlic, and similar actions, until they heal; otherwise put half-cooked peeled beans under the arm, and leave them so that they dry out on the arm, which will stop the bleeding immediately. And if you need more, take other veins.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the wounds do not take well to healing, rub with fresh blood, or pierce it with a needle until blood comes out and then place on it; once they smell the blood, they will start to heal immediately. And when you see that they are discharging pus, powder them lightly with some aloes and powdered meal, or ashes, and they will heal now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book on fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it restores fracture and alleviation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear child, that the people of this chapter gaze upon what's contained within it, something unseen in ancient books or letters read; hence this knowledge has been extricated from our land, as I've never found any good content before. And I know nothing, for it comes from the study of ancient books, to which I have devoted much effort and time, through experimentation, and through habit with my life; and I have described in this chapter what is contained within, abbreviated it at the end, and clearly illustrated the forms of instruments used, as done in the two chapters preceding these.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	So it is necessary that we outline or introduce this book's main points and chapters where the wise people use their understanding, and remain faithful to truth. Let those who have experienced this know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when fracture or dislocation or twists or stiffness occur to any part of the body, it is necessary for you to quickly heal the patient from one side and the other, if there's nothing pressing on them, such as weakness, children, old people; or if their pulse isn't steady, too fast, too weak; and cold fluids, meaning cold jades, and eye and parsley flesh, and do not drink wine, nor consume any fatty meats. And don't let your meals be too heavy with meat that fills the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of pus coming from an abscess or spreading of matter in the limb; if the patient begins to improve under their first management, as they were using it.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that the patient be nourished with foods that cause a heavy digestion or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and onions, and nuts, and pies, and beef stomachs, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For at times, after an operation, it can move again more quickly than the breaking.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that old and weak bones cannot be restored or joined according to their nature due to the dryness of limbs, nor are those too soft, such as the bones of young children; but do this, set again the broken bone with a big mallet on the protruding pieces that separate and join the limb together, until it supports like before. And don't finish his work straight away, for this is suitable, feed him with large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are varied in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the skull is different from the fracture of the heel, or of the leg, and in this chapter I will tell you all ways of fracture.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that go to the marrow, and others through cutting, such as the length of a feather for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it's a fracture with injury, or a fracture with just a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And for each manner it has its own tool and its proper instrument in the restoration process, according to what memory brings to mind; and is known by the breaking of the bone when the limb is twisted, opening well outward, and feels pressing from the hand; and when there is no twisting or rubbing, and the patient doesn't feel much pain, if there is no breakage; but it can have twisting, or cracking, or small breakage.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	But do not move it with your hand yourself, but apply the remedies that follow, and then gently constrain it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the breakage which was in action, and were the two parts separated, they should now put them equal, so as to make incisions close together; and if incisions are too close, let him not leave it for any day, until the incisions heal; then place him evenly under your skillful and gentle touch, knowing that its restoration is easier than the restoration of those with pieces; then tighten, according to what should be done after this.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if there are pieces broken in the bone, and it's divided into two parts, whether it's hands or feet, or by your hand is a small member, or at two strings, or one string and by your hand; place the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken limb have been removed, you pull them in every way with force onto their places as much as you can, and be careful not to cause the patient any injury or pain; and adjust well the two ends of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And hold it well in your hand if you feel that it is not properly set: if it is dressed beautifully, and do not over-tighten, do not press as they do when they remove an abscess by their method of incision and contraction on the limb, as we have desired many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limbs are in place, make sure to control the patient so they do not move them, neither while awake nor asleep, neither upon turning or in any other way; ensure that the limbs are firmly secured so no pain is felt.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	And when they do not feel any pain, it is not properly in place and you should arrange them so that they do not feel any pain. And guard that they are put correctly, so that there is no crookedness upon their restoration; and the quality of the broken limb must be according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that limbs broken are varied by size and extent and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	And for small limbs like arms and legs and alike: they must be enveloped in soft and fine linen; and those that are larger, such as thighs and calves: they should be enveloped in wide, sturdy bandages since the wide bandages encompass the entire large limb equally from all sides, without causing any unevenness. Then loop thin linens lightly around three or four times according to the limb's size, and press your hand on every part of the bandage slightly. Afterwards proceed above the break and apply less pressure so that it doesn't move away a bit from the break; and soften the bandage little by little until you have treated almost all of the healthy part, then take another linen loop, wrap it around the broken limb again, and return to the vicinity of the break, applying moderate pressure without going too hard or too soft. This is as we explained in the first part above. Then place linens or bandages between the loops until they are evenly distributed throughout; afterwards cover them all with a bandage, and then fit your well-made pins onto it, unless there's pus or inflammation present.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is inflammation or an abscess, then apply something soothing for the abscess and that reduces the swelling. Let it stay like this for a few days; then stretch your limbs, and they should be at half the width of a small cane reedly cut straight, or from the shafts used to make clamps, or palm fronds, and do so according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the limbs which one places on the brace be slightly larger and wider than the others; and they should also be as long as suitable to the size or grandeur of the limb. Then stretch them onto the braces in the same manner you did at the first attempt, then attach a compensation thread above, just like you did on the fracture initially; make it tighter now, but not excessively; and it is necessary that the threads are moderate, neither too large nor too small, and they should be made of soft linen. For if the thread is too thick, as in works made by those who perform their bindings with twisted linen cords, this is a great mistake because the binding cannot be equal if it is too thin, and it is not suitable for there to be less than half a finger's width between each limb.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the wounds are irritated by the edges of the stitches after tightening during their healing, then place linen patches or raveled wool on them, so that they do not blister.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is inflamed and the ribs are broken, I will then describe the treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not proper to hold back too much of your efforts when healing broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, one should not use these plasters immediately after three or four days or even more depending on the abscess that appears; and here is the way of using ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and torsions: you take flour that stands in mill walls, mix it with plenty of egg, make this concoction neither too thin nor too thick, and use it. This is a common method for restoring fractures in multiple orientations, as well as for pregnant women and young children since there are no restrictions on its use whether hot or cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of plastering to restore fractures and dislocations: take three parts of each of these: barley meal, dandelion, rue, and asafetida, along with gum arabic and myrrh; measure it out to be .x. three times the amount specified for each individual ingredient. Mix in a bit of myrrh and aloes also at .v. five times. Add seven parts of alechil (a type of vinegar). Grind all ingredients into powder, then mix with plenty of egg. If the mixture is warm to touch, use this plaster; it has good composition properties and rapidly heals broken bones and is beneficial for many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method of plastering for torsions: take mugwort and wormwood, each measure IX thirds; myrrh and aloes, each measure IXI thirds; carageena, measure VI thirds; Armenian boric acid, measure X thirds, grind them well, mix with water or plenty of egg whites, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another way to plaster joints and bones where they are, and relieve the pain that follows, and use bone cutting tools and hot oil for bruising: take new wool, and fat in a pot cooked with oil, and apply it on your limbs.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Bandages do not heal completely, but they are better for soothing abscesses, and properly treating the pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method for dressing broken bones: take dried fig leaves and terrestrial plantain leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another way to plaster is for the restoration of bone fracture and to relieve the removal of the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of parsley, chamomile, violet flowers, fennel flour; from each take one part; grind and mix with wine, then if your limbs are warm, mix it with wet coriander water, or just water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another method of plastering more forcibly than the first, when pus is returning to the recovery of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of vismalve, and linseed, balsa wood, marjoram, and sage, and flowers of violet and chamomile, from all take one part; and grind it, and mix with salt water or sweetened water, or with wine, according to the warmth of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book, Hippocrates instructs that only beeswax ointment made of wax and oil should be applied to the broken limb for restoration without anything else. He states that it must not be too soft or too hard but just right.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen that we should place upon the broken limb for restoration, substances slightly heated and somewhat dry, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to prepare plaster for injury and pain: take mung beans and chicken feathers from cooked chickens, or bird feathers, and basil leaves, and sand equally ground, grind them, make the mixture into plaster and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then after a little time, take care not to let the patient feel any pain or move their bone from its place. If you don't remove the plaster in hand motions, and if pain starts in the limb, or itching, without rest or swelling, then act quickly, remove the plaster, and apply fresh bandage immediately; use a light cloth and wet sponge, soak them in water, and cool down the limb until the itching stops and the pain is relieved. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put it on dry wool, moistened with water or oil, and bind it with a strip of linen until you are sure of pus presence; cool down the inflammation in the limb, relieve pain, then continue with careful reapplication, and a little plaster, do not apply too firmly as before; be careful until the patient is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you notice that pus is coming out and the area is red, painful, swollen and oozing, indicating inflammation throughout, then you will need to apply plaster and bind it, start again as you did initially, in exactly the same way.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if there is no effect on the limb as we have said, or it isn't released until after three days or four or five or seven; and let him not rest any time then, according to what can be seen, until inflammation subsides, and approaches the adjustment of the flesh above; therefore maintain your restraint more than before, and allow his body to swell its substance as I have said previously; and if you see that the skin has dried excessively beyond what is necessary, know that bruises will not come about; thus dip him in hot water every time you release him, and do this once every three days, and clean a little around the wound; with this work then cut off the bruise on the limb, quicken this operation compared to what foolish practitioners do, who forcibly straighten the limb: this is bad practice, and it is wasteful effort, and I see nothing else than allowing and operating him directly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Regarding various methods of breaking bones
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many methods of fractures exist, and various forms are there, with causes being distinct; for some fractures are made by the impact of a sword, and necks fracture all the bone up to the symphysis which is near the bone, such as done by a hammer or staff; hence this manner of breaking is called "hatchet break".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	When the sword cuts through the bone from above without piercing it, this is called "absolute" fracture; and these are either large or small wounds resulting from such fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is sequential impact, or crack, or fracture of the stone collarbone, or under the stone, or other similar occurrences.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a fracture partly through, which approaches until it reaches the membrane beneath the bone, or above the bone, and this wound may be large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there is a wound that heals within the bone as thin as hair, and has small cracks, this kind of break is called "hairline"; and if the wound is made by hitting with stone or falling or any similar thing, and has the piece of bone inserted downward, and the pieces are close together just like blacksmiths when they forge on the anvils; if a piece goes inside the stone.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	This happens more in those with softer bones, like children's heads; and occurs in all these manners of fractures where small fragments are lost like feathers; and I shall speak about it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And know all methods of breaking through the diminution upon them, and the examination by touch, and through the corrupt flesh that is upon.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of hair is known by this: when one has exposed the bone and rubs inside it, if the breakage shows black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a breakage, beware of any bad accidents due to illness, if you see no harmful incident, such as vomiting bile, loss of intellect, extension and rigidity, fever ague, and if the eyes emerge and turn red, or show other similar symptoms in various conditions, you cannot be certain of recovery.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a terrible accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the nose comes to you first, and it is in winter, then you should remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the month.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it's in winter, you should hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day after the month; so that when the pus around the bone becomes infected, and accidents as we said occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the breakage of the bone comes up to the fabric that covers the brain, then it is necessary for you to cut into the fractured part like this: and take hold of the edge of the patient's unbroken head, and expose the bone in all ways possible, and more accurately based on the appearance of the wound. If blood starts to flow during exposure, or if pus forms, use what is appropriate then place a wet cloth soaked in rose oil inside the gap; let the wound rest until the pus subsides, and make sure there is no more bleeding. Then begin working into the bone according to two ways of operation: one way involves cutting at the narrowest part facing front, which defines its shape.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make another cut that is larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have several different size cuts, some narrow and others wide, all pointed and made of iron; and execute them lightly, so as not to injure the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is protruding and hard, it's necessary for you to pierce through internally, so that you make cuts with needles, not fully piercing until beyond the bone surface, and there should be a margin or about half a circle above the point, ensuring the point does not pass beyond the bone; and you must have more than one, so that each goes into its place of the bone's thickness, so that you have needles for all parts; and this is the form of the three types of needles:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality to pierce through the broken bone is that you place one needle on the bone and turn with your hands until you know that the bone has been pierced. Then put the needle in another spot a bit after, and do this for all around, then cut out the space of the bone which is between the teeth, doing it more finely than you can and gently as we said, as long as you bring the bone to your hand or any tool you have such as forceps; and make sure not to touch the brain nor the spine.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have punctured and cut the bone, it is appropriate to clean off any remaining bone debris with an instrument resembling a scissor but which should be more robust and finer than another scissor; if there's nothing left of small bones or scales, gently scrape them away using those instruments. Then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another way of doing this is as Galien taught, which is more safe; and it uses strong tools, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	Firstly, it is necessary to uncover a part of the bone, at the place where the fracture opens and moves, so that when you have uncovered this part, you will place under the tip of this lens-shaped incision, from which its shape is given:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, and make the cut across in two sides, so that when cutting you are against the bone; then with a small hammer at hand, so you can lightly stroke over the whole bone, and be well careful of the cloth which is underneath; if it sticks to the bone, then gently scrape it off the bone, for this scraping does no harm and causes no fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture doesn't penetrate just to the membrane, and the bone is cut only from above, with small pieces present, then after that abrasiveness, and remove the scales with a subtle razor you must have in various quantities, for administering the most suitable one to each area according to the treatise and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you are in front of large razors, and after even finer ones, and never cease doing this until it is done well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other scalp cuttings and finer fractures, it is necessary that you apply treatment according to their orientation; and this matter is not answered by someone who has put their study into this craft.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the scab is uncovered, it is necessary that you use linen of the size required for the wound, soak it in oil rose, and place it over the wound; then take another layer of doubled linen, soaked in wine and oil rose, and place it above the first layer. Do this more lightly than you can, making sure not to weigh down the scab, then administer bandage again from above with a third layer, but do not pull tightly that it only touches the wound; leave it like this for one or two days until the abscess is somewhat calmed, then remove the bandage and apply medicine such as lily roots, wheat flour, incense powder, and aristolochia among others; make a powder from these things, put it over the wound, and then administer more gentle medicines without causing irritation. And beware that the wound remains clean, do not leave any ointment on it, nor let it get stuck with dirt, for when dirt assembles under the cloth of the brain, it moves and irritates, causing great harm to the patient; because when something mordant is put over the scab, it becomes irritated from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Then be careful therefore, if no accidents come to the patient as we have said, there is doubt without fear.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if fear does not come out only due to the medicine that we have placed on it, should this substance possess such a virtue, then you must take one part of honey and three parts of rooster's gall and an inch of glue, and spread this mixture on your skin. Then treat with methods appropriate for treatment until it is healed, while it remains healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that never are broken the two parts below the nose or only one of them, because they are two bones; and this one below is cartilaginous, it does not break, even if you bend or twist it, then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, you should pinch or squeeze your small finger or nose tip, and apply the breakage evenly inside your index finger, and outward through your nostril. Continue this until your nose recovers its natural shape; do this gently, and be careful not to cause pain for the patient with your actions.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the part above the nose and cannot come to the nostrils, it must be that you put it level with the tip of a hair a bit thick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the breakage is two parts, redo this procedure, and try to restore it on the first day if possible; if not, after seven or eight days when the abscess is calm, then pinch at the nose tip using linen cloth. If the breakage occurs in one part, do so accordingly.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you apply another one from the other side, if the break is in that direction; and make them large enough to fill the hollows of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say no restorer thinks to moisten the warts with butter, and change each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I don't think it's quite right, but they should be moistened in the preparation of a concoction from an egg, and powder of mill grind; then leave the wart until the bone is hard and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes, one should use goose feathers instead of tents, and if you have an egg, wrap it in them, and keep the warmth, allowing the air to circulate among the wounds; do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if pus comes out through the nose as you work on it, then apply a wet cloth or cotton soaked in rose oil, or in a little pot of almond oil.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscesses are not developing, apply a poultice externally, made of ground snail shell and incense powder, mixed with an egg yolk. Then place it on light bandages, don't tie them tightly; and if they break without hurting the skin too much, and they break into small pieces, then use tools suitable for this purpose to extract, cut open the wound and cleanse it of all impurities, then suture it, using poultices and ointments suitable for this task. And if there is no wound beneath the skin, then treat the wart, and apply thyme needles until they heal.
de la routure de la mandibule	On the rupture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is fractured and there is no wound on the surface, and only the breakage is external, not at all broken into two halves but rather split internally throughout, one can recognize it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the fracture occurs in the right part, to place your index finger in the mouth on the side of the injury; and if the fracture occurs in the left mandible, you should place your index finger of your right hand on the injured side, and gently apply pressure to the fracture internally, then press it outward with the other hand from outside, ensuring it is even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jawbone is divided into two parts, then it is necessary to provide extension for both halves, ensuring they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the teeth start moving or break, or you have to stitch them back together using a thread of gold, silver or silk. Then place wax on the broken jaw and put two layers of linen on it. Place under one layer a large ridge made well or a piece of leather matching in length and width according to the jaw size. Secure this at the ends that you can reach and instruct the patient to rest, and let them consume light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you notice that the figure changes, release it on the third day and then put things back in order according to what has changed; apply plaster, mixed with powdered materials or enough eggs or flour of chestnut, after removing the wax. Place a light woolen cloth over the plaster, and if the plaster dries and the patient's position remains unchanged, let them rest until they heal. Many times healing occurs within three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And when pus comes out during an incision, then apply what we have instructed many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, reward nothing of the bone that has been removed; so much delicacy was required in using tools suitable for this task.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and there remains nothing, if the wound is wide, place one plaster suitable for it over it to promote healing until it heals.
de la forcele	By the power of
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The force breaks many times before reaching the shoulder, and the breaking occurs in three ways: sometimes it is broken and torn into two parts, resulting in fragments that are easier to restore; or there's tearing with an injury.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the procedures are as follows when there's tearing with an injury: you need two assistants, so that one marks the shoulder where the force is broken; and the other extends their arm towards the affected part. Then make the break equal with your hands, ensuring the shape matches what it should be, without any sign of strain or movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, place a round sponge of cloth or wool under the shoulder to the hair, and make its size according to your need; then stretch and lift up the force, hold the sponge in your hand so that you can make the break equal as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the force outwards due to it coming forward, so that the patient lies on their back, and places a half pillow under their shoulder, and pushes the shoulder blade downwards, until the bone of the force is lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then apply pressure with your fingers, and if you find fragments, it is necessary to cut through them; and gently pull the pieces apart. If the bone cannot join at any point from pressure, make a cut near one of your incisions; but place this tool on the force, in order to prevent leakage:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	It appears like a spoon, and is not found within, and can be as wide as needed according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and it has two heads, as you see, and one is broad, and the other narrow, as it is with the wound you made when treating the bones; and once sure there's an abscess in each, if you let that wound heal, and if the opening is small, or if you're unsure of any abscess, if you cover the wound with cloths and tents according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if pus comes out, if moisture arrives, apply oil roses and vinegar and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The grinding of the bone when it is affected by wounds and size requires that you place on the bone the plaster mixture of mill powder and beaten egg white, then place light bandages on top. If necessary, put a wad under the heel. Then take a very large bandage about a palm wide, then place a double cloth bandage on top of the bandage, and cover it with plaster. Next, take a small stick three fingers wide and long, wrap it around this bandage so that only part of the bandage is hanging down, and place it above the injury. Turn the bandage upwards towards the neck, under clean and diseased areas; and adjust from each side. When you see that the healing takes hold at the wound site, and clearly sees that the stick does not move on top of the broken bone, then reward him every day, and when the stitches are removed, put it in his rest. And make sure that the pain subsides on its back, and place it during sleep under the heel to raise the shoulder up; if the swelling of the injury is relieved by aligning the shoulder, or you tie your arm around the neck, and do not remove it until bad things happen, for 20 days; then, if you see that there's need, renew the plastering and tighten and leave him like this, until he is restored. And she is restored in the longest of 28 days, but some people recover sooner.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of the breaking of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	A certain situation occurs when the shoulder is broken or fractured either at its end or mid-section; if it is dislocated only by external force. If you rearrange according to the shape of the break and reset it in line with its natural form, through any means possible. Then, apply a powder from the mill onto the joint mixed with plenty of egg whites, making light bindings, and place two layers over this. Next, lay out a large and fine strip somewhat larger than the shoulder across a wide piece of stone; ensure there is no movement anywhere on the shoulder; then cover that area with layers of linen wadding, making sure the strip fits evenly; afterwards bind it all tightly in one big band, so tightly that the stone doesn't move at its place. Keep an eye on your patient each day; and whenever they loosen up, readjust them, maintaining equal tension on the strip if it is not displaced from its place, laying the patient on their side; and by this method, the shoulder will be healed in twenty days or twenty-five. And when this period has elapsed, release the patient and ascertain that they are well, for what sets itself firmly cannot move lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a bone piece appears first and not below the knee, then proceed by removing it, along with the abscess beneath, and do as we have instructed for treating wounds of muscle dislocation.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The bones are broken once or twice in the middle, but this happens rarely; they often break at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, if it tilts downward and the patient feels intense pain throughout their body, along with loss of consciousness, immediately afterwards, and by chance vomits blood, and opens up the joints in the broken bones, and one can well perceive this.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when it comes to setting the bone, should lie lay under his backbones, and you place one span between the shoulders, then press on the shoulders, and join the ribs of both sides with your hands, and gradually adjust them evenly in all possible ways until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then place plaster bandages over this fine structure of salt or another lightweight substance, wrap them in a piece of cloth, and tie them around the broken bone so that they do not move. Then bend the joint back onto the back, press against it properly, and reward every hour by massaging the wound area; if she begins to heal, then tighten her up; and if it is appropriate to remove, due to corrosion or itchiness coming from the body, or pain or abscess, act quickly, and loosen the tie, and remove the plaster bandage, and treat the person who came in with the cure methods. Then replace the bandage, and press it until it is fit for use.
de la brisure des costes	Of the breaking of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the breaking of the ribs happens only in the large ones after the back and within, and do not bend because they are oily; and one feels it well during examination at the waist.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And for the healing process, you should make the break equal, just as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply plaster and bind with a bandage if needed.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the breaking of the ribs is occurring internally, the patient feels great pain and piercing, like from labor pains, because the bone punctures the tissue; and they have pains all over, immediately and vomit much blood, and it's a serious health issue, and the elderly have experienced severe illness.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that it is necessary to administer meats which swell the belly, in order to expel the wind from outside.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not follow this, for abscesses and pus do not come about unless they have arrived.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have arrived, heal them.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And it is said by none of us to apply suckling pigs over the wound in order to extract moisture and this appears reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt that the suction cup draws away excesses from the body due to its weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that when treating the wound of an animal, one should cover it with moist wool in a hot oil, and place the bandages between the ribs to make the healing consistent all around. Then follow the treatment for pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels intense pain that cannot be borne by the bone piercing the skin, and there is doubt in the patient, then it's necessary to make an incision at the site of the broken rib, and you need to place a tool under the torn edge; and then one must cut through the bone, gently drain, and then suture the two edges of the wound if it's large, and treat with plaster until healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you have to drain pus, place it over moist cloths in oil and put them on the wound; then treat while that part of the body requires pus drainage, and have a constant watch on that side where it should be done, until it is cured.
de la brisure dou col	of the break at the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No fracture occurs at the bones of the neck, and it does not bend; similarly for the spine in the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to any person, and you wish to know if they will recover or not, take care; if you see their hands softened, swollen, and dead, and unable to move or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, if they do not feel.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	You know that it is fatal in various conditions, and if they do not respond well when their limbs are restrained and there is no sensation, you know that the joint of the bone has been saved, and that the illness has been cured, as long as a treatment is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And when such a thing comes to the spinal column of the back, and you need to know if it is sane or not, take care that his joints are softened, and that any injuries are where they should be, and above the back ventosity and expulsion against will; and when it has been observed on its belly, it expels against will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is observed on his back and wants to sit up, if he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it's mortal: if you do not work diligently in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this incident does not happen to him, then it is a simpler thing.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that you should extract if there is pus, if it's placed on the spine or on the yolk of an egg, until it calms down; then place on one of the soothing plasters and let them dry, and bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where they feel pain, until they recover.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is broken, then it should be covered with plaster; and remove the bone, then join the two edges of the wound, if they're large, with stitches, then treat with ointment that heals flesh until it's healed; and if the tip of the bone is broken off, which is called 'the tip of the elbow', then you should hold your left hand pouch and place it evenly on the other to your power, then apply the plaster and bandage as needed; then press firmly, and if there are broken bones, then remove them and treat the wound until it's healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	From the breaking of the bone of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It occurs when the bone of the hip is broken. And if it happens, there should be a slight swelling at the knee; and it runs long, declines towards the groin, brings pain to the leg, and bruising, and inflates that which is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And in terms of restoration, you must extend your hand upwards, as long as you are over the breakage area; and understand where the breakage is and its shape. If the breakage is only at the knee, then make an equal breakage there, until it reaches a natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the breakage is along the length of it or it declines towards the inside, then guide the patient so that they lie on their abdomen, as long as you are able to complete the repair of this breakage.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have placed it evenly, set it on the plaster, then place it on a column of wood or charcoal, and hold the wound steady, so that it does not move; and apply the area over the ribs, as long as the limb is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the abscesses swell up and come out, do not touch them until they are calmed down, and apply what we have already mentioned; then return to the process of treatment, tighten it as needed, assuming there is no bad incident; this is how you should proceed.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	From the breaking of the shoulder.
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The assistants are those that lie between the handle and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, you must restore it according to one of these two methods: wherein one method involves taking a full length staff of medium thickness, in this manner:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two shoulder blades with two strips each, and place them on top, securing the patient's sides onto one spot. Then, lay the broken arm onto the staff until it reaches to the middle, making a bend of the staff halfway through, then rest it against any heavy object or let assistants hold it downwards; then place the broken end of the shoulder in alignment with his hands when they are together, up until the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that you place the patient on their back, and tie their hand to their neck, then instruct two assistants to have one cut off from where it's broken in his hands, and the other cuts off everything up to one finger length, stretching each one to its respective side.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more fierce, then bind it tightly against the wound pain, and above the wound, and extend each of the assistants to their share.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is close to the head of the shoulder, it should be necessary that you place one band in the middle against the seat, and the other towards the knife, against the wound; and also if the wound is towards the blade, then it should be necessary to place the band lightly, without effort, as long as the wound is equal on the left and on the blade; then make an incision evenly, just like it should, and hold tightly, so that no abscesses occur.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if pus comes out from it even after seven days, do not hold tightly any more; instead apply greased wool and oil roset, until the pus coming out is calmed down. Then hold tight, so when you place the plaster on the wound, then unite the arm with the shoulder support, put your hand on the shoulder or chest; apply the bandage and hold it tight both on the support and on the arm, ensuring that the arm stays straight, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not broken.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you suspect that the bone does not move, use supports for this, and place a larger and stronger support under each cut than the others, leaving an inch of space between each support. Ensure that each support is large enough to pass through the wound three inches from both sides; then hold tightly on the supports as I instructed at the beginning of this chapter concerning wounds, more firmly but not stretching too far apart.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the bed of the stumps, and the constriction, as we have said, at the time that you restore the broken limb, and you hesitate about removing the clot, if you leave it bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine each three days the tie, to ensure no itchiness spreads across the area or causes a rash, or that the infections cannot reach the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the address, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such incidents occur, or if the dislocation takes longer than three days or more, and the patient feels better on his back and has his hands on his stomach; and place under the shoulder one cotton pad evenly filled with wool, and watch each hour of the day or from dawn, to see that the shape of the broken limb does not move or that the ties do not soften; if the address comes thanks to the power of medicine, and gives him back the meat we placed before him, in such a way that the meat becomes easily digestible at first; and when he begins to recover, if it is large.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be readjusted every forty days from then; thereafter, one must relieve them, administer baths and medications for the wound to heal.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the tightening is ugly and tangled, it should remain to be relieved for one or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the breaking of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the 'fosciles', from which one is small, and it's this that covers the pit; and the other is large, and it's this that rests under, near the small bone; by chance only the large foscile breaks or the small one, or by chance they both break.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, the restoration is light and the healing; and when large ones are broken, the healing is poor, and more painful than when they were broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small bone is broken, it should be slightly extended and made even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it's the large bone that's broken, you should pull more firmly; and extend him to the first cussin, and mark the hand pocket higher than the others, and place the small finger lower than the other fingers, and have the patient cross his own ribs over himself, with the first cussin above him higher, so that the ribs don't suffer any labor; then extend your assistant's arm towards his side near his hand, or at the wrist, and another assistant above the other.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then set the eyes even, according to their best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the break into pieces, you place each one in its own location, and if there is none that grabs onto the bone, and you cannot restore it to its location, then do it upon and through the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if there is an injury due to the breakage, I spoke about it in the singular chapter; take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if during the commencement of the restoration, there come discharges that stick, then make a bandage of beeswax and white wax, so it should neither be too hard nor too soft; and bind this bandage properly from above in a fine manner, until the discharges that stick are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then apply the wax, and put on the plaster of the powder from the mill with enough egg, then place the splints, and make sure that the splint for the fracture is more forward, and slightly wider than the others; and know that there should be six splints or arms in various positions: either that the break is within one bone, or in two; and fix it more on the fracture than anywhere else, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let those cloths above the fracture be soft and moistened, and do not make them hard or rough; and use threads made from linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And restore the member and the link after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any harmful incidents occur to the member, such as itchiness that affects the member, it is necessary for you to dip the member in hot water, until the itching subsides; and let the member not be forced to rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then continue the process of ligature removal, and if the ligaments are loosened and the bones have been exposed, and similar actions are taken.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if precautions are taken so that no further constriction can come to the limb because it's too tight, it is necessary to soften it with heat and let it rest for a few days until the constriction ceases, then resume constriction.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, or if no untangling happens up to twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Or elsewhere, then place their hands on their necks, and ensure that the necks are even, and take care not to move or disturb them, and let them rest on their back; know that this healing is restored in thirty days or forty-five, and sometimes in twenty, depending on the compositions and the temperaments of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	You know that in the back of the hand and on us, few breaks occur, and only fold many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the heel of the hand is broken or folds, it should be treated by having the patient sit upright and directly in front of themself; then place their hand flat on the table and stretch out the fingers of the broken parts, and align the bones properly, making sure they are well connected; and apply bandages and splints, if no abscesses develop, then place an ointment according to the size of the injury; and wrap it in one linen sheet.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the break is at the base of the fingers near the belly of the hand sole, make a pyramid from cloths and instruct the patient to hold it against their broken finger; then stretch him with a long cloth, and place the splint as high as the size of the hand's palm, making sure it stretches properly.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is at the front, it must be that you place one splint above and another below on the foot part. So that your hands are open and straight; then tie them entirely around the hand, and seal the joint between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the break comes to any of the two feet, it's like a bundle, just as should be; and press with the heel, and if you see fit to place a small upright splint to raise the fracture, and not move. And if the break is at the other foot, like in the index or one of others, it's like a bundle, and tie with the healthy one which comes after; or you tie all together, as long as they can hold, or place an upright splint just like for dressing; and take care in restoring and arranging each wound separately, and adapt to what comes up, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the shoulder often breaks several times, and one can see it when it turns in front and behind; and its repair is this: i.e., the first step being to set the broken part above the breakage point, and the second below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the veins lie on its surface, then extend each minister's line to its equal part; and this is when the breakage occurs inside the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the fracture is close to the root of the thumb, then one should apply the ligaments towards the knife, and the other ones over the breakage.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And similarly if it is close to the knee joint, then apply the ligaments around the knee joint, and instead of that perform extension. Then position the bone halfway between her hands, as long as it fits with her natural figure, and then place the plaster and bandage, should any abscesses not come about.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is pus to remove, let it heal first before you return to your work and treatment; the wound is made in such a manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary for you to wrap around the fracture with a hard bandage doubled two or three times, leaving any excess. Then turn the leg until the heels reach the knee, and place the needle long between the foot and leg, under the knee joint from below, and guide the head of the needle above; then wrap the leg again on the thigh and the bandage, then place a pin on the fracture site, and place a pin on the bone of the leg; then position four layers of silk cloth between the leg and thigh to ensure uniform pressure, then begin to bind tightly in three or four turns around the fracture. And when you go further above the fracture and less tighten; then guide two ends of the thread that you have placed between the leg and thigh, and bind three pins which are on top, then return below to the head of the needle until you reach underfoot; and tighten it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like this, until no other signs come about.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, release it and address what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that catch hold, it should be removed, so long as one can; and if one cannot, it is necessary to cut the wound and draw out the strength; and treat him as we have said, until he heals.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And no part of the flesh is broken when these pins are inserted in such places, as in the shoulder and on the arm; nevertheless, no inconvenience affects the patient in this manner of restoration.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	Know that the flesh is restored within one day, or somewhat less, or somewhat more, depending on the variety of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the groove of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the joint of the knee, there is little breaking, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it's usually just a crack, or it might be lost, causing pain in all injuries and being felt well by one.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is to place it even with what was round at its ends until it's assembled and moves as it should. Then put on plaster, and add a round stick if needed, then tighten appropriately. Afterwards adjust every arrangement that we have mentioned in other fractures, such as pus formation or similar conditions; for each situation apply what suits it until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	Regarding the breaking of the leg.
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called by the right name "ham" and the other is named "foscile"; and it experiences all kinds of breakage similar to what happens in the arm, and similarly its treatment follows like for the arm equally, and the processes are all the same. And if both these bones are broken together, then the leg twists everywhere.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bones are broken, then twist in front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the larger bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it well; and then it twists around.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then adjust the position and make it even, and evenly tie the threads but always, if breakage is messy and there are several pieces, that the extension should be smaller and more gentle; and apply according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your task, take two lengths of wadded cloth that cover the leg on both sides and are long enough from the thigh down to below. Then wrap these around with two pieces of bandage above and below, and tie them in the middle as well; so that the leg does not bend either to the right or left, and thus is done properly; and no one should administer to it a single piece of cloth as long as the leg, made of wood, and place this under the leg to prevent movement. This should be carried out exactly where there is damage from the breakage or wound; and move the leg each day in order to check for pus or any other complication; treat it until it is healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	From the breaking of bones at the knee
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle it does not come from breaking, but when bones at the knee are broken, there is a break and in the legs, powerlessness occurs in multiple positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if it happens that the bones at the knee break, and you see these bones thrusting over one another, place these limbs of earth under your feet just as if they were going somewhere, then put now your foot on his, where the bones are elevated, press them so much until their heels revive; then set plaster and bindings over it, and put a small table at two feet thick under the belly of the knee, then restrain him to the foot insertion, then when you have wrapped cloths around him, and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, remove the bandage, for you will find that the bones are equal, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the ribs are broken, repair them, as we have said about the ribs of the hand; then place a splint on the broken rib according to its length, and make it slightly wider than that. Then put under the splint the board I mentioned, and apply pressure evenly; and if there are two or three or more broken ribs, break them, placing one splint for each rib according to its size, wrapped in a single linen cloth of the first, then fix the board under the patient's abdomen where it is cut. And while lying on the table top above the patient's belly, ensure that it properly cuts through.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other matters I have discussed regarding other injuries, once we have talked about them; and correct each incident according to how it should be.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	Regarding the breaking of the bone in the hand.
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the natural bone of the woman is broken, make her stay in an enlarged position, then incline her towards the lower back part and hold her from behind. Fill the gap that nature made with cotton, also filling it as large as possible. Then let the woman stand up slowly and lift her back bit by bit, then jump out the cotton until it comes to the entrance of natural formation, and return the bone along with her stool; and when she wishes to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has done so, put her back in place again, like this for seven days or more: if the breakage is healed, take a goat's bladder, tie it to the knot of the string, stuff all the bladder into natural formation, then blow into the string strongly until the bladder is inflated inside; nature will return the breakage. Then fill with cotton and let it be like this for some days, until it is well.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the hand is broken, or from the woman if it is repaired as we have said for the bone of the hip; and these near breaks are not hidden by him who dedicates his study and use to this, and listens to my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the break means in many positions the right path of restoration: thus understand it.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the case of a broken penis, take an oxtail and fill it with the penis; then wrap it tightly in bandages, and let it be for three days or longer, and it will heal very quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	By fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it's large, like in the case of the thigh bone or shoulder blade or similar, that they be surgically treated now, so that the surgeries we have mentioned testify to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is clean, then seal it with vitriol, or if you have nothing else, then start to treat the fracture at that same hour, or on that day, assuming no abscesses appear.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses appear, then let the treatment continue until a new day, as long as the abscess is calming down, and don't touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause harmful accidents.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone is broken and visible at its exposed knee, then it should be put back together lightly with your hands, in a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions are not available to make it even with your hands, then you use this tool made of iron, which is seven inches or six inches long, and its width matches the size of the wound; for this task, the surgeon must adjust its size as needed for each treatment of a broken bone; it should be round and somewhat thick, so that it does not bend under compression on your limb during surgery, and it should be sharp in front, and large at the middle towards the front, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And is called 'palanché' because it requires that the crooked shoulders be placed on the tip of the visible bone; and beat it once until it heals and they are equal to each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle and the tools cannot properly grasp the bone, it requires that you place the tip of the bone until the tools have capability.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot return the bone back, as we have said, if you have an appropriate tool for this task, such as a scalpel or awl, with your skill; then take out what is remaining in the hard and small cuts of the bone.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is returned, and the patient feels intense pain afterwards, know that it has not been placed in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you want it to be in its natural position, then soak the dressing in a black, medicinal wine and ensure that if done correctly, especially when dealing with external injuries. Don't place anything like wax or other substances on the wound which might cause irritation; avoid causing infection and decay. Then administer herbs after you have restored the bone, keep the wound open and cover it completely according to the size of the injury, making sure to closely watch that the wound is not restricted by friction. Many people have made this mistake, leading to death or decay in the patient. And when you apply pressure gently and cautiously instead of forcefully like other breaks, these outcomes are less likely to occur; take good care that the injury doesn't heal improperly.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that harmful incidents have occurred within it, as we have said, and you find pain in your hand, then it should not be treated with stones; but encase it internally, instead of stones, bind strong cloths around it, and secure them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see that after one or two days the wound is swelling, remove whatever you have put on it with vinegar, and apply healing ointment for wounds, such as the fourfold medicine and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it must be that you dislocate the limb twice a day, morning and evening, until it is joined and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it should have been so that the limb is bound in such a way that the bone slides down slightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if it continues for the whole day, and it cannot join anymore, know that there are small fragments of bone, so you must seek to open the wound with a probe, and remove all these necessary pieces that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a sinus develops in the hand or any other form of corruption, it is necessary to treat it according to what was instructed in the chapter before this one.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and open within the limb, like in the elbow or shoulder, or other similar large bones, do not attempt to remove them as many times people die because of this. Leave it until it heals naturally; occasionally it might drain on its own after about 20 or 30 days. Then treat the wound if you can, and if you cannot, let it be as is.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	The burns that come from sweat
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	They come many times after the wound has healed, especially near joints, and an ugly thing to see is the appearance of the limb; and by chance it cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care then if there is any swelling: if you administer restorative medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, as well as sanguine collyrium, caraway, and similar others, do so with one of these things, or all together, and mix them with stinging wine, or with a whole egg or with honey; then apply this mixture on the spot in poultices, bind it tightly, and don't release it by hand for several days; then remove it, and repeat another application until the swellings are gone. Or you can apply this on a well-made piece of leather because the properties of leather have the ability to drain all swellings from the limbs; if the swelling has turned hard like stone and needs to be removed, if there is any excess, make it obvious; or continue applying it until it's reduced by any barber, until it's gone, and continue treatment until healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	Of the limb that becomes weak after an illness.
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the breaking of the bone has been restored, and after that the limbs are weak and subtle, this happens due to certain reasons: because one is for those who were bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many ligaments, and could not allow the necessary movements in the limb; or for an excess of bleeding; or for overly large movements, not at their proper time; or because they lack much blood within their body, being feeble.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the treatment is that you must make the patient eat the medicine, and make the body tender until the pus multiplies within him; then give him baths, and bring him joy and ease. After this, apply grease to the limb, so that the grease attracts to the large pus, and washes it often with hot water until the pus aligns with the limb; and restores its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The member becomes twisted after recovery.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limbs are twisted after restoration, and if the bones break open, even though the body's natural form is lost, it does not lose its function: nor should one believe those who say that we must break all new members completely; many fools do this in our land. These practices are criticized and cause great harms, sometimes leading to death. However, when the fractures and injuries are fresh, they should be immersed in hot water or cooked with soothing herbs like dandelion leaves, roots, and milk thistle, among others. And one should apply a poultice made from these soothing substances; you take greasy figs, grind them with cinnamon, and similar medicines that alleviate heat. Then you make a greased plaster and apply it. Or you take greasy dates and grind them with nutmeg powder, and other such medicinal substances to cool down the heat. And then you make a greased poultice and apply it.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And no time is removed the operation of rubbing continuously and for a long time with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let each body part move once an hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twists have aged and hardened, like bones, and require being treated with iron, if it is necessary to cover up to the bone, apply subtle gentle cutting at the incision; and include consideration and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book on dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation affects none, if now is needed bring back without hesitation.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	And if one delays, the limbs swell up and unexpectedly cause pain in certain parts of the body; for this reason it is not advisable to move them when they are swollen: many times pus and other pains are drawn out. However, whenever this happens, have a surgeon examine the patient, then let him rest until his abscesses subside; then immerse the limb in warm water and oil, gently apply movement, and cure each part according to how it is supposed to function within its own body.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have organized the chapters about shoulder dislocations up to this point.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes the jaws become dislocated backward, and the dislocations of both are according to two ways: or they are slightly bone-like from their places, and somewhat softened; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the heels, and causing saliva from the mouth that one cannot hold, nor can close his mouth, and wraps his tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it can often return through several positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And when it is whole and completed, you should apply the remedy quickly, without hesitation; and do so in such a way that the attendant cuts off the head of the patient and sticks the sharp end of the implement into the base of the dislocation of the jawbone inside the mouth if the dislocation involves two parts. If only one hand's fingers are involved, they should stick out through the other hand to keep them aligned; instruct the patient that they should soften their jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And guide her until she settles back into its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it becomes difficult to return them, even when the two jaws are together, if they were raised with hot water and oil, until you gently reset them; do not overly strain during the resetting process, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back equally, and the mouth of the patient is well closed with mild soothing, then place damp cloths on a paste made from rose oil and beeswax, then bind it lightly with moist string; and have the patient lie on their back, and their limbs between two cushions, so that they do not move neither to the right nor to the left, nor try to twist themselves more, but require light food, until the pains are subdued, and the jaws are stitched up; and then allow them to eat lightly, without opening their mouth while eating or drinking, until the jaw is well stitched up and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be properly aligned within an hour and are not converted back to their original positions, then fevers and recurrent swelling occur, along with occasional abdominal discomfort, and occasionally, vomiting of pure fluids.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it's a loss; and many times, death occurs to the one who experiences this within seven days.
de la forcelle	from the lever
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The strength cannot relieve from within the middle of the back and at its base, and is dislocated outwards every time, and one feels this well indeed.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is such that the patient lies still on their back, and extends their arms; then press into your palm the shape of their body, and it will return; then put them onto the plaster and bind them, and tighten; and if they dislocate again towards the cut, do not allow them to move; should they, and if they dislocate once, you must reset it back in place as we have said; then put them onto the plaster and bind, and tighten, and instruct the patient to rest until healed; and thus similarly are returned the shoulders of the spine when they are removed from their place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Concerning the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Know that the shoulder is dislocated according to three ways: one way it dislocates from the part of the acromion down to the base; and the second way it dislocates from the part near the heel; and accidentally it dislocates upwards, which happens rarely; it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor inwards for nerves; and it dislocates downwards towards the acromion multiple times, even for those with little flesh; at these that have little muscle, this happens quickly; at those who have enough flesh, this happens by jumping, and then returns by jumping.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance, some men suffer from impact or fracture, and the shoulder swells due to an abscess, and they believe that it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore, you must test them until you are certain; then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known how dislocations occur when they move towards the acromion, and one recognizes the difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, you will find various clear distinctions between them; you will also find a depression at the head of the shoulder, from where to the base of the acromion as if it were an eye; the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor can they move in any movements; similarly, if it is dislocated high up, it is not hidden either because you clearly find it at the base; and this way of dislocation does not allow bringing back when it's new, or when the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the minister lifts his hand from the malady at the top, then places his fingers on the shoulder blade, and raises the joint to its full extent at the top above him; and the minister lifts his hand and extends it up high, putting it under; if it comes quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come out as we have said after a few days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water. And apply soothing and restorative remedies to them; such as decoction of garlic, fenugreek and melilot in water, and they need to be applied; then dress the injured area with wool padding that is neither too soft nor too hard. Place a small cushion under their foot and place their heel on it, gently lift up the shoulder blade and pull the hand towards the patient; have another assistant press the top of the shoulder down firmly, so as not to let them move back. The shoulder now returns immediately in this manner: if you see that you have successfully reset it following this method: make sure there is someone bigger than the patient present at home during this process and position them straight towards the injured side, push the shoulder under the pillow of the patient, lift up the pillow and place their head upright so that the injured person hangs in the air. Have another assistant pull the hand away from the patient towards their stomach.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too weak, they cannot support anything heavy with him, and the dislocation returns immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And resetting can also be done in other ways: and you stick the long coal into the ground, so that the shoulder is placed like a pistol, and it's neither too big nor too greasy; then place it under the patient, but with its head resting on something soft, and the shoulder remains at the same length of the fender; then extend your hand from below on the other side to form, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it doesn't return using all these things that we have said, you perform this treatment: take a stick of two arms wide and three inches thick, which has its head rounded so as to be able to enter through perfectly under the pit, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then bind the head to the stick with a piece of cloth underneath, so that the stick does not bruise the patient's arm, then place the stick under the arm against the side; and extend your hand up along the stick from the elbow, and fix the shoulder on the stick, and the arm at the elbow joint, then place your arm on one of the stakes about the width of a thumb, and keep the other hand hanging down, leaving the body hanging from the opposite side: the joint will return to its place now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when she is there, in whatever way it may be, if you must put on the seat of the dislocation an equal thread, then place plastered with powder from the mill, together with incense and egg oil, all over the shoulder and around it. Then remove that which was placed upon the seat after a while, and retie the bandage on top of the plastering, and hold the hand at its neck, and keep your hands in this state for some time.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is required that he chew a little, until the limbs are strengthened, for it will heal faster; and then continue to chew more after five or seven days, and move it around; and if it's firm and not softened, it will have healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is out of place due to moisture that has come upon it, or for some other reason, then you must administer three cauterizations to it, as was described in the chapter on cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it gets dislocated after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift your arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is torn or stretched or weakened; and know that the joint would never be properly placed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation near the buttocks, and breasts, or behind, if it is caused by pushing and stretching of hands, or administered elsewhere; treat until it's healed sanely.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing there comes weakness in the limb, and delayed movements, then the patient should take frequent baths with hot water until that weakness is alleviated, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	From the dislocation of the shoulder joint
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated at points and returns to them; and if it's dislocated from all sides, even in front and behind, then the shoulder dislocation doesn't respond properly, as you can see it clearly and feel it well; and it dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the diseased skin with healthy tissue, if you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is knotted, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder to any degree.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	It is necessary that you reset it in this manner as abscesses heal from within outward, for if they heal from outside inward, it would be problematic to reposition them; and by chance, they may not be able to be fully returned; shoulder dislocation is worse than others, and causes more intense pain, and by chance death occurs.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is as follows: when it can be brought back to that position where one can extend their hands to your two hands; and their arms are spread out, and the hands face each other in line with the elbow joint, both inside and outside, then push the joint towards their wrists or at the base of their palm until they return to their place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if there is a dislocation in front, it returns when they double their hand against their own and push from the base of the palm with the knife that has been inserted.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it doesn't return to its place, administer strong stretching; and when you are to administer this stretching, extend the arm with both hands, and stretch with both hands, so that it does not move during the stretching; then bend the arm from each side, then having wrapped a double long and wide cloth around it; and when you aim to join the joint back to its place in your hand, oil it slightly for softening the joint, then press the joint firmly until it heals; and once healed, place it with dry plaster under an egg yolk, press firmly, and allow the arm to rest at the neck against the diseased skin, and leave it for some days, then remove the bandage.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in its place, remove the bandage and leave it as it is; and if you see that the joint does not heal well, reapply the plaster and the bandage, and keep it like this for a few more days until it's firmly set; then remove it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if they feel sore after setting the joint back in place, and it continues to move, then bathe them well and rub their body beautifully until it relieves the pain. Or you should put on the joint a layer of fatty lamb's wool, leave it for a day and a night; then wash the area with warm water; and when they sweat, gently rub the joint, then place the wool back on. And then enter them into warm water again; and do this twice or three times until they recover fully; and if you can see, apply moistened calf's fat mixed with butter around the area, and rub it well; if it returns to its position, it will be set properly.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The hand joint has dislocated, and the return is slight, more so than other joints. In this case, it's necessary to quickly bring it back into place while it's still dislocated, thus making sure that the limbs swell or an abscess arises.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And when you're setting it back in place, do this by placing your hand on a board and spreading out the fingers of that hand. You should look at how well they align them; as long as their palm is placed upon the appearance of the joint, hold it firmly until it fully recovers. It's important to check if it's properly set; then have the patient place the back part of their hand on a board during both extension and repositioning.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then have the patient place the back of their hand on the table, and you mirror their hand onto that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If she comes back now, it's good if not. If the application of plaster bandages to relieve abscesses is soothing and then leave her undisturbed for a restart.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if they cannot endure it, and you can't put her back to the place after some days, then the joint remains twisted; and there is no harm done to the patient as long as their hands are immobilized, and unable to strain anything at all: so know that a nerve is cut, or an artery; in this case, if there's no other option but to apply a cautery, it might be necessary by chance. And then there's nothing else to do.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when his hands are in place, apply the plaster we have mentioned, then strain it and leave it for five days, then release it and leave it as such.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he can't move it well and there's no crack, then apply hot water, and rub until it is clean.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Regarding the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	No matter which side of the hand it is dislocated to, whether on the back of the palm or stomach; then the arm remains upright and holds off resetting until it revives, then supports its head with its shoulder, and pushes toward the affected area; and leaves it for two days, then aligns it equally on that day; and ties it as we have instructed, and resets it again at night, allows movement during the day, and ties it back in the morning; and repeat this until it is tight, do likewise when dislocated from the stomach of the hand, carry out as done previously until it heals; and similarly proceed, when dislocated on other side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	of the heel, of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the heel, or the back, or multiple heels are dislocated, if there is no treatment, because death rushes to the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs for this are that the discharges change direction without volition, and cannot be held, and many times they soften various limbs, or both thighs or two arms or one. And many times, the belly softens into four parts; that which softens at the back is called 'gibbosity': the treatment is to compensate for when the gibbosity came from childhood: if there is no cure or healing in entirety.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from childbirth or impacts or similar things, the old methods of treatment spoke with grand words, there was no benefit in all great ways; but I have shortened it according to my intention and formed tools in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the delivery of the head before the anus, there is no place for any treatment; and likewise what comes straight to both sides, it cannot be cured except for that specifically which goes to the back, as I say; and ensure that the patient's skin extends evenly over their body on one side, not allowing them to rub against anything causing injury. Then stick a thorn in the head into earth formed soil, another at knees, tie a string beneath these places under the skin, then tie the other strings around hips, knees, ankles; and two doctors know how to handle the strings, one at the head and the other at the knees, between these two thorns; and they must be well closed together, the thorn as we have said, and the doctor should place his palms on the spine formed soil until she regains consciousness.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it doesn't return through this cure, take a board of three arm lengths long and place it over the spot. If the patient is on their side, put their backside under the edge of the board. Place one end of the board against their spine. Position your fingers at the other end of the board close to where they are placed. Apply pressure tightly until you feel movement upwards; and if possible, perform this maneuver on the wrist which turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And if you place two spits through the patient's shoulder bone of one arm length and towards their feet, place another pair in between each spit about half an arm's length apart; ensure each end of the spit is placed into the ground firmly so they do not move. In between each set of two spits, place a single turning spit opposite where it turns near the wrist. Place small spits one hand's length long among them to turn towards the other wrists and to help in turning the arm; and when both assistants are turning their arms on all the ropes, let the masters keep the spine level as we have described before.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when they are even, if you place desiccative plaster with plenty of egg white, then apply it and after that, use honey. Then rub it with a piece of lint from three inches long, which purges the site of gilbositis and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage as we have said before, and let the patient sweat lightly until they are well; and if anything comes at the end of health, one must administer softening medicines and soothing remedies, along with the treatment that we have said previously; and each time a piece of cloth is given, and nothing appears on the lower spine in the back, then you should consider it to be dislocations; it's the bone that opens up for this reason, so there should be no assumption: by chance it might bring about death.
des dislocations de la hainche	On the dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and shoulder only produce dislocations, not fractures like other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and more so from within, less in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation is that when you join the diseased leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer, and opens wider than the healthy knee, and the diseased leg cannot double its knee at the fire; and it's because pus accumulates beneath it that the head of the diseased shoulder comes to it.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him who comes to death is that this event is contrary to what precedes.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him who goes before, are that his leg is well according to its completion; nonetheless, he does not double the knee without pain, and if you try to make him walk, he cannot move forward and holds back his urine, and swells up his ankle, and when he walks, he walks on his heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who goes behind, are that he cannot spread his knee, nor double it, and this leg is more twisted than the other one, and his ankle is softened, and the shoulder joint comes out under the ribs at the top of the back.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The return of this sign of dislocation is that you should confirm that the dislocation is old and remains in its position, if there is no treatment; and it is not appropriate to have any assumption about it.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for those where the dislocation is recent, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you hurry to return the joint and stretch it inwards and outwards, and move it right and left; by chance should it return, and no further treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it doesn't return in this way, you must apply the forceful minister and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or tie it with a rope around the knee; and another minister extends his hand over like this so that he pushes his hands under his armpits, then pulls it up by one tug of the rope on the shoulder; and another holds the head of the knot; and extend both upwards and downwards at once, until the diseased part is lifted from the ground in one go, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This stretching method applies to four similar situations; and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is correct.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, it is necessary to take care according to its appearance. When the dislocation occurs in the chest, you should position the patient's healthy side upwards, then tie it at the root of the armpit, and the upper part above the underarm, then secure the tie at the top towards the underarm, and in opposition to the muscle; next, instruct another assistant to hold his arms, embracing the thick part of the diseased armpit, and spread them outward forming: it will return to its position now; this way of dislocation is less severe than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot tighten it in this way as we have said, then it is necessary that you tie both legs of the diseased one together with a strong string under their heels and under their knees, and let the diseased leg be stretched out two feet longer than the other; then suspend him from his head on a staff, and have two long arms up in front of the earth; then command another assistant to hold onto the top of the armpit, and have other assistants hanging with the diseased one, who embrace them forming around the armpit, for now the joint returns quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocations are towards the front, if the patient lies there, as we have said in that with glibosity, and tightens the band around the affected leg properly, and also on the foot; then place two points, one at the head and another at the knee, then insert a point between the buttocks at the affected area in the shape; and cover each minister towards him with moist cloths to prevent any burning of the patient, then have all assistants face him, and align his dislocation equally with his hand.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it comes back, that's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If it doesn't return to its place, put it on a surface like a table and press it in this manner as we described with glibosity, having the patient lie there, and have them rest on their healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it should be extended immediately as far as possible, and according to what I said; and place the patient's pain on the wrong side, then press with the other hand, and extend down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is at the back, it is not appropriate to extend the patient's head downwards or lift them from the ground. Instead, they should be in a position as though their hip was dislocated forwards, just like we said about lying on both hips; and they should lie on their stomach, with the band stretched out as we explained before, and apply pressure at the joint to the table; it will be correct when the patient extends their legs, and they are even; then adjust the knees, put in the plaster, tighten with one band, so that the hip does not move. And lie for three days or four, then reset them, and place the plaster again; and if you see that they are even, then tighten further like before, and let them rest for three more days; then reset them, and make them walk properly, until their limbs are comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of the dislocation of the hip
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The hip joint can be dislocated in three ways: one might say inside and outside, and behind; and it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs for this are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at their knee. If they cannot bend it at their knee, then know they are dislocated; and the restoration of all is when you make the patient stand straight, stretch out their leg if they can, place your back against their buttocks, and set one foot on your feet; then grab their knee with your palms, draw it between your fingers, then bend both sides near the knee smoothly. And another attendant stretches their foot until the knees return to their place, and the signs are that they bend well their leg at their knee lightly; then apply plaster, and heat up the leg at the knee, and hold them together tightly for three or four days, then release them; do not move the patient to walk until the limbs are strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limbs are not at all, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, as long as it is sane.
de la dislocation dou talon	From the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes partially dislocated and sometimes fully out, both inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen and tries to move forward towards the part where it has been dislocated: the movement should be gentle, and one must gently extend it with their hands as soon as they sense it.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is dislocated immediately, you must make the patient lie straight, and let them hold their leg up by supporting it from the ankle, above the ankle; then pull the foot towards your right hand, and then to your left twice. Then extend it upwards, and firmly push the foot up; do this two times, as we have said, while pushing and pulling on the foot. If it returns, that's good; if not, start over with the process, because it will return; and if it can't return like that, you must move the leg beneath their back to the ground, firmly place a stick between its thighs, and bind bandages around them so they don't hurt themselves; then shave the thigh of the injured leg, and have other helpers extend the foot towards their hands or knees, where they tie it near the neck of the foot; then evenly extend each helper's hand, and place the stick firmly between the thighs to keep the injured side when extending it; finally place mirrors equal to the dislocation at their hands, and have another helper shave the healthy leg below its knee, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is at the correct point, apply the plaster and bandage over it, keep it steady, tie the foot to the leg, watch that the ties near the ankle are not too tight; then leave it for two or three days. If they loosen with time, do so gradually. Then, release after the third day or fourth day, and allow the limb freedom for about four more days; if progress continues beyond this point, there is still a risk of re-dislocation.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when abscesses begin to drain, you should soothe them as we have said in other parts of the text, while they are still clean.
des dois	Of the cautery tool directed by fire, command the patient to let their hairs grow long and uniform; and if they start pricking at their base, keep the eyes steady so they don't move until they fully grow.
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the shoulders are dislocated, if they should be nicely extended for work, it is a simple task.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in no way at the back of the neck or at the feet, it is necessary that you have the patient sit on a flat surface like a table completely straight, and place your foot over what opens from these joints, then press with your foot until it heals; and when it is equal and doesn't open anymore, put under the sole of the foot a table for two shoulders, then hold steadily, and leave him for three days, then release him; and have him rest until he has recovered.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	regarding wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound occurs with dislocation and you wish to restore it, many times the patient dies: if you are not presumptuous in treatment, if you are not skilled in the art and have not used it for long periods, and if you are not pitiful and merciful but rather bold; then at first use things that soothe abscesses moderately, and leave the patient to God's mercy, if you do not see hope of healing; and when you see hope, immediately reset the limb in its place, as if the abscesses should burst and heal; and when the limb is in place, administer soothing remedies for abscesses, and treat the wound properly, with desiccated ointments; and if there's a break due to dislocation, and small bones are broken, bind them up, and do what we have told you about simple diseases; and refrain from entering into paths of fear according to what I said, for this befits you as per your Creator, and with the wisdom that arm you and your body.
Amen	Amen
