O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, dear children, I have completed this book which is the essence of medical knowledge, gathering together its completion through my explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to my vision that I would complete this task with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the art of hands is cultivated in our region and has spread everywhere, it has been lost and forgotten, and nothing remains from its original form other than small descriptions in books by the ancients that have been used.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And out of this comes error and vanity, and closed are the minds, and science is moved away.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I should renew the arrangement of this treatise according to the method of exposition and disclosure and abbreviation; and will come together the forms of the cautery instruments and other tools of work with the adjustment and preparation of them, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no skilled masters are found in our time, the art of medicine has been lost.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for the one who intervenes to master anatomy science, as Galen says, so that they understand the judgment of limbs, their shapes and connections and separations of muscles, have knowledge of bones and nerves and blood vessels, and know the number of bones, the movement and location of veins, both mobile and stationary, and where the exits are located.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And as such states Ipfcras that the benefit with the cure is much, and with the medicine is little; in like manner in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We shall tell you in the introduction of this book that if one is unaware of what has been mentioned, they may err and deceive others; as I have seen many times with those who interfere in this science and abandon their knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I witnessed a foolish surgeon who cut out one of the lymph nodes or throat condition in a woman and cut into her neck arteries; because so much blood came out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another surgeon who treated a stone in an elderly man, and the stone was large; he took with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already been called to draw out, and saw the position of the disease and the size of the stone, and if one had let me cut him it would have died.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another scene where the cure took care of a duke from our land who had his leg broken, and with the breakage there was an injury; and the healers full of ignorance would bend the break over the injury according to strong will, and did not alleviate the injury in any way, and let it go like that for one term. And I commanded him not to disrupt her; and remained like that until the leg swelled up completely and the foot, resulting in loss.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was summoned to come to him, and hurried to come and straighten the leg; and when I heard it being dislocated so much that it became peaceful and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But every passage for corruption was already confirmed or part of the body and could not be cured; and the process of corruption would continue within the member until the entirety of the limb was lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And observe one other site where an abscess opens and gets clogged up, then inflames due to the wickedness of its owner's authority.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a cancer, when it is filled with melancholic humor and is in such a place that all can be removed from where it has become corrupt, then it should not be touched by iron.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And because of this, skilled children, you are required to know that the work of hands is divided into two sections: knowing that it has danger in multiple conditions; and I will show each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Because it is necessary that you take care of yourself, so that the simple people do not speak ill of you. If you take your weapons in hand and fight against your ailments lightly but firmly, and use the best way, so that by grace of God you come to salvation and are healed; and leave the terrifying diseases without grievance for healing; and remove from those who make you doubt your weapons, and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other with glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galiens states in some of his admonishments: "Do not take any illness as a bad disease, that you might be called foolish by the common people.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters deal with fire cauteries and medical cauteries, and organize the chapters up to the belly; and describe the forms of instruments, and the metals of cautery tools, and all that is necessary for work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, as well as suction cups and wounds, and arrow extractions, and similar things; and the chapters are organized with descriptions of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapters deal with restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and they are organized up to the belly, as well as descriptions of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Just as we remember our work, it is necessary for me to describe the quality of each aid and the harm of each constitution.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and the harm caused are the longest word and most subtle science and the secrets answered. And many wise people spoke about this and agreed with it. And they were content with their words for me because I fear the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that fire cautery is universally effective for any constitution where it has substance, knowing there are two constitutions: this means hot constitution characterized by substance, and dry constitution characterized by substance.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the hot and dry combined constitutions, there was no agreement and they said that fire cautery is great help; and the other said the opposite: that fire cautery only works for diseases coming from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is so hot, and should never be treated with hot illnesses by heat or drying; and it's stated that those who argue against this claim that the cauterizing tool provides great help to hot and dry diseases that come into a person's body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of the person and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find that the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it true on many occasions through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And every path, do not interfere with it unless he who has tried it does so, and who knows through long usage the art of cauterization, and the diversity of human constitutions, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the manifestations and the time span; for other constitutions we have no fear, similarly in cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the parts should resemble and agree with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Know, children, that when a fire cautery is assembled, it possesses the secrets of treatments, and offers more benefit than a burning medicine cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and leaves no scars on the body except where it burns, and does not harm any other part of the body.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The active medicines travel from one part of the body to another by spreading away, and bring about diseases for healing in the body; and indeed, if the patient should use fire due to its height and the goodness of its substance, he does not do so unless there is excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this is what I have found through experimentation and the length of my service and study in the art, and it matches with the truth of things; and for this reason, I apologize for the length of speech, as I do not like that I force you to accept the secret associated with fire and the quality of work, how it relieves diseases from bodies, as the philosopher explains in demonstrating. Now receive it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, child, that they determined when the cauterizations should be performed, and studied them meticulously.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is applicable at all times, because the nuisances occurring are reduced by the aid of the cautery; and indeed, if the cauterizations are for necessary pains beyond which cannot wait until bigger maladies affect the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think like the foolish people do, child; for a disease healed by cauterization does not return. And they say this way: but it is not as they believe, because cauterizations are only medicine that alters complexion and dries out fluids causing pain, which are worth more than medicine for the quick increase of its strength, and for the virtue of its work and its authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And there exists no disease that comes exactly according to the complexion of the disease and its location, as well as its virtue. And they gather together in him the excesses due to the consumption of foods and similar things, if cauterizations are not administered within him where there is a lack of excesses and moisture, such as dense cauterization for pain, and similar things, so that this type of pain does not recur; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And not many people understand why cauteries are called the last of medicine, and this is seen; but they do not believe that cauteries can come after medicine, but their understanding is false, and it's said that cauteries are the last of medicine because when we administer methods of treatments in any illness and they do not work, then we administer our cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, clearly understood, cauteries are the last of medicine, not according to the understanding of people who simply say so.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The old ones said that gold cauteries are more effective than iron ones, and they stated this because of the quality of gold and its high substance content; and they claimed that the metal parts of the cautery do not cause corrosion, but this is not clear since I have proven it, and found that it does occur in some people; and gold cauteries work better than iron ones, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And still, when you heat the gold tool, you do not know when it is heated by the color of the gold, and soon cools down; and if you heat it too much; then send it to the fire; and thus there is enough prevention.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And that's why we use our iron cautery which we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	So you should order this chapter on the shoulder joint until it reaches the elbow, because its visibility will be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	with an olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	A fire cautery is suitable for moisture and cold on the head, and there are two types that we apply due to an illness called 'soda', and because of many fluids that descend from the head as sweat, and ears, and due to a multitude of dreams, tooth pain and throat pain, and most especially for all diseases arising from cold such as paralysis, soda (or gout), apoplexy and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is such that the patient's body should be purged by a dissolving medicine to modify the head. It varies between three and four doses or between four and five, according to what the properties and the temperature and the habituation of the patient can endure; then you make adjustments to the head of the patient afterwards.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then place your hands in contact with each other and put your palms on his nose. Afterwards, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two nostrils; and let where your middle fingers go bleed, then heat the cautery which is called 'olivare', this is its form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put him in the middle sign of ink, and do as you descend and steady your hand little by little while turning; then lift your hand alone, and test whether the bone appears .i. sol small; and if you do not see it, continue with the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; afterwards take .i. poc of powder, and apply a soft moistened cotton inside, put on top of him, and let him .iij. days; after that place on one part butter; and leave for as long as the scorching is removed; afterwards treat the wound with ointment known as 'tetrafarmaçon', until it heals properly.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And if they said that concerning the old ones, that when an injury remains open longer, more purging occurs; and because of this movement helps.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they say that with these we should leave the cautery applied until part of the bone is burned, and then once this part of the bone is burned, it should be treated.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And it is said that one must let the cautery burn there, and press so hard against the bone as wide as a thumb, just like women place in their flasks when they use them because bodily fluids are forced out; and should one allow the wound to be long open; after this, one should clean and bind it.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of using the cautery do not seem to me to be good for all purposes, except when there is a way for fear; and I think that I should leave them as they are; because the joints become weakened by continuous exposure to nature's solutions, as we have shown in other limbs; and even when the joints of disease are naturally weak, and my first impression of using cautery is more healing and effective for me, and with this method I perform work thus assembling health.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the ancient pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When chronic pain occurs in the whole head and lasts long, one must use the patient's ears and pills that are called "cochies", and treatments for head and ear purification along with bandages; and if one applies the cautery as we have previously mentioned to them, it helps.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the sick is of strong nature and not too cold; then apply the cautery on top of the spot a little as we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After make the cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, just as we said before, and do one more cautery where it is called 'vassel'; and take two levers for which you place suction cups; and lift your hand so that you don't go until the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of this further; and it should be that the cauterizations on the horns are more gentle than the one used to cauterize the middle part of the head, which is this shape:
dou cautere dou chief	Of the fire cautery,
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When suddenly the part of the head comes to have an acute pain, and the illness extends up until the eye, and the head is cleansed by purifying medicines, and other treatments that I mentioned in the division of diseases have been done, and none of this helps: then you do cauterizations according to two ways, namely with ague medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The fire cautery from ague medicine involves you taking a spoonful of garlic, and placing the peel and minced portion in two small pieces on each side of the head. Then conduct the temple or the part where the pain lies, in such a way that you can spread the garlic throughout the skin; when it is spread, cover well with this method and let it remain like this for 12 hours; then remove the covering, take out the garlic, and leave the wound thus for two days or three. Then apply a poultice of butter until pus comes out.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of ointment until it is clean; and if you see that you should apply some burning remedies as I have written or in the tenth treatise on burning remedies.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery operates in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery of which I have described:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And call it "closed" because its head is made in the shape of a bell where there is one and a half inches of curvature, and at its center has a small appearance; and place it on the painful area, and keep your hand steady while slightly move the iron just a bit, until half of the thickness of the wound is burned; then lift your hand to prevent the artery from burning, which leads to an abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After placing linen wadding, place it on the affected area for three days; then replace with wet cotton soaked in butter, and continue to treat the area with ointment until it heals. If you wish to cauterize this headache using the iron cautery which is called "cultellare", do it at its tip, and be careful not to cover the artery in this headache that is not old.
de emigraine	Of a migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraine as we have previously described in the divisions of diseases, and you don't find relief, and notice that the cauterizations mentioned earlier in medicine do not suit it, then it is necessary for you to heat the cauterization called "cultellare" until it becomes white; and thus cut along a line half an inch long on the body, and move your hand once, and pull it so as not to touch the artery and that you stop at the bone; and be careful of the jaw that moves when eating, and let only the tongue move and avoid spasms in the patient, and beware of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or if the procedure has great fear and similarly for those who do not know about it and are untrained; and leave the work halfway through; but I will tell you how to stop the bleeding once the artery is cut, and show you its location in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cauterization does not suit the illness, and the patients are suffering, apply it in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you observe, administer the cauterization that we have said or chapter on extraction of the artery, with a two-bladed cauterization tool; and these cauterizations are better than the other one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears from part coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain from cold affects the ear, and treatments have been applied using dissolving medicines and other procedures we discussed earlier in this section, if the pain persists, then apply this type of cautery known as "dots", following which is its usage:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After applying the cautery all around the ear, or in both sides of it if pain is present in both ears, and move away slightly from the root of the ear after you've marked its position. Apply ten 'dots' on either side of each ear; afterwards treat until the site becomes healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Tortures that must be treated with a cautery are not from those that move by blood flow, as we have said in divisions of diseases; and do not make a cautery for the appearances coming from scarring and pus of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this type of torture that moves by water and from head discharges and gargling, and if it's not effective, then it is required that you cauterize the patient with three applications: one at the root of the ear, another slightly beyond the temple, and the third in adjusting the two lips. And place the cautery where health reveals itself, and cauterize right at the tip of the ear above a little below the outer ear's edge, and another at the temple as long as a thumb; and let the cautery burn up to halfway through the brain; and this is the shape of the cautery.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the appearance of the surgical knife that we have described previously is a bit more refined, so it requires that the knives be somewhat thicker. After treating the wound as I have said before, until it heals properly.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When it comes to apoplexy being chronic and treating it as we have said, if it is not effective, and the patients do not have fever, then make four cauterizations: two on each of the horns of the head, and one underneath the head, and one at the part that's called 'vasselz' as we had mentioned before, and the last one on the mouth of the stomach; and treat it in accordance with what we said previously.
de litargie	of liturgy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness, you should give the patient large pills and brain-dissolving tablets; after that, remove the head of the patient thoroughly, and place the sinapic plaster on the back of the head as instructed in the treatment of plasters. And this is how to perform cauterization: do it just like I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it's healing like this, well done; and if not, do the following: three cauterizations on either side of the head as it descends to the neck, leaving an interval of one thumb between each cauterization. And treat it just as with others, and should you see that it has adjusted, and the patient tolerates this, then do a single cauterization in between; and if necessary, two more above the two horns, and treat until it heals. And let the cauterizations called "olive" be performed, as I have previously said.
de la froidor dou chief	from cold or injury to the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleaned of years and what we have said before; after treating the head for the patient, then do a cauterization near the wound on the head, and on each horn, and one at the back and three below the spine of the neck; and if you need more than this, and the body is moist and the patient tolerates it, and the disease has spread, then perform four cauterizations along the spine of the back; and leave it until the deepest part is fully healed, then remove your hand; after that treat until it heals, and let the cauterizations called "olive" be performed which we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	From the treatment of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics should only use the cautery on those who are phlegmatic, and first modify the years of treatment and other remedies that we have discussed in the section where the body is large and suffers from hunger for medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it's a child who can't bear the suffering, make them gargle and chew, modifying the treatment often with good meats; after this, you should have their head in the middle, and I do one cautery according to what we said before, and one cautery on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the body is strong and suffering, I give them cauterizations as I said for those who are paralyzed and have a softening of the limbs, on the spinal column both at the back and neck, and let the olive-shaped cauterizations be done according to the method that I've described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the body is a child's, I perform one delicate cauterization in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to the reason of melancholy are excesses or fluids corrupted and thickened, then the cautery from the parts' cautery as we have said to him who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if it is due to the reason of melancholy that these excesses are declining towards melancholy, and there is malaise from moistened organs in the body, then one should drink something according to which makes the brain clean, as was explained before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After removing the head of the body; after do .i. linen twists well made, as .i. circle, if you place it around the head; and let the body parts lie properly aligned and held firmly in all directions; then apply the liniment and rub with old bee wax butter; and heat it moderately on fire so that one can bear it; afterwards empty the circle from within through the head, and let it cool down; and do this to each part of the body once a week with another good regimen until it is healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you see that it needs to be treated by making several marks across the entire surface of the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cautering moistens the brain more; and then place a wet cotton pad in butter and fatty meat grease.
de l’awe des eulz	of the irritation of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When eye trouble first arises through the symptoms I have mentioned in the division, then begin and continue to instruct the patient on things that purify the head, and keep them away from all moisture, and make them sweat or bathe several times fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After commanding over his head, and have him cauterize in front of it, and make him receive two cauterizations on the two temples when the alleviation of the trouble is among the two eyes together, or if the alleviation is in one eye; then apply to every cauterization all the veins and arteries that are around the brain, and have them cauterized long according to the width of the temple; and guard against bleeding out, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it by applying pressure as you know how.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and incisions using cautery, how to apply it; and never should one use cautery or burn across the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	of both tears' courses
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears from the eyes are old and accustomed, and located on the veins, or across the arteries that lie beneath the apparent surface of the head; and one can see they are cold excesses of phlegm. So, I apply the cautery as I've described at the beginning of this section: .i. cautery around the eye, and .ij. cauteries on each of the .ij. temples, and .ij. cauteries or burn across the .ij. bones; and if there is need for more, carefully apply additional cautery above the eyebrows with every .i. small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	of the paths of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you apply the remedies as we have instructed in the division, and if they don't benefit, then give the patient three nuts to drink; after that, have them drink their own urine, and apply a cauterizing agent or an olive oil-based cauterizing substance; and perform two cauterizations using the 'clavilis' cauterizer on both sorcis, slightly over the hair; and be careful not to cover the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cauterizer which is called 'clavilis':
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this type of cautery which is called "olive".
de coi ci est li forme:	Of which I have described:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that it is done twice by two needles as long as the needles are; and do not let go of your hand until only the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner I said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of hair that touches the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	None of the times has it been that the hair of the eyebrows turns to the gums and touches the eye, and in this case, one does the cautery according to two ways: namely by fire, or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow long and even, then have the patient in a healthy position. Afterwards, on the paper of the eyes draw a figure that is as large as a mint leaf and includes the beginning of the sign between the hairs; then place damp cotton soaked with egg white and garlic paste on the eye, then heat the cautery which has this form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you've cauterized on the figure that you have drawn a little bit at a time, such that the burn stays in one place; and signs of health are when you see the paper returning, and the hairs are raised to the edge of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it like this for three days. Next, place damp cotton in butter until the scab is removed; afterwards apply the ointment until it heals properly.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if hair growth starts occurring after this, and the paper becomes softened; then resume with the cautery on that same area as before. If hairs have emerged, apply the cautery until the paper rises to its natural position and is even, without touching the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cautery of medicine that burns commands the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and even. Then make the shape of a laurel leaf from parchment; then take French soap and living charcoal, each about half an ounce, and grind them well together; and prepare it quickly so it does not cool down, then apply it directly on the form like a laurel leaf, and place it on the paper under the eye. If the sickness lasts for one hour only, you should open in one direction, and if both sides are also affected; put wet cotton in each eye as large as an egg; let the patient's head rest on your hand supporting the medicine, press with two fingers and hold the rest of the face every time the patient feels the irritation from the medicine, because it feels irritation similarly to fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a while, if let the medicine sit on your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the burn has passed, lift up the area and reward it if you see that the paper is lifted in the same way as it was lifted due to the force of fire or through incision; and if so, then treat well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is not healed that way, then still the medicine on his body or where the medicine has worked, as long as your works are equal, and your eyes set; then put wet cotton in butter until the kidneys burn, after cure the body of the ointment which is called 'dyafenis' and others, until it's dried.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to take care of your work well by great caution so that it doesn't let any medicine pass through to the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes moistened afterwards, and the hair grabs into the eye, then repeat the medicine on that part of the body which is softened by the clean paper as you did before. Afterward cure it until it's dried; and this is the form of the leaf of mireth:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the oils of men vary in size and degree, and according to this be your constraints; and do not let the right way be answered by him who studies this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	regarding the treatment of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have described in the sections on diseases, and your treatments are not effective, then it is necessary for you to perform a cautery according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place their head in a healthy position; and scrape the temples of their head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or twist its head; afterwards put moistened cotton on the eye, either under an egg or from garlic juice; then heat the cautery which is prepared: and over the head as if it were the shape of a quill feather, place the cautery there; if you see, let it be pointed from one end to another, and if you can see, let it also be like a tent; but always remember that whatever is under should move according to your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is opened, and treat the infection, then dry it up; and if it is closed, open it again, and remove from the body; afterwards place the cauterizing instrument in a form, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part under the nose above the eye, so that your hands do not cause harm; and put the cautery into the grease of the oil, and let it be corroded.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be well.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then repeat the cautery one more time, and if needed elsewhere, leave it for three days; afterwards place moist cotton on butter, and the ointment cure until it is healed. And when forty days pass without healing, apply corrosive aqua medicine until the bone is exposed; and follow the prescriptions according to what his chapter suggests.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a method of cautery for fistulae that none of the old ones mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Understand by 'fistula', and open it; afterwards place into the incision a fine form of horn that is here shaped:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And I do it to the size of three grains of poppy; and hold your hand or the camel bone firmly, and don't let the patient move, so that the melted wax does not spread in its own direction; and it is appropriate to put cotton moistened with butter or oil on the wax: the wax serves as the opening of the fistula, and the healing proceeds wonderfully through cure.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then administer colostrum to the calf, and return the fistula to the body according to what is suitable for its own proper place.
des crevaices en levres	This translates to "cuts on lips".
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	This sentence translates as follows:
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these wounds as we have discussed in sections, and if the treatment does not help, then apply a small surgical instrument according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And immediately place it in these wounds until the oil comes out; afterwards clean the wound with tallow until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	from the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or into the uvula, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has rotted and swollen and festered, eventually turning into a fistula; you should treat it as we have discussed in sections, but if this does not work: then you must apply a cautery according to the size of the fistula; afterwards remove the contents of the fistula, keep your hand steady until the metal rod reaches the bottom and towards the middle; do this once or twice, after treating as discussed for curative measures, until it heals. And if treated in this way, it is good; but if not, you should uncover the wound, remove the decayed bone according to what you find in your treatise.
dou movement des dens	of tooth movement
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and teeth move,
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way, the moving tooth is fixed,
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes due to coldness, or there is coldness or fever, and medical treatments do not work, then it must have a cautery according to two ways: and the butter cautery and the fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Butter cautery if it is like that you take butter from a cow, and the tip on a iron or ant's spoon; after take cotton and envelop around the point of a tent, and make the butter to cool down, then put this on the hurting tooth quickly and hold until it becomes cold; and do this often until the power reaches to the root of the tooth, and if you see wet wool and cotton in cooled butter, then put this on the hurting tooth, and place hot iron over it for as long as the fire goes into the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The fire cauteries if they are such that you desire a small iron or snail, and make it large enough so that the heat does not enter the mouth of the sick; after heating the cautery, from which its shape will come afterwards, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, because the pain will be alleviated by that day or the following day.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it must be that the sick person fills their mouth with good butter while waiting for this cautery, and then removes it immediately; and that is the shape of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And perform the cautery to your satisfaction, according to what you can do; and this is how a rod looks:
des scrophules	Of the scrophulae
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scabs are due to cold blood and moisture, and they do not respond to digestion through medicines, then heat up the fire cautery as described later here, and make two openings for the fumes to exit from the other side of the cautery; and place the heated cautery on the abscess once or twice, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, adjust the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it like that for three days; then put moistened cotton with butter where the pus comes out; after that cure the area with ointments and bandages until it heals.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of sugar:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture invades the lymph nodes near the heart, and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then it's necessary to first clear the body with diuretic medicines; afterwards apply the cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful not to go all the way up to the throat, but just a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that I make another cautery at the joint of the neck and head of the spine, and let it be the kind of cautery called 'clavile' which we have depicted before; and treat the area as previously described until it is sound.
de la toust	Of the touch
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and the diseases of the heart are due to cold moisture, and the body doesn't have fever nor dryness, and it's an old disease, then you should perform two cauterizations on their veins; and another cautery in between their buttocks under the breasts. Let these cauterizations be those called "clavile" according to the form mentioned before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, apply the cautery at the entire 'point' which is called 'poins', as illustrated previously in the diseases of ears; and let there be thirty points or perhaps more.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the area as previously described, and apply three rounds of the cautery according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And these cauterizations are lighter because you do them three times in each area.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	regarding the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After that, bandage the wounds on his back and sides; after that, release the kidney inside the bladder from your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated internally, heat up the cautery until it has two points, as this is how it should be shaped.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	And apply the cautery to the kidney until it reaches his side, and bring together four pieces of the cautering; and for this, use the cautery that has three points, because the pattern of cautery consists of three pieces; and the nerves follow the delicacy of a tent and this is the shape of the cautery that has three points.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And no time is attached to this first nerve, because there are seven cauteries involved.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After placing the cautery on it, grind with it; after that, allow the patient to rest, and do not let the limbs be strained for too long until they are well supported.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it dislocated above that point, where little happens, then apply the cautery on the thick part of the 'clavile' cautery or perhaps just one round.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is eliminated and the wounds are healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	For when coldness and moisture come to the stomach while it is still in accordance with its nature, they multiply his loss of fluids. And there are many ways to treat this condition that he becomes accustomed to, but they don't benefit him at all. Therefore, it's necessary for the patient to have bandages on their back and to extend their legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	From this point on, I will make three fire cauterizations in the region of the heel under the armpit for a quantity equal to two. For each fire cauterization, there are three clavicles and two further cauterizations behind the second ribs until the figure of the cauterization is at three angles, and there should be space between each so that they do not join together when they develop gangrene; the cauterizations must be done precisely so as to penetrate both parts of the knee, and the figure of the cauterization must follow this shape without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see a large cautery being used in the stomach according to this form; and whoever fears this cautery, apply it carefully over the stomach at this point according to the amount that you observe of it; then completely cauterize with the entire cautery which is called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment we've undergone, as long as it's clean.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	As for the liver, it experiences pain due to cold, moisture, and large windiness. As long as it is being corrected through its natural disposition by eliminating excesses; and the patient should be treated according to what we have discussed in divisions, if this doesn't help them, then the liver must be soothed with a bandage on its gaiter. And apply three signs of cautery following this shape and figure, and amount, on the liver, behind the hip bones, where the back of the hand comes; and leave space between each cautery roughly as large as two coins; and have the cauteries aligned from their long sides to their back ends, and don't press too much with your hand across the entire cautery. And only burn half the keur, and let the liver lie flat on its feet; and if it can't do this, then it should be lying down with its legs extended, and lifting its arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if your desire is, then cauterize these cauteries with the cutler's tool, should you be subtle and cautious in this art, and beware that you do not burn all the contents, for you would dry out the whole body; and let it only boil until just a simmer, because the contents are very subtle at that spot, and know how to see that.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When it has moved to the liver, and you want to know whether it is within the liver tissue or on the surface: if it is in the tissue, the patient feels a pain that is not too intense; and if it is on the surface, they feel an extreme pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this treatment causes the abscesses to drain, it is necessary that the patient be shaved on its head; and then mark the area where the abscess is located on the body, and then heat up the cautery which resembles a needle, as described here.
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And treat with the fire cautery until the knees are burned, and continue until the scab is completely gone; after that proceed according to the treatment of boils when they are healed; and it should not be that from this cautery any residual burns remain except for one who has studied long in the art of medicine, and by whom these diseases have never once been inflicted.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he can confidently open [something], and always it seems to me that leaving it alone would be better for him.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the weeping cautery
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The old ones said that we should do the tearsin fire cauterizations from the roots of aristologe, and in this way: take a root of aristologe long, the longest you can find, and dry it, and also make it as thick and as long as your finger; and put its juice in oil, then hold it to the flame, and cauterize once between the elbow and neck, and twice smaller ones slightly down on the part that is under the beard; and three times between the fifth rib and the sixth, descending a little behind; and one time near the heel, and another above the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and four times at the sides of the ribs below the cauterization that is between the two shoulders; and do not squeeze your hand, rather act freely as when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And it was said by no ancient that any man uses the fire cautery like shaving and heats it, then places it between the ribs, until it reaches that abscess; and the pain leaves, as we have mentioned with respect to liver abscesses.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	However, in this chapter there is fear because now the patient has died, or a fistula comes that cannot be cured.
de la mice	"De la mice" is French slang for "from the mouse," referring to something that is coming from the mouse (as in the small animal). In English, it could translate roughly as "from the mouse," though context would determine its exact meaning.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the illness of the mouse in those we have spoken about regarding the divisions of treatment, and it doesn't improve, then apply three methods of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	In which there is a method thus: you make three or four cauterizations, in line according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver as we have mentioned previously; and do not press your hand across all the cauterization, and may the patient survive under his back; and another way of cauterizing is that you heat the cauterizer which has two handles, as we showed in the dislocation of the shoulder; lift the fur which is at the location of the mouse, or where the disease comes from the left side, and raise the elevation according to your hand, according to the curvature, according to the length of the body, and the cauterizations are according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After lighting the two wicks until their ends are pierced from the other side, and then removing the cautery tool, in this way there will be four. And if you observe, completely cauterize using all three of the cautery tool's sides.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has lasted long enough causing putrefaction, and this is equivalent to using other remedies as previously mentioned.
de ydropisie	From dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	The cautery is not suitable for lead poisoning, except in the way that is called "ascleites".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat according to the methods we have described in sections, and if your treatment doesn't benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauterizations around the anus, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one under the kidneys, and one behind the back near the spine. And let the cauteries be well placed near the urinary bladder area.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After letting the cautery heated for a long time to burn thoroughly, do not stop the cure after the cautery; and healing would hasten, and both sides of the burnt area would join together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly is like a knife as we have demonstrated before; and the one for the back should be round, according to what was put forward earlier.
de l’enfleure des piez	regarding swelling of the joints
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the joints swell in someone who is hydroptic and are full of yellow bile, it is necessary to apply a cautery between the little finger and the ring finger on the back of the hand; and move your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too far on the surface, in such way that it would go beyond the yellow bile, and apply the cautery according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After performing on both legs at the tip of the knife cut; and place the cauterizations along the length; each one in front of the knee joint on one leg and the other behind, down the middle of the leg; leave the cauterizations to burn for a long time without treatment until the wound heals; after curing the other treatments as we have said.
de la menoison	of memory
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the stomach trouble is caused by cold or moisture, as long as the retaining and digesting powers of the stomach and intestines are overwhelmed, and cannot be cured through usual treatments; you see the patient suffering greatly with greenish fluids, if you apply a large cautery on the stomach according to what he has said before, or stomach cautery, moving around the stomach. And four more cauterizations inside the subtle area around the mouth for each of these, and two subtle cauterizations at the elbow joint, and two cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, apply the fire cautery to the base, and one cautery on each navel, and two small cauteries on the stomach under the large one, because the treatment benefits when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	regarding the treatment of hemorroids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hematomas are either in the ground or one or more of them, and they are old and full of large cold and moist corrupted humor, and if their cure is not effective as we have described in divisions, then use a cautery: three times on the spine of the back, that which is entirely beyond the loin muscle little by little in triangulating manner, and one cautery on each side of the navel. And if you think that the stomach has been chilled, and the food does not cook, and it's observed that swelling occurs at the waist, then apply a large cautery to the stomach as previously described, and another to the liver, and another on the kidneys with all the cauteries remaining long in place.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment until it becomes healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the soreness which is called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you treat the swelling called "thelul", heat up the cautery until it looks like a rasp iron, and then place the entire hot end on the thelul; and leave your hand as close to the cautery as possible near the vein's origin, from which blood flows. Do this once or twice, and if there is more swelling, apply each part of the treatment similarly as we have said; after the treatment with beneficial ointments until they heal properly; and if you apply a large-hot cautery on the area affected by "alchatim", it will provide greater relief.
de plaie mal curee	of improperly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear surgery or incision, as we will describe in its proper place, if such a disease should occur that can only be cured through cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is no opening and it has become infected and rotten due to corrupted moisture, if you must try for a complete cure with a subtle attempt, and ensure that you know the extent of the treatment in relation to how much healing it needs.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After applying the cautery that seems appropriate, and place it in the fistula according to the amount that the attempt has gone inside, and start with the cautery until the rotting and corrupted portion is burnt away, once, or II or III times depending on your need; and watch out not to burn nerves which are sensitive, and major veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes into the body and towards the intestines, be aware of this, and do not apply heat outside the intestinal area. Perform these treatments only inside the patient's body, and remember that it is not done for long periods; after treatment until the area becomes healthy. And if there is pus and the substances have hardened for a long time, then you can say that the treatment has been completed throughout; and if the substances have not hardened, know that there is still pus and corruption in the bone at its root; and like this, as one of these we will explain further in his case.
de la maladie des reins	Regarding kidney disease
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When abdominal pain arises from the kidneys and large wind movements, it doesn't affect men equally, so it is necessary that you apply a cautery on both sides of the kidneys, as well as to the wrist area where we have previously mentioned; if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three applications of the cautery in a line, and they will provide more assistance.
de la vessie	From the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is thick and moist due to heat and moisture, so that the kidneys retain urine, then you perform a cautery on the lower part of the bladder, where the pubic hair begins, and one each side, and let each cautery be as long as one finger; and you do one cautery behind the back, or two if needed; and make the cauteries in a V shape according to the form previously described.
de la marris	From the mare's tail
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the mare's tail is cold and moist, and it does not allow anything to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends delay; and when they come, they give off great pain: then you must perform three cauterizations inside the vulva, as we have said or in relation to bladder cautery, and two cauterizations behind the back; and make the cauterizations in a V shape, as we have said.
de la hainche	From the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moisture descends to the cavity of the hip, and because of this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the leg is longer than the other when measured together; and you find the legs from their origin visible, then it should be that you apply a cautery on the cavity of the hip with a mark resembling a circle for one firebrand. And you shall stand in front of the limb within the cavity as she curves, so that the cavity is inside the circle; and if your fires are like those where you have cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if such fires are not available to you, then make three olive-sized firebrands that are as precise as all your stones, and perform the treatment until it heals.
de la dolor de la hainche	The pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain occurs in the buttocks area, and this is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient's treatment follows what we have discussed about division and cure procedures that are not effective, suggesting an old disease: then it is necessary for you to cleanse the body of thick fluids using foul-smelling pills or other good-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After you perform the cautery; and the method of performing the cautery is according to two methods: that being together with hot medicines, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery has several methods, among which one is like this: you cauterize on the buttock of the thigh with three triangular cauterizations according to this shape, and make good depth and largeness for each, leaving space between each cauterization about twice the size of a thumb, and let them be olive-shaped; there should not be any cauterization in the middle of the upper part of the buttock because then there would be four according to this shape.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that the circle-cautery, as we have described before in the dislocation of the buttocks, should be used; but do it this way so that all the buttocks are contained within the circles, and all parts of the keur (or area) is heated.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way it's done in sciatica, when pain stays in the buttock and doesn't reach up to the thigh nor down to the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes up to the thigh and leg, then it makes two cauterizations there or where the patient says that the pain holds them back, and a single one above the ankle four times, near the left side a bit; and let the cauterization be done with surgical instruments, and burn off any thickening of the blood clot; and if the patient senses that the pain extends up to two inches or nearly there from underfoot, then cauterize where they feel the pain for three points or four at the cauterization known as 'points'.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if more work is needed, do so; and if it turns out that the pain is spreading from the knee towards the thigh, apply a cauterization using either an incising or circular tool. Make sure to take great care in all your cauterizations, ensuring you don't stop too soon when burning nerves and large arteries, and refrain from causing more harm and constriction to the patient than necessary.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I have seen several who had done cauterization on the ankle bone, and they were laid off until their leg was completely swollen, and also their toes, and all of the toes became sore and putrefied.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After an abdominal treatment which led to death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pains are together in two parts, make a cautery on one and other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the sage said about the fire cautery for the buttocks, as it is described here, make one such iron and place it on the head also as large as a rod of the foot or a bit smaller, and have it crossed and so that it crosses between from one part to another by space the size of a grain of rice; and let the crosses be divided into two parts and they should also resemble knots, and let there be a metal fixture well made; this is how it should look.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heat it until it is completely red and emits steam, then place it on the afflicted area of the hip, and twist it near to the healthy side. And apply one cautery treatment once and allow it for three days; and after this, cover it with butter, and keep the wound open long thereafter; continue dressing with ointment until it has healed completely.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim states that we use very little of this type of cautery for the fear of his judgement, and there are few who actually use it; yet such a method is among the better cauterizations which one can endure, and leaves scars where they occur.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The fire cauteries in medicine consist of making an instrument with crosses into which the edge of the door descends, made of iron or long reed and at its height have two knots each, and between each have the size of a bow; they should also be above and under it, and join together according to this form.
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing the hot iron on the hip of the lying patient towards their healthy side, quickly place your hand close to the hip bone. Afterwards, heat the two circles of a hot instrument with a flame until it's heated by the fire for about an inch point, and let this heat remain for an hour or so. Let the patient endure the warmth and burning sensation from this.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it finds bite marks as well as by fire; and when the biting marks pass, take your hand with the instrument and lift the hip gently from the heat. And let this process continue for three days, applying butter until the blackness of the scorching is dried out; and leave it for three days until putrefaction begins; and this would be the latter aid after the treatment of ointments as long as they are sound.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread up to the thigh or even down to the leg, you should apply the tool that marks the point according to what you've done on the hip similarly; and this is the manner of hot branding, which I have written about in a treatise on rectifying medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take vinegar and chalk in equal amounts of each, grind them together, and put the mixture into a new jar.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	So that it has a small snail protruding as much as the tip of a razor so that it can enter; and place this jar in another well sealed jar, and put vinegar and chalk inside and gently add some water until there is enough above the powders to fit into your hand. And leave it like this until all the liquid drains out as a viscous substance or well sealed mixture, then take all of this substance, and pour it over the chalk and vinegar as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And thus it will be very difficult and managed in the movements of medical operations and in the cauteries of other limbs. For she accomplishes a work akin to firework, and has others medicines as well from which one sears the buttocks properly like turpentine and anacardium oil and soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us about a cure where some people were treated for the pain of the buttocks and sciatic vein pain, and he marvels at this much, saying that no other treatment was done, and he became well in one go after this cure. He advised to bathe as described below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he instructs to do it this way that you take the green fresh and dry litargy (a substance) and grind it thoroughly with a little fat, then apply it on the buttocks and thigh and leg where the pain persists, and bind it. And let him leave for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burn from the medicine.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then have them bathe until their body has somewhat revived, and have them lie down, and the pain will leave them entirely and they will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	Know that no one should use such medicines with a cautery, unless after the removal of flesh.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides states that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with donkey's blood, if it helps little; and the cauterization must be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take lard and cook it in old oil, and place it on the depression that is between the first toe of the foot and the other one which is called the heel bone.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After taking donkey skin, let it burn on fire until it turns to charcoal, and place it on the lard, and leave it until it sticks; and repeat this process again, and do not stop doing so until you think it goes up to the hips, and that the pain is ceased; and this method of cautery is called "donkey's hair cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or from percussion or due to too much evacuation, or due to similarities of cold matter spread out, none of these appearances warrants cauterization, because it is someone who came from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after this that the patient has been freed of rotten pills or other appearances, and that one applies it to the back, where the pain is located, three lines marked with a cross, and in each line according to its strength and quantity what the body can endure; and do the cauterization according to the cautery called "points"; and if you see fit, apply 3 or 4 cauterizations at the middle clavicle according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often affects children, and the signs of its beginning are that they suddenly become weak when standing up, with fear; and you find an inflammation in the last spinal bone at the back and a similar appearance to other spinal bones.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you notice it being treated, if you apply the fire cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If one applies hot iron to each part of the spine evenly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see fit, apply the hot iron to a line or two along the spine at the point of the hot iron, and have the marks close together.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treating it until it is well according to what we have said, and be careful not to use the cautery in places where there may be nerve damage.
de la dolor des jointes	Of the pain in joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain arises due to moisture spread throughout each body member, and when pain comes from the feet which they call "gout" properly, and when it is caused by cold reasons and can be cured with medicines, they are treated in this manner: make the fire cauterization inside the joint of the foot, and have these olive oil cauteries take this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need that you touch near the foot's bone, if it gets burned by the full length of the cautery which we claim as 'point'.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains extend to the knees and other joints, if this happens many times, then apply the cautery at each knee three or four times across each part of the joint, all along the olive oil; and if you need more, do so more, but don't remove your hand from there until the skin's heat is gone.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend up to the knees and back, then he should be administered the cautery that we have said in our chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make points between the fingers two lines; and if there remains any pain on the arms, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to the elbows or to the shoulders, cauterize each part, and treat the patient well and give him good medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if you treat him well and cleanse the blood, God willing, he will be healed with the aid of God.
de la routure dou syfac	from the rupture of the syphilitic sore.
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When rupture occurs in the lungs, and the bowels descend into the kidneys - it is novel. It's necessary that when you see them to cure, do not disturb that day; use things that allow the wind to leave his belly so that the intestines descend from his belly; after let him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to shave his armpit until the bowel are repaired, then remove them with your fingers, and mark with burning under the rupture on the bone of the knife, and in every sign make it similar to half a circle above the heart. Then heat up the cautery which has this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	Until it is white and discharges pus.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then pull out the bowels from its place; and let the attendant scrape her hand so they don't turn back; and work well on the thighs for the patient, and put a hot stone and hot iron on his thighs, and another under his buttocks which touch his hands; then apply the cautery to every sign in your hand, and hold it straight until you reach the bone; if you do not reach it on the first try, repeat again until you reach the bone; and be careful that the pus doesn't leak out when you apply the cautery; don't burn him; and so that the patient's wounds or other illnesses are avoided.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not reach to the bone with the cautery, your works are worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cautery for children be delicate according to the size of their body, and likewise large people should have a cautery as big as their measure; after three days cleanse the area with butter until the scab comes off; afterwards apply other ointments until they heal properly, and lie down on his back for forty days so that the wound heals well; and it is necessary to let these precautions last long enough so that no boils appear when he wants to go into chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wants to stand up, get him a well-made bandage and wear it for another forty days. He should have plenty of rest, work moderately, avoid overeating and drinking too much liquid, and refrain from loud shouting; and if he adheres to this advice, he will be fully recovered.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say after this amputation treatment in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	And when wounds occur in other wombs and are deep, and you see that they do not grow anymore, apply the cautery according to its size, and so heat it up until two-thirds of its length; after this, treat as we have said; and none of the old ones said that one should cauterize with three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But the first sign is the beginning of the infection and draw a line across the width above the wound, and another below, and hold your hand tightly with the entire blade of the cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first applications of the cautery are lighter and more moist.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from old pain in no limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain occurs in any limb, due to falling or being hit, and that pain lasts long, and the cure of medicine does not help, then it is necessary for it to be cauterized with the cautery called 'points', and apply the cauteries according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its functionality and its location of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If the patient is already healed from the first cautery application, that's good; if not, start another cautery on it again. Because these tools are designed to make movements in nearby body parts, it's necessary for you to perform as many cauterizations until the wounds are fully healed.
de meselerie	Of cautery by fire, command the ill person to allow the hairs to grow long and even; and if they poke at their base, hold the eyes still so they do not move until they grow.
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The illnesses should be treated once with great care by a cautery, and similarly, the disease that comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Can't you see the cautery? Take care that the disease is at the beginning, and if it is cured according to what we have said in the division, without spreading or lingering, and you doubt whether corruption might spread throughout the body, then do two cauterizations on the head: I apply the first one near the nose, and the other towards the forehead at the end of hair; and II on both horns, and III behind on the chin; and keep your hand so that the cautery goes down to the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the vapors from the large humors can escape; and cauterize it on the cheeks as follows when this is done.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the cautery is everywhere scattered; and it clearly disappears, then it's appropriate that you apply these cauteries that we have spoken of to the head, and one cauterization near the nose, and two cauterizations on the spine at the neck, and seven cauterizations on the spine at the back, and one large one at the throat and another in front, and two on each shoulder; and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the feet, and one on each joint of hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and be careful about the nerves that are at the heel bone, do not burn them. And no single cauterization is done over the bone of the wrist, and another over the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more I apply the fire cautery, the more assistance it provides, and it benefits; and know that patients do not feel pain from the cautery as healthy individuals do, because their bodies are already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the size of the cautery be large or small according to the limbs and joints, as you will find in the methods for using tools.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After the cure with flour of times mixed with honey and other treatments until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When inflammation occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it does not heal, then I perform cautery on the limb according to the size of the limb; and let the cautery penetrate a bit into the root of the disease. Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And never should a cautery be applied with the hand or on foot and back, at the place where the nerve is that makes the limb move, and thus there is extraction of pus; and whoever does not know about the limbs and the outputs of moving nerves within the body should not interfere in such matters.
de albaras	Of cautering with fire, command the patient to allow the hairs to grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is grown worse, and medicine in its natural form is of no use, then apply cautery from a small fire to some extent, according to the quantity of the root being treated, until the pus is removed and its color changes; then cleanse with flour and lentils mixed with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood from chicken and blood from duck, each using one part; mix all together, then wrap in a cloth, and leave on the affected area until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	Curing syphilis with cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When the gangrene starts and you see it, should you halt its growth, then apply a cautery to the spot that seems like a circle, around the entire circumference of the gangrene.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And yet the wise men say that one should also apply the cautery in the center of the gangrene; and yet this does not seem good to me, because I fear it might lead to ulceration and corruption, and I have already decided never again; and more sensible is it for the cautery to be applied around, using the cautery known as 'circule', as we have mentioned in the matter of cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of swelling that cannot die.
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has an illness that is called "adubelati", and death is delayed due to excess or because of the old age when it becomes decrepit (that is, too old) and there's little blood left, or due to the severity; and you see it hastening towards death: then cauterize internally with small cauteries by touching them; afterwards leave him like that.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	And it will hasten toward death.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierce through completely to all points of the cautery, if you heat the cautery as described:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of this illness which is called "adubelati" until the cauterizations penetrate all its depth, and make them such that the patient feels it outside in such a way that the progress of the disease is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	Afterwards cleanse until it's perfectly clean.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure by fire using iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of illness exists which is called 'corrodens', and this is nothing else but a decay in the limbs, for it afflicts the limbs just as if one were burning dried branches.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a patient who can bear the application of a fire cautery together, then heat up the clavicular cauteries both small and large. Do so according to what is necessary for each location or where the disease exists; after burning from all sides until you rid the area of all corruption, leave nothing behind. Ensure that every bit of corrupted material is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and apply a heated iron with oil to the burned areas as long as the scabs from the heat of fire are healed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the treatment of wounds causing pus.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if after three days you see that the wound does not heal, it's good; and if this does not happen, then repeat the cautery on what remains from the pus-infected area.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this measure has often been treated with medicinal astringents instead of the fire cautery; but nevertheless, the fire cautery is a greater help. I have already spoken about the treatment of medicinal astringents in the division: take as much as you need for it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	From stones that come into the kidneys
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Sometimes, diseases that appear from within are born, which we call "cysts" according to our understanding, and it is a large, lumpy thing that irritates the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterizations for this disease can be done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This means 'it is to know the fire cautery, and the hot water cautery.'
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	A fire cautery is that you heat it up. Do the hot water cautery in the same way as a feather, and make it of good iron to fit all around, and have thin margins; after you place it fully heated on the metal tip, twist your hand completely around the tip until it reaches the end of the metal rod; and leave it like this for three days until it begins to cause gangrene; then have him apply a poultice made from wild garlic crushed with oil, and let the poultice stay overnight, and the metal will come out and be removed from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it with oil to saturate the flesh until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they have moved within the body cavity, and this happens many times in both hands and feet, it's necessary that you apply a hot cautery; and do this: take an arnica reed or iron rod, or a goose feather, and place them on the nail and thyme, which is to say for warts; then place the reed over the entire area until it darkens it all through, then put a bit of hot water, and hold your hand well, pressing your hand as you turn so that the edge of the reed touches the root of the nail, and then find the path of the hot water to the very root; let the patient endure a little the burning from the hot water for an hour; then leave them like this, and they will be uprooted at their roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	So treat one by one, until you heal all those who are within the body, then cleanse of the growths that produce flesh.
li cure dou trembler	the treatment for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some tremble from cold or nerves, or from the quartan fever or other conditions, it is necessary that you perform this treatment: four to five hot iron applications on the spine of the back; one application between each vertebra; one on the skin and another under the stomach with an olive cautery; if this doesn't stop the trembling, hasten the recovery from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	The pus-filled boils
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	No visible eruptions from the skin or pus-filled lesions appear, that come from large putrid materials.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	When they become visible, at the first instance when it is necessary that one applies a cautery to each tip of the pustule: a subtle firestick from myrtle, where its point catches on fire, or from the root of aristolochia longissima, or with the lentil-shaped cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And each time they cauterize, at the beginning when they become visible, according to this manner, and it cannot grow more sores forward, but eliminates the excess that comes from them, and are cleansed; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there would be great flows of blood from the artery that is cut during the wound or when incising an abscess, and similar occurrences; and it's very frustrating to have to deal with bad smells.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And still, when this happens to any, if you hasten to place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it not too tightly until the skin is soothed under your finger, and no drop leaks out; then heat several olive oil cauteries with both small and large sizes, until they are all red. Then take one or more according to the size of the wound and the place where the artery runs through it, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the skin is completely cooled.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cauteries are done, then quickly take another one of the cauteries that are at the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop performing this one after another until the skin is cooled down completely; and be careful not to burn the nerve that lies beneath, and so no harm comes to the patient; and know that when the skin has receded from the artery, one cannot cool it properly themselves even if the artery is large, unless you do this through four methods as we have said: by cautery, or extraction when it has not been treated yet, or by strong winding of a thread, or by medicines applied which have the power to cool blood; and then tie and restrict it accordingly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers it will apply stretching or tightening of cloths tightly or place burning things upon them, or other similar actions, if they do not gain from it then they did not.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and they have no sight or medicine at hand, when faced with a wound in the vein, they should put their index on top of the wound as we have said, and stretch it so that it remains stretched above the wound and above the vein; and not move it, but moisten it with cool water often until it's very cold, until the blood is frozen, thickened, and remains stretched. And make preparations in advance for cautery and medicines for what they need.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book of treatments for amputations
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases concerning which it is necessary to apply a cautery of fire, or hot medicine, and we discussed their causes and tools, forms of cauterization; I completed that chapter up until the feet, and now I shall proceed through this chapter on my own path as these are found more readily for what one desires.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And just as I begin this, it is necessary, dear reader, that you understand that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than with the first treatments of cauterization, so great caution is required for these.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there are many times bleeding when opening veins and making incisions on abscesses, and treatments for wounds, and extraction of arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar matters; where there is doubt and fear, and it leads to deaths of some.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I advise you not to embark on folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For none of the ways of people come in for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	if they come from those who have died so much with their illness that they die lightly due to the foolishness they find in their disease, and from the severity of their wickedness; one must be afraid of these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And from these he speaks and says: "Wait, I am brave"; and the disease is disdainful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not appropriate for you to consent to those who come to your aid in this manner, but rather place more regard on the honor of your office than on your greed. Do not act rashly but wisely towards those about whom you are certain and have taken counsel; use prediction and indication in your treatments that lead to healing, as they will help you acquire good reputation, glory, and lasting memory. This will assist you in obtaining a noble reputation, fame, and remembrance for long.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dear child, Our Lords give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have commanded this chapter in devising through chapters, according to what is before or the chapter on cauterizations, which I have devised from head to feet, for you will find it more easily of that which you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this disease comes very often during childbirth to children, and when the mother constrains too tightly the head of the child; and no time does this come about because of a response that one might know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease in anyone other than children, and among all those that I have observed, their death was hastened by it; for which reason, I think it's worth trying to divide the work into partial treatments.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw an infant of theirs whose shoulder was filled with water, and the head swelled each day until it could no longer bear it; and he believed so much in the moisture that he died, and this moisture is assembled all over the bone under the axilla, between the heart and the bone; and the works are such that if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you cut open through the head a large crack; and it goes as long as two hands, as long as the moisture flows; and see this shape of the spasmula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more concentrated, and the abscess is larger, make two cuts in a manner like a cross, according to this shape:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is inside the bone, and you see the edges of the head opening from each part, and water jumps out when you press it with your hand internally, and this does not stop: then it is necessary to cut through the head three cuts in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after making the incision, remove all moisture completely outside.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After holding the incisions of cloths and powders, I place wine and oil, and leave it like this for up to five days; then release him, treating the wound with bandages and dressings, and let the head remain steady as well. Afterwards, the sick person should eat dry meat from a source of little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is to look at where the opening of the abscess lies, and the position of the water; for it's never ahead, it's never behind, it's not on the right side, nor is it on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut then the area where the abscess opens, and the space of water, and make the cut according to your ability; and be careful not to cut the artery; and watch for a stream of blood, so that the patient dies from the flow of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Of cautery by fire, command the sick person to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they pierce at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to any illness that is called "congestion" as in the eyes or at the anus, and this disease is old, and the treatment with medicine does not help, then the last resort of treatment is cauterization using this method where one severs the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	So then, if you can bear with me, I advise that the sick person has their head moved; after that, rub the back of it with a rough cloth until veins appear. Then, remove the hair around their neck to all edges of the cloth; then observe where the vein runs, and check both sides from behind the ears, and when they are cut short; then mark the sides, then shave each side with an extremely sharp blade until you reach the bone, and this should be done by leaving a margin by the width of their head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it, pinch the pus at the artery and over the vein above, cut also like two inches through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein has been cut, if you push the blood continuously outward from high up.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open upon feeling, it is necessary for you to measure the quantity of space of III fingers, then press and apply pressure up to the bone; and what needs to be taken out of the blood is VI c/ (a unit of measurement), and by chance a little more or less depending on how the patient can endure, and the reformation of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone point similar to syphilis, if the abscess that was sealed does not appear there, then stretch the wound and bind it, and apply ointment treatment until it heals.
de emigrainne	Of cautery with fire, command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old age comes, and acute coughing, due to the moisture of tears and the heats in the temples and lower back being long established and similar things, it is treated using methods of medical cures, but none of them provide relief. We should extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them as we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extraction is such that the patient should be made to feel through their temples, and hear the artery which opens at the temple, because it opens well by its beating, and responds very little except in some people who are too cold; and if it responds, then compress the neck with cloths, then rub him with a rough cloth, and immerse his head in hot water until the artery clearly appears. Then take the form of the instrument from which this is done:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then lightly scrape the skin until you feel the artery, then lift it up with clamps and remove all the threads that are off each part; and if the artery is delicate, turn to the tip of the hook, then seal that part according to the size of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it isn't cooked properly, either the meat or the bones will be full of toughness throughout.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw blood from two veins up to three inches; and if the artery is large, it must be tied with two strands of a strong silk thread for at least four centimeters before suturing the wound, so that pus does not come out before the healing of the injury, nor cause further bleeding; then cut off the excess between the two threads in this moment. And when you can see, if possible, gently apply the cautery from the cut to the bone as long as the bones are cut; and this is the finished work, provided the patient does not have fever and he has a warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cauterizations help to finish off infections; because they provide more assistance in dealing with moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	In the extraction of arteries, you must fill the area with old cotton and place it over well-made tents; when they are released from their binding, apply dry medicines that create pus and tents until they become clean. If there's no artery cut, treat as you normally would, hurry to cover with a cautery or use the space with vitriol on your hand so that the cut is cauterized; if you do not have this present, place ice from your hand onto the area until the cut freezes and then rinse with cold water until it stops bleeding, applying pressure as needed. The one that becomes wetter in the extraction of the artery should be burned by a cautery trenching through two parts, but ensure the trenches are well spaced to retain longer heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too tight, they hold less of their heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have .i. inch of space between the two knives, and then when you have made a small incision with both edges, place the hot iron until it reaches the bone, and cauterize the wound in two places; and keep them far apart from each other because there is no welding from this cautery throughout; and this is how the cautery works:
des larmes	Of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes are flowing through the veins located above the testicles of the head's chief part, and no medicinal cure helps, you see the skin turn red, and feel or perceive like tremors; and in places that are moistened and damp such that the paper hairs fall off, and heat up the papers, and burn from the heat of the tears, there is need for this kind of treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they named the old "healer of contusions", and when you treat a person with this illness for wounds, have them shave their head or forehead, then make three cuts evenly across the forehead according to its length; and let one of the cuts go as far down the front as II dio allows until it touches just below the nose, and the others cut across both sides over the eyes, and be careful not to cut the arteries that are above the eyes; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jaws, and each wound should have the size of II dio across; and have a piece of sponge and some cloths ready to wipe off any blood, then use a strong saline solution made with parts from this as described here for treatment:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is made behind the temple up to the second incision; and charbroil all the area between the two grooves completely to the flesh which is above the bone. Then make another cut from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then extract this pus-filled content.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If a tool is placed in the first groove which is called "cultellaire", and it is very sharp on one side, but not sharp on the other, it's shape is:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And make the cut toward the fatty layer at the knee, and the cut should align with the bone, and the blade until it feels in the middle crack.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And press down the veins that descend from the head until they meet at the eyes, as long as the incision is continuous up to the one opening at the knee, and then continue elsewhere along the middle crack until it reaches the other opening; and then remove equal blood evenly, express the eye for the taken blood; then place a piece of old cotton in each crack, and cover with wet cloths soaked in wine and oil and anise, and ensure that no pus appears; and on the third day loosen the bandage, and apply great baths of tepid water, then treat with ointment of basil with oil rose and other treatments for wounds as long as it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When it comes to sudden catarrh that is habitual, and you see the eyes heavy and small, and weaken the vision, and burned papers; and the hair falls out, and one feels feverish during the aches, and the body shivers; then know through these events that those substances and that phlegm do not come from many veins, and the wet cure that is being used, if it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And indeed, you instruct the patient to place their head behind their forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another one somewhat wide below.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And start from the crease of the left temple to that of the right temple, and let the incision go until the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move during eating; and when the bone is revealed, drain all the blood with a sponge, then clean between the two lips of the incision and put old cotton, linen thread; then cover with cloths soaked in wine and oil, and avoid removing any debris; once removed, it is necessary to rub the bone until cartilage begins to grow, then treat with desiccating substances that encourage cartilage.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of the wheat flower, and four parts of the root of wormwood, and make them into a poultice; and apply it to these wounds to promote the release of pus everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of ear piercing
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Everything that chokes in the ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beast, or mine stones or similar things such as iron; or seeds, such as peas, beans, lentils; or draining substance such as water and oil and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it comes to piercing the ear or any other manner of thing that does not fit with the ear, or does not grow in the ear, place the ear under the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, if any purple or worm oil is distilling out, then proceed with extraction; and let him sneeze on command, and stuff his nostrils when sneezing occurs, and place pieces of cloth or wool inside the ear; and keep the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times this remedy brings relief; and if it does not bring relief, then proceed with extraction using fine needles, about which the following is said:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it leaps like needles, that's good; if not, proceed with extraction using a slender needle of small curvature; and if it doesn't leap through this, take an arachnid hair and pinch the tip of its hair or the ear petal strongly, and apply wax to the inside of the hair thread so that nothing can enter with the thread; then shape the force, as we have said many times; and if force does not come in such a manner, grab from here and take its other ends, put into some no instrument is suitable for this purpose, and place a little cotton inside; then press the lump onto the stone or anything else, and pull with force.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it doesn't leap through all these things that we've said, hurry to puncture the ear in such a way that pus can come out and spasms occur; and the method of incision is such that you first make a surgeon's incision on the tympanic membrane and remove blood according to the measure of its virtue, then have the surgeon sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where fat hangs down; and let the cut be like a moon until you reach the stone, then break the bone according to your ability and suck it quickly into your mouth; and treat until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it's grains and they swell up, you should perform extraction; and if it cannot come out, then use this small spatula according to this shape:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	And make an incision on that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think that the grains are wet due to the moisture in the ear, until you have done many pieces; then extract using fine needles and suction, as we have said, so that extractions are made smoothly.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the cold therefore when one coughs in the ear then the patient uses an expectoration of some strong concoction, and fills the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let them be gashed right next to that ear itself or where the cold is located.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If she jumps out through heaven, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If heaven does not permit it, take many stones according to the length of your nose and make them medium-sized and light. Warm them slightly on fire; and place one or two of these stones into their ear, and direct them out from their foot from another side, and through one stone onto the stone that is in the ear; and keep repeating this process with each stone until all the cold has left entirely, and thus jumps out entirely; and if you observe it, take a juniper branch, and insert one of the shoulders into the ear, and the other head into fire until the more fragrant juniper becomes burnt; then redo another set of junipers until all the cold leaves, just as we have described with stones.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the removal of the beast, if it's of small size, like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in division; but if it can be felt, go for extraction with forceps; and this is the easier thing to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from ears, when you are treating them as we have said in the division and treatment of distillations, if the cure does not work, it is necessary that you look at the ear to sunlight: if no worm appears there, if treat it with sharp needles, and if nothing appears, take the form of this:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And may narrowness be below and width above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And apply the most subtle balm in the ear according to the degree of suffering, then spread it thoroughly throughout the canal; do this often until all the pus comes out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not want to come out, you should stuff the cotton canal as I've described for in stones; and if they do not emerge as we have said, administer distillations that the old ones have proven effective in removing worms, and you will find information on them under distillation treatments; and distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this tool, which is shaped like what you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And it should be made of silver or a small piece of iron below with two small openings for distillation and above to cover for the purpose of distilling inside. And to press within the distillation use a properly made tool from iron for this task, and take one comb and wrap cotton around the tip beforehand. Then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines in the cotton, and let it be in the ear; then push all the cotton into the comb completely, and press your hand smoothly until the oil is distilled or excess from the ear; and listen to the maladies inside, and let these distillations be heated for a moment as one would when they are being distilled into the ear; and make sure it's not too cold because medicine wouldn't work as well otherwise.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of ear piercing
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without any loss in their ears; and this same thing happens with injuries to homes, or a fetus being born inside the ear, and these piercings occur once within the ear if one cannot see it; and never does more than half of the loss be seen clearly.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes from within, if one cannot see it, is of healing damage in various positions, and concerning this thing that we can observe, you should place the ear under the sun; and look inside: if you see the apparent pus, as the work has formed with this substance:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be careful to cut forward and behind evenly all around, ensuring not to damage the ear; if the pus is from a birthmark or a part of the ear, then use fine pins to gently pinch it until that part of the flesh has been completely excised.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the earwax goes too far into the ear, take a gentle and fine instrument, slightly heat it on the fire, then place it near the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you sense the irritation that the ears feel in their bones when touched lightly, do not weigh down the nerves of the ear. Then place a tent inside the ear according to its size near the entrance, and apply the mucus in Egyptian ointment in it.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Continue this for as many days as the wound is healing, or take a patch and moisten it with rose water, and apply powdered vitriol. And if you see swelling in the ear, it is necessary that you remove the patch and replace another one that is wetted with a cerotic made from roset oil and wax, until the swelling is removed; then cure it until it is healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, immerse an sponge and dip it in cold water, then place it on the ear, and use other remedies that remove the bleeding which are treated with distillations.
de la char des papieres	Of the ashes of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	In the month when they come from papers with hairs that are wet and dry, it is necessary that you spread them out using tweezers and forceps, and cut off its roots with a scalpel; then place sulfuric acid on the area.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if you don't remove it, then cauterize with a small lens cautery, and after the incision, make sure to remove the cauterizer; and many times repair, because no part remains from its roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots get burned and do not return.
de la gresle	Regarding the gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times papers come containing some things that seem to harden in their form and hardness, and because of this there is a disease called "granuloma," which is an assembly of thick moisture on top and underneath the paper; the operations are like this: take care if the granuloma remains mute from one side and another, and it's a light thing to know; then make them broad first, then burn each part slightly, then seize them with tweezers, and remove.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you can't cover it without piercing some paper, and if it doesn't hurt the patient; and if there's a large tear, then sew it up with one stitch, and treat until it heals; and if it's small, don't apply much force, because the ointment will heal it quickly and promote flesh growth.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the snow falls down into the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper and place the snow on a pin; then cut it off from both sides. And if the paper is moved away by incision, this does not cause any harm; and when the snow has been cut off, drain out the salty water and treat the wound until the injury heals so that the patient recovers healthily.
de la graisse des eulz	of the grease of the pus
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that soaks into the papers above, and this happens more often in children than in adults, and it doesn't hurt their eyes much, and they come down with weeping as in the mornings, and can't look at sunlight because tears rush to their eyes; and for this reason they lie on their sides right away, and sleep there, and the papers under their eyelashes get moist from Exinach which opens in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press on his head with your hands and feel the exit between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of the work is that the patient places their head on your healthy place. And then take one linen sheet and set up a tent in manner of a circle according to the quantity contained by exirnach from each part, then put it on; press with your fingers from one side and another so that exirnach gathers within the circle; and cut in the center of the moisture in the knife make a slit of size, and should not be larger than the wound when you do for opening veins; and make the leather around completely until you see the exirnach coming out from the slit according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Then remove it all as one piece of linen cloth between your fingers at the front, and twist your hand to the right and to the left until it is spread out; and make sure you do not get stuck in the slit, that you come up to the edge of the knife right up to the eye, that you do not hurt it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the incision does not open at the start of the wound, increase a bit the wound gently until it opens; then stretch it as we have said. Then soak with moist cloths and water, place them on the wound, and hold in position with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such places that crush seed and put it up to corrupt the moisture that has remained.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the treatment should continue as long as it is effective.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there appears an abscess under the wound, then the treatment with plaster remedies should continue as long as it is effective.
des poilz des papieres	"Des poils de papier" translates to "paper hairs". This phrase could be used metaphorically or in a literal context depending on the surrounding text, possibly referring to fine, thin materials that resemble hair.
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When the papers are born with hairs adjusted other than naturally and they grow old, they harm the eyes and cause illnesses such as habitual tearing and paper putrefaction, and albugine, until this is the cause of destruction to the eyes; and then one must cure according to four methods: or by a fire cautery combined together, or by medicine according to what was discussed in front or chapter of cautery, and it will be made either through incision and sewing, or with ligatures, according to what I shall say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It must be that you put the head of the eye in your health, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is converted, it's good; if not, take one needle with two threads above; and do this across the edge of the paper where the hair grows under these hairs, and pull both threads across the entire paper, and turn it with the rasp; then cut in that part beneath the paper, beneath the adjusted hairs, all along to the large tear up to the small one; then remove one thread, put a small cotton tent and a silk cloth underneath the paper, then draw on the paper a figure like an oak leaf, as if of laurel leaves, and it must be that the figure is according to the amount you see raised above the paper which is placed under all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if there is a part that needs to be treated with large quantities of paper according to how the paper has been softened; then do everything for all the spatumile above the two lines you have indicated, and start with the largest drop down to small; then make one of the cuts close to the natural hairs in the growth stage of an inch, then insert the tablespoon into one of the two corners on the right side of the cut, then scrape it completely; then join the two lips using a fine needle with one thread of fine wool fabric and remove the blood. Then let the excess fibers dry out at both ends of the two lines without any sticky substances if you see that this works; and if not, do not worry about it, then leave the stitches and threads for up to three or four days; then treat the wound without stitches using dry and constraining materials, because paper heals when pressed against the wound and joined with it, but stitches are replaced (as the old ones said), and this is work without fear; and there is another way: you should cut the paper into a shape that resembles the leaf of a bay tree as we have described, at three tablespoons according to its shape which is depicted here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut those on top evenly according to the shape that is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the tongs, and the thing is not equal, take a needle or have thread, and run it around the object; and then run another thread on the large surface, and the second thread on the small one, and gather them equally between your fingers; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin over which you indicated, as we have described, then stitch the two edges of the wound together by suture, and treat until it heals properly; and if pus comes at your incision, remove it with cerate and soothing ointment; and any time paper hair gets converted: you should use what we said about incising; but the stitches in both are more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of canes follows this form: and you should convert the paper and cut it inwards according to what I have said, then make two canes by art, and two fine threads each as long as the length of the paper and as wide as its thickness; and take two heads from each part; then assemble them smoothly on what stands up above the paper of the eye, and draw together those two canes from the two parts. And leave them like this for a few days, and the skin that is drawn tight will shrink and harden and smooth out, until it escapes by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, if the wound has some strength, then treat it until it heals properly. And when the wound is stitched and lifted up, and no longer grows hair; and this form of the two needles that you will do according to this figure, and according to this length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work consists of such actions as you need to take: grasp a slender needle, and attach two strands of silk thread that are delicate and fine; then join the limbs together, tie them both neatly, and make the lengths of the threads about a palm long. Next, prepare one more fine silk thread for short use, and bind its top with the thread; then place the patient's head on your healthy side, and let the sun illuminate it because this is a subtle and small operation; afterwards, stick the needle into the root area where hair is attached until you pierce paper quickly while lifting it above the natural hair. Then pull out all the hairs up to the line, and bind them again in that line if there are two or three or four or more; finally remove your hand as soon as all hairs appear from every part of the line with the natural hair still attached.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the operation has been treated properly and no hair comes out with it, then pull out the line from underneath until you have pulled all the thread that was ordered, as long as the line can be seen through and past the edge above; then pull out the line and the thread, and rest the eye for two days or three, until the hair has grown back in its place and a new one has formed. And if the hairs are small, accompany each with one longer natural hair, and leave it attached to that or let it be left there, as long as it grows out straight, then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the infection of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease is called 'Aleacrati' or the corruption comes to the eye, if there are two ways: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And happens suddenly from wounds, or from surgeons or cauterizations, and by similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the method of the work in this is that you sever that bond, and open the lips of it, and insert linen cloths inside, and bind it until it heals; and there should be no use in its treatment of things that dry and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the disease will return worse than the first; but work with things that soften, such as fenugreek; and the decoction of water or wine and linen seeds be cooked, and applications of garlic broth melted in no oils, and cover a tent, and treat it thus.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your treatment are that you must be cautious not to seal it back up in the same shape as before; and these treatments we have spoken of only apply to the remedies for this disease, so they do not return in the same shape as before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	The fluid that comes into the ear
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which truly is called 'Axacrati', and is natural and accidents.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Accidents come from wounds and fissures and cautery and similar things; as for the vein of the work, you take an awl in which there is a double thread, you insert it into the flesh, and have the needle pierce through on the left kidney so that the thread goes through two parts of the flesh; then the flesh is at the top over all the awl, and the knot is made large.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure resembles paper according to what should be, it's good; if not, take a razor and place it in the fissure, and turn the paper, making two cuts inside the paper. And make two points at the corners of the incision you've made, and create an angle such that when they are assembled, the figure is like the figure of a letter which has no "I griesche"; then remove this flesh according to how much its edges are and from where it comes under the paper, then adjust the two cut parts with thread; then sew using a needle made of wool. Then administer the cure that we've spoken about for softening medicines and ointments until it's healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a cut or stitch or cautery, it is necessary that you make a full-cut along the hair where there are papers, and according to what was stated previously; then cut between the two leaves of a book, as I said before; and must perform the work in accordance with the shape of the disease, for it varies much in form, and the doctors should prepare all tools so they can return the figure to its natural shape; and even the patients themselves, according to what they need regarding treatment and instruments across various positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	right away from the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this stitching occurs on someone's hand in such a way that the paper above is sewn with the white of the egg, and cannot move or do its natural tasks, then it is necessary that you place the tip of a razor under the paper and lift it up; and stretch it with tongs, until you get to the subtle spatulate at the tear which should neither be too sharp nor too deep, so that the patient does not suffer from the spatula being too sharp and irritating their eye. And make your incision, then scrape off this combined piece lightly, in such a way that the paper regrows according to its natural shape; and heals all of it, and do not use any salt water in the eye once, and rinse with gentle cool water, and clove oil; then place between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and cover the eye with wet wool. And after three days, use a colander and other sowing tools until they are all healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the eyelid
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the eyelid is in two ways: it is nerveous and resembles one hard tendon, and another which isn't nerveous, but seems like a frozen white moisture. When touched with iron and cared for using pins, neither can be done; both similarities start near the large tear duct, grow slowly and slowly until they cover all vision and light, and the movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of incision is such that when the patient places their head in its healthy position, then they operate the eyes; and lift the eyelashes with your hand, then place the edge of the nail using small pins, and extend it above. Then take a needle, and insert two hairs from a horse, or cow, or ox, and one strong thread; and double the needle point slightly and pierce it in the nail, and poke through all the way with the needle, and tie the nail with a string and place it above, and scorch along the entire length of the hair line that follows under the eyelid and the hair until reaching the root near the tear ducts, leaving only the very fine inner part of the eyelid untouched by the thread. Leave the natural membrane of the tear duct area intact so that no body's tears come through the incision as usual; and the nail is extended at just the edge of the nail bed, and under the thread, exactly like what we have described. Then the scorching should cover all the inner part of the eyelid from this point onward, forming:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And ensure that the cautery doesn't touch the fatty tissue and doesn't damage it. Do not puncture the eye. After making an incision, pour a small amount of powdered sulfur into the wound, make a bracelet from silver nitrate, and let it stay until another day; then treat it according to what is required until they are well.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not sensitive and you can't push in the needle, many times this nail-like appearance needs to be treated with medicines. It grows just as I described in the division section, and if you see it become thick, then the eye feels ill due to the disease, take the cautery lightly in a sharper way according to this shape:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And cut the nail slightly upward, and if you see that it doesn't thin at all and it presses on the reason, then drip silver nitrate from your mouth into the eye, and also use a red bracelet and sulfur. Keep this on until another day; then start the next treatment according to this same process, until all is removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing opposes your sight, like pus-filled sores, then proceed and start by treating the pus-laden sore until it's clean. Once it is cleaned out as much as possible, resume the work procedure as before, until it's cleansed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if there appears the flesh from the eye in your sight by great harm, you should suspend its use and take a part of it but not all at once, so that no tears come forth; then apply red balm to your eye which is made from stibium.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows on the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Hair of some individuals does not turn red upon birth and covers the eye lid, restraining over the papers and turning outside, seeming like a rose petal; and the veins are such that the patient's head is in their healthy state then lets out these eyes, and thereafter the entire flesh part fits into this form suitable for this one, keeping it with strength; then peel away the first layer of flesh, and go all shaving with the razor until completion, making sure not to injure the eye during the operation; and ensure that the incision is smooth as we said in the nail removal and with small forces from here we remove the pus, just like the diagram after this chapter shows; and when the incision has been completed and all flesh removed, put on oil of sulfur or distill it with red colander powder and seemingly corrosive medicines, then place a cotton ball with egg white over the eye to prevent infection; if there remains nothing and the pus is hot, if you doubt about the heat of pus, leave the eye and treat the pus condition with soothing treatments for hot pus; then return to your operation as long as it has been sanitized in this way, and thus make every flesh part fit into the eye by this semblance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nevertheless, it is necessary for you to treat each weak eye of the natural way; and of the accidental way, in iron operations; and do not let your hand enter any of these operations until you see that this member is suffering from this operation.
des voines des eulz	of veins and eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	When the veins are red and covered on the eye, and bear upon sight their work and weaken the sight for several days.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Therefore, at the first stage, you should observe where the eye is, in which the redness resides, and nowhere else; then treat it like this: instruct the patient to place their head in a healthy position, then suspend those veins throughout the entire body according to their skill, and make the arteries double-thin according to this shape.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two veins of thirty-three degrees each in one row, according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then proceed to treat those veins delicately, and let the blood flow for an hour after another treatment, until you see those veins move out of the eye; and be careful not to damage the eye with the ends of the spatulas. Perform this operation at noon in front of the sun, and be very vigorous in your work so that you only remove those veins; and when you have completed this task, apply a collar of green and red distilled liquid to dissolve what remains due to sebel.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you don't have the ability to do all of this at once, create a poultice using things that soothe the pain from the eyes and leave it for several days until the pain is alleviated and the fear of an abscess has been confirmed. Then continue in this manner as described previously until they are healed; and this is how one uses strength:
de la fistule de l’oil	from the duct of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The treatment for what is called 'arissati' (a type of fistula): when you treat it with a cautery and with hot water according to what I have explained before, and if it does not heal, then there is the place where you incise in front of the abscess, at the point it should die, and remove all the moisture that is there, until the bone is uncovered.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you will see the decay and blackness, if you take it with all the tool used in its formation; and call it 'hard head', and made of iron as large as one big spoon, and pointed like a file according to the present form.
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place on it the part of the corrupted bone, then press your fingers on it, and squeeze a bit until you know that this decay has stopped; and do this several times, then restore that part with medicines that have been dried.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	Let the limbs be joined together, and hair begins to grow, and the body of the boil is joined together, and remains like this for forty days, and it does not heal or becomes abscessed, and no bad events happen, then you know it has been cured; if not, there is another reason that the fistula must be brought back to the neck near the elbow according to this shape: and once you uncover the bone for the second time with a knife and medicine, and when uncovered take out the wood according to this shape, and make the nails of iron at three angles, and the rod should be thinned up to the head as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place the tip of the instrument against the lower edge of the eye socket, and keep your hand far from the nostril. Then continue pushing until it pierces the bone and you feel pain in the patient through which air flows if he holds his hand on his nose; then restore the limb with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when pus begins to drain out from the nose; if it is lighter material that disturbs the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eye opens completely and nothing comes from disturbing the heart or diminution, it is necessary that you tie the sufferer's head; then heal them, then place suction cups or pincers without causing pain to suck, then apply on the eye. I. The preparation made of cassia, aloe, incense, and sarsaparilla, and then strain the eye, and plaster it with strips and pieces of cloth; and the way of the cloths is that you take cloths that are quite soft, double each one in four layers, and then place them one after another according to the amount the eye needs. Then strain it from above with a hard bandage formed, and repeat the suction cups to suck without causing pain. Then remove the suction cups and leave the eye strained day and night, and if your strips loosen, then continue straining as much as necessary; then remove the strip after day and night, and if you see that the eye has healed, it is good; if not, then repeat the plastering, cloths, and strip again until it heals.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	At the rupture of the vitreous membrane
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When tears come in the vitreous sheet, then opens and comes out strips like pieces of paper so as a resin seed, and is observable; thus if you see this covered, the operations are such that you prick at the root on one part below up to half above, then prick another hole with a double thread at the end of the tear; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its position. Then cover the other side with the double thread and tie some part of the vitreous sheet together, and tighten well, then remove the needle and place wet linen over the eye with plenty of egg mixture; and let it be as long as the thread breaks along with the sheet, then treat the eye with comfort remedies until the wound heals. And none of these times should the wound be restrained by the sheet from each part of a circular piece of cloth, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the eyes show significant symptoms, if you puncture at the delicate membrane that passes under the eye, and remove the moisture and descend the sheet beneath the eyes, and do so immediately; then strain until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	From the flow of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called 'alcunnati' is nothing more than bile that has accumulated in the gallbladder, resembling descending sharp pains but it's not actual pain; and the way this disease manifests involves having the patient sit upright on an apparatus so they're straight, then take their head between your hands from two sides, and move them until you see the bile come up above to your eyes; then proceed to insert it, don't let it descend and clear out any light; observe all things as they were before; and if it doesn't come down immediately, know that it's pain, and if the appearance of the bile isn't like what we've said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you are to make the patient sit between your hands, then take the fine spatula and cut on the corneal surface making one point through the continuous connection with the cornea and crown until the bow comes out; and when it has come out, pour in hot water mixed with honey or hot water with fenugreek that has been boiled and honey, then apply another cure once she is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	From water in the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have the signs of the fluids in the division, and what needs to be pierced; you should proceed according to their health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you make the patient sit with their eyes crossed, outside of light by the sun, and they link the healthy eye tightly; then put the paper from the eye to your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or to your right hand if the eyes are on the right. Then take with your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the tool called 'almagda', or with your left hand if the eyes are on the right. Then place the tip of the tool below the cornea by half the thickness of a finger in that part of the eye's edge to the back of the conjunctiva, then push the 'almagda' tool vigorously and twist your hand until it pierces through the conjunctiva of the eye, feeling when 'almagda' comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the measure of the path of 'almagda' be equal to the measure of the space from the pupil to the end of darkness; and this is the cornea of the eye; if you see the bone in that paper by the clarity of the corneal tissue, then put the tool until it reaches or where there's water, then expel it through one way after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	Let the patient feel it descend now, so they can see their enemy before them and the instrument within their sight.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After I have it at rest for a bit, and when the patient feels it rising on the second route, apply force with the instrument. And when she is firmly placed and doesn't rise any further, gently pull out using small circular motions with your hand; and then add a little piece of salt to the eye's socket, and remove the foreign body from within.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then place the eye on oil-soaked cotton or wet wool, and cover with plenty of eggs, and bind it with healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Now, for those who belong to our kind, place them under the common broth with plenty of eggs.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if 'almagda' cannot enter the eye through its hardness, because there are certain men who have too hard eyes, it must be that you take the tool called 'alberit', which has this form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And pierce only the conjunctiva, do not go too deep into it, but make it subtle. Then pull out the foreign body, as we said; and upon completing the work, the patient rests in bed with his back turned towards darkness; and be free of all movements, eat light meats, and do not move his head either to the right or left. Bind him according to his position until midnight; then release him in this dark room, and check his vision, have him see everything. Then rebind him until seven days; and it should not be done during the time of treatment or after incision now, but you should proceed with this, because the water has ascended rapidly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	Let the abscesses drain, and you should remove the eye before the seventh day, and apply remedies to those who relieve the abscess; and when it has calmed, then free the vision and place over its face an edge of metal for a single day, and remain in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then leave the house step by step, and adapt to its situation; know that no followers should intervene in this situation.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from the Island, who told us that there they used alum powder, through which water is extracted, but still I never saw anyone like it in our land, nor have I ever read about it in old books; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of the magd, because those who do not know them see them; and they belong to a mare properly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And these are the head of their kind with the same subtlety, and the rear at three angles away.
de la char sor le neis	from the neck to the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	None of these creatures or beasts are born or come to be in various ways. Some seem like scorpions with the feet of pies. And if there's such a case where the beast has an enhanced color, and if it has a fur of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	For those beasts that have white fur and not enhanced coloration, you should place the patient between your hands facing the sun; work their nostrils, and apply onion juice to these animals, and remove them. Prepare yourself to endure the sharp thin thorn on one side as long as you know that this animal is entirely bony.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there's no remaining thing that we can't cope with, when you open it all together with two fine light instruments, and ensures nothing is left; and if something isn't surmounted or has pus oozing out, then the surgeon should operate according to how it should be done; and if it's malignant pus, act quickly and apply cautery until the pus becomes thickened and all the muscles are healed; then pour out water or let the air in or use wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	For the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it happens up to the palate. Know that there's blood; and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there's new flesh in the bone above, with tools unable to cut: thus you must thread a linen thread somewhat thick, tie its ends together by hand, and place each loop about one or less in space between them; and have the patient grip the shoulder through the thread on their nose, pull it out smelling as much as it comes out from the nostril inside the mouth; and many times children do this at school, and it's a simple task for someone who wishes to perform it. Then hold the head that comes out by the nose with one hand, and the other head that emerges through the mouth with the other hand, and know them one after another by listening as we are holding the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this as long as you know that the new flesh has corrupted that which was there before, then remove the filth, drain the blood, moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment and reinsert it directly into the nose just as before; do this for three days or more until the ointments have corroded all remaining old flesh. Then place a small amount of opium in the nose for some days if it needs to be healed properly, and if there is need for dried medicine usage, use them; this is how you would prepare an instrument to purge the head, one with which oils and medicines are distilled or used with the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And use it made of silver or iron, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and guide it in the same way; and if you see fit, then make a closed cane, and fill the surgical tools to purify the head; and hold one hand on the head when heating oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	from the neck to the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease is born at the nose and grows and becomes large until it is visible to look; and for this reason you should begin by cutting it, and treat with bone all together, then place in him the fire cautery or hot medicine; and if one delays in cutting when it is large, beware if it is hard, of changing color, of poor sense: do not touch it with iron at all as it is an abscess that has grown inwardly; because when you cut it even once, it causes great harm to the patient; and if the abscess is touched by heat, not by changing color, and you see that one can cut everything off, let the patient relieve and cut the head with fear, and treat him with dry and restraining things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose has been cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when the solutions for continuation come into one of these veined organs, it is beneficial little because in some people.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	So then if this happens to none, look whether the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then adjust the two lips for a stitch, heal them until they are healed. And if both sides of the lips have dried up on one side and another, it is necessary that you burn all parts of their skin until they heal, then join the two lips for a stitch, tighten them, and powder with dragon's blood and incense. Then place the powders on a piece of plaster of quick or any other welding plaster, let it be until it heals by itself, and then heal it with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of the stitch is such that you unite the wound: either with needles, as we have said in regard to stomach stitches; or with thread, as I have instructed.
des apostemes des levres	extracting from the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the work of this chapter, there are often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
de la char des gencives	From the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times it begins on the attached gum flesh, which the old would call "albulus"; you should hold this with your forceps and cut to its root, allowing blood or the blood to flow. Then place under a vessel of vitriol powder, or other drying and restrictive powders; if that flesh returns after the incision, and many times happens, then cut it again upon the second occurrence, and cauterize it: if it doesn't return even after the cautering; these are the forms for treating such.
des sordens	Of cauterys made with fire, command the patient to let their hairs grow long and even; and if they pierce at their root, hold their eyes steady so they do not move until they fully grow out.
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Many times teeth and their roots are gathered at the head of the teeth, between the mouth and gums, with unattractive and rough scabs present; and often there is a black tooth and citrine tooth along with worms until corruption reaches the gum, causing tooth decay. If it means that one must let the patient lie in your hand, and his teeth be at your service, take out any teeth or scabs while nothing remains.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When you treat the tooth because of its pain and it takes time to remove as much as possible, do not stop early; one should not let any residue be left behind. Because this material is so high up that if there's any leftover from the extraction process, it could cause issues.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is forced to endure treatment, it is necessary for you to be certain of their pain threshold.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain of the patient occurs and you must ensure it's either dental pain or not. Treat the good tooth well, but always make sure to stay with the pain as long as the disease is present, as this is what we have already instructed these patients to do; and when you are certain about the pain threshold, it is necessary for you to burn near the tooth throughout each 1. spatumile strongly to keep the gum intact from all sides; then move your hands or with delicate tongs into the first pinch and pinch until they are well embedded, then firmly hold the tongs in place; and let the patient bear the pain between their knees, and you must ensure it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After removing the right tooth without breaking it, and if it doesn't snap off, take no tool from these and insert it gently in each part from both sides, and move it as you did initially.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth has been pierced and broken off, it is necessary to fill it with cloths where they were lost; and when you are tightening it gently with tongs, do not break it as you tighten. It is also advisable to open the gum very carefully around the tooth to extract it.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be sure to handle it carefully so you don't break it, and leave a part of it, causing the patient more pain than at first due to the mischief of the root.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And be aware that you do not act as ignorant surgeons do, who break the tooth once due to their haste and boldness, without bringing about what we have discussed. Instead, they often cause this large disease by pricking at its roots or breaking the tooth itself; just as we often want. And when the tooth is removed, wash the head with wine or water and vinegar; and if bleeding occurs, which happens quite often, fill the head with vitriol powder. If that doesn't work, apply the cautery.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the tools, which you are to use for pulling out the teeth first, should have long points and large handles, so they do not double when you pull them out; and these are their forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them have large parts that do not bend during pulling, and be made of very strong iron, and have teeth to hold the movements.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains during extraction, it is necessary that you place moist cotton in the wound with butter for a day or two.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	As long as the joints are softened, then take hold of the pliers called "algifers", which make the patient's knee appear like a well-tended one; and do it in such a way that they resemble a file and this is its shape.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not wish to emerge with all these claws, it is necessary that you uncover the entire flesh right up to the root, and insert the instrument which is called "althali", meaning palmache, as depicted here:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be fine and thick so that it does not break at all, and if the root jumps out through this, it's good; if not, use all your instruments, as depicted hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you assist with this instrument which has two points, as depicted here:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools that are placed according to the spacing of the teeth, and this instrument that seems like large pliers, as shown here:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let this tool not be able to break it, and know that few tools of bone exist; also other tools, which are not counted; and the skillful surgeons find their own instrument by themselves, according to what their operations and diseases show them. For there are parts of diseases where the old did not teach any tool because of the diversity among these and if one breaks part from the carriage or others' bones, or if it rots, then they search for the tools that suit him, which I have said, and assist with gestures, as this is their form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And may they be large and well held to hold the bone so that it doesn't escape, but can be held and removed; and then restore the place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is decay in the bone, and it's small, then find all of this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to its natural form, and the shape is ugly, especially in maiden women, you should know if this tooth was born after another one and it's not in its rightful place, and one cannot pull or grind it: then extract it; and if it's next to a tooth, take this instrument that has this form, which resembles two small beaks, and is sharp from iron on the tip.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the file slowly in my hands for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can be filed, so I file it from half a file as it is shaped:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and similarly like the file used for making needles; and grind the tooth slowly gently in my hands for a while, until it doesn't move till it finishes; then make it flat at the end with all kinds of smoothers, if it's too sharp and it irritates the tongue, so you need to smooth out the roughness until it is even, so that it doesn't irritate the tongue nor spoil speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth boils
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth in front is broken, through percussion or impact, and if the patient can't press on it that he doesn't eat until it bleeds, and you have treated them with medicines to restrict, but this works; so they must be restrained with a gold thread, for silver threads turn green and decay, but gold never changes. And use threads of less size neither too thick nor too thin, according to the size of the space between the teeth; and if you see to incline the teeth, take the thread and double it into the two healthy teeth, then place the diseased ones between the inner teeth if there is one or more, until you feel properly up to the healthy tooth on the other side; then start covering again up to where you interrupted, and pull your hand skillfully and carefully until it doesn't move; and bind your thread at the root of the tooth so that it can't escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then use thread with some pincers, and assemble them, and place them between a healthy tooth, and do so in such a way that it does not irritate the tongue; then leave it like this as tight as it can remain, if it loosens or the threads come undone, bind it again with another thread; should it stay and serve thus for all its time, and this is the shape of the teeth and the arrangement of the two healthy teeth, and the two middle ones, just as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth is dislocated, you put it back in its place gradually, just as we have said; and do not interfere with any forceful attempt which isn't cautious or endures pain, and each time one does not make the shape of a bone tooth of a cow, and then place it at the spot where the defect exists, and bind it like what we have said, and it stays and serves for as long as possible.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	covering the wound on the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	None of these threads come from under the tongue or nature, when one is born thus; or by accident in a stitched wound; and the procedures are such that you work with your mouth towards the sick area, have its head on your healthy side, and lift the tongue. Then cut this nervous thread until the tongue is dislodged from its place, and if there is stiffness or hardness, it's due to sudden trauma, then bend the hook and cut this tightly bound thread; and be careful that the incision does not go too far inward, for the artery is underneath; and when you're done, remove the rose water and coolness, or cold water, then place beneath the tongue a linen tent; and rub your fingers on the sick area each night, so the tongue cannot stick.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if the bleeding starts, you should apply sulfur to the wound; and if there is no blood loss, then use a gentle heat from the cautery; this works well in such cases; then treat with other remedies until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you notice it's of color or blackish or hard, so that the patient doesn't feel anything, don't touch it because it's gangrene; and if it's turning into phlegm, and there is moisture, then cut off the hook, and make a thin incision on both sides, and relieve them from both sides; and if the nose doesn't drain in your operation area, put vinegar over the burnt spot until it's healed completely, then continue with your operation as long as you're using force; then lift the head up and wipe it with oil, and treat again until they’re healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	removal of abscesses from the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	None of the glands in the throat, which are called 'godath', and properly named the two almonds. When you treat them as we have said during division, if they are not healed, then be careful: if it's hard pus-filled spots that are small and white, don't touch them with iron at all.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if they are red and the root is large, don't touch them with iron either, like for blood leakage; but let them bleed until it heals, then you can remove them, or they would burst on their own. And if they are white in color and have a thin root, prepare your instrument to cover them, but first check that the pus has settled and calmed down.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then have the sick person sit in front of the sun, and let his limbs be in their natural position, and let him open his mouth and hold the surgeon's fingers between his hands, and press the tongue all over with the whole instrument, as it is done; and use fine silver or thin steel just like knives.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can't you press the tongue with all this instrument, and you see the abscess, take the thimble and place it in the almond, then pull it down more than you can; and pull nothing from the strings with it, then cover it with the instrument until this shape forms, resembling some forces; and always let the head be bent, one after another, and are very sharp, and made of iron or silver:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument at hand, take tongs like these instead:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And make the incisions on both sides and name them. When you have completed one of the glands, complete the other in the same manner, after which gargle the patient with hot, then cold water and warm water, as long as bleeding occurs, then continue to gargle with water that is hot or pomegranate seeds that are cooked, or bay leaves and similar things until all the pus has been drained. Then proceed with the treatment once it's healed. If any other abscesses develop in the throat besides the two glands, then treat them accordingly as the two glands would be treated similarly.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was inside her throat, namely the small abscess; and I had almost completely sealed off the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe due to the blocked passage, and she could neither eat nor drink, and died if she remained like that for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	The abscess had grown so much that it was necessary to remove two inches by the two nostrils of the nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I acted quickly then, and applied the antiseptic to one eye, after which I pulled it out, removing a large portion of pus. Then made another incision in the other cheek near the nose, and left her mouth open pressing down on the tongue; afterwards inserted the stick into these abscesses, and cut off some tissue, but only a little blood came out. And thus cleared the passageway to the throat for the woman, started drinking water soon after then wine, stopping from further surgery over an extended period; and the abscesses grew back immediately filling up the space I had emptied out until they were quite large; so kept working on this task within her throat cavity: she did not grow as expected; and left those areas, God alone provided for her afterwards.
de l’uve	From the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When it descends into the uterus, and it becomes swollen and long, this is called "perpendicular"; and if it's large and round, it's called "ovum".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is being treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment doesn't help, and you notice that the wound from the abscess has calmed down, and it's subtle, then it should be taken; and the one that's round and not long; and it's bloody or of a reddish color or black, then it is necessary for you to avoid making an incision on it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	So when you see it, according to the way I have explained it with respect to its scent and length, you should place the patient in front of the sun, and press their tongue against the tool as we previously mentioned. Then insert an onion into the ovum, pull it outwards, and remove using the two instruments I mentioned for cutting the testicles.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you not remove more force than the excess which is beyond the natural limit; because if you remove more, it harms both voice and word. And after incision, use what we said about incisions of II almonds, and treat until she is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient fears at the thought of surgery, it is necessary that you apply means for cautery on the sense of fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the method of cautery is by hot iron.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And let the patient place their head in your hand, and then press their tongue against the tool we described or the chapter on cautery, and mix with sharp live vinegar, so that it is neither too thick nor too clear; and use the force of this instrument as follows:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let our head have a hair or where we put the medicine, like in movements of a spoon, and place the tool entirely with the medicine on the eye; and the patient lies still on their side so that saliva and moisture drain out of their mouth from the medicine inside, so that it doesn't go down to the throat and cause irritation; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it onto the eye for half an hour, until you see it relieve and the medicine's actions are calmed. And if you see this, take cotton and envelop it with any tool, soak the cotton in medicine, and place the tool entirely on the cotton in sand, until the cotton dries out on the eye; and do this often, until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry, and rest for four or five days. And if you need to repeat the medicine's cauterization procedure, then repeat it, and after the cauterization, cleanse inside the eye with cotton dipped in butter, and clean off what is left of the medicine; and rinse with cold water, and rinse with gargling until it heals completely.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This treatment is safer with an incision rather than using the cautery; if it's treated by fumigation in this manner, gather lavender, thyme, oregano, rue, chamomile and parsley, and similar herbs. Combine all or some of these into a single pot, put it there, and let it boil. The pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and inside the pot place one tool according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And whether it is made of silver or arsenic, and if one of the shoulder bones, place it in the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the eye via the nose as long as the eye is necrotic; after that repeat often until the eye dries out. Make sure you do not perform this at the beginning of the pus collection process, for many things can happen; and do not carry out this method when the pus starts to drain away.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this tool is not available, take a piece of charcoal and place an eggshell inside the patient's mouth so that it doesn't get too hot; because the eggshell does not let heat build up in the mouth, and together with other treatments it provides good healing.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it clears the throat bone or spine of fish, without any result; if you must do this, take what you can see and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument until you see movement. For anything that does not appear and is retracted in the throat, you should make the patient vomit so that the disease comes out as though it had been cooked in the stomach; by chance if it escapes through vomiting; or if the disease swallowed a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a crumb of dry bread; and tie to the sponge a string, then swallow her; when she comes up to the mouth, she will clear up, and then you pull with force; and if it doesn't come out through this method we've mentioned, take one tool of ash according to this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And make the tools sharp near the head so that they can enter the throat more easily and have the head raised up high; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, letting nothing pass or pushing any bone inward; ensure that the patient pushes the tool when it moves or if something is loose; if you push it down, or pull with strength equally across the entire tool until it reaches full force.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the windpipe
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Never let the patient die from thirst, as I mentioned in division regarding treatment by medicines; and if this doesn't help, then look into the throat of the patient under the sun, and when you press their tongue against the tool I told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the blood, guide it with all care, however small each drop is, or with delicate forceps that suit this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, take a hair comb, and use it on the patient's throat, then proceed with the movement of the comb, make sure to direct its motion smoothly, and repeat this action frequently.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if you bathe the patient in water all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take full glasses of cold water and operate the patient's mouth with it, then pour it into their throat without making them swallow immediately, and move it around with their hands often. And as soon as the water starts to be felt in their stomach, they will vomit.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if she doesn't vomit as we have said, subfuse the patient with essence of sulfur through the instrument that I mentioned for its use in eye treatment; do this many times because it will expel without causing harm.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the way of fumigation is this: you take the pot where there are glowing coals, and place it under a cover that has a small hole in the middle, and inside that hole should be the head of the instrument; then you pour your fumigation, and have the patient hold the tip of the stick in their mouth, seal the mouth so no smoke escapes but goes straight to the nose; and now the nostrils will begin to discharge, if it doesn't do so repeat the fumigation many times; and let the patient suffer thirst, eat salty things and others like these, and not drink water; and then they must exit through this method.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the tool with which we treat the bleeding is such that when it can be seen, it resembles curved scissors for entering into the throat; and has the appearance of a doctor's beak, and it has been sharpened like a lime, so whatever she takes in, she cannot leave; and here see this shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	The appearances of pus discharges are, according to what memory brings after one and another in this book, and they are diverse in perforation and size; and it is done in two ways, where one resembles its appearance itself, and the other deals with moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for those who are inside the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses in the head are different from those in the foundation, and the abscesses in the middle of the body are different from those that come at joints, and each has its judgement in action.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if there are abscesses that should not be pierced until the body is spent according to its completion; and if there are such that it must be pierced when they have grown, and do not spend according to their completion, as abscesses that are around joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come around joints, and it is left until they are rotten internally, by chance if the ligament and nerve of the joint have been corrupted, which causes a contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	For the abscess is within the main limb, and if you delay the puncturing until it's dead, it will harm the main limb. Or it is within the base, so if you pierce or do so until it's dead; and you should not puncture an abscess without digestion having been completed, except for that which is within the base, where pus could spread fully, and be inside, and result in a fistula; and cannot heal in a large scale.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it must be known when the time for perforating the boil that is dead according to maturation, and this is when the pain subsides, and departure of fever, and reduction in pain and heat, and movement and hardening of the head of the boil, and other signs; And you should let the perforation occur a little above the boil location or at the point where it opens, and wherever it appears. And make the perforation long throughout the body, and if the boil is on hands or feet, or joints and nerves and arteries, and all areas that do not have wrinkles.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In such cases, according to that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the fatty part of the body, it's good to wait until the digestion process has been fully completed before puncturing it, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before that, then the body fills with the poison of him and is full of many dirt; and by chance harden its lips and the depths of him.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there are no abscesses pierced across the width of the chest, according to what the body requires.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary to make small incisions, small cuts; and in large abscesses, large cuts, and many slits according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where a knife should be used, and covering; when it has become as stiff as a cloth, and is softened, then one should do as with infants: And if there are those that split into three angles, and if there are those that cover like the leaf of myrtle, as abscesses from angles; and if there are those where you make a round cut, and other cuts and cutting shapes;
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who do not have a head, such as superficial abscesses, it must be fully punctured; and it is required when the abscess is large, and it has collected a large amount of pus, then you must puncture it, but not drain all the pus at that moment, but only a part of it. Then let the abscess subside until to another day, then leave nothing near the opening; do this repeatedly from big to small, until all the pus comes out; even if the patient has weak strength, or pregnant women, or small children, or old and decrepit people.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For when it tries to jump every time with the issue of blood, that perhaps kills the patient, and you do not realize this.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	So avoid this chapter with great caution. When you have made your incision in the abscess, if there is an opening or wound, observe that it's size from the edge of the incision; and should be a full incision where you would use linen or cotton tents; and for large abscesses with many discharges, each must be filled with a tent so they can be placed against each other. And if you cut into the skin part in making an incision and have sutured it together internally, then it should be filled with old cotton or linseed rags without moisture until the third day; then stitch again and continue treating with ointment until it is healed properly.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if blood leaks out during your operation, cool water and easy handling should be used, and oil must cover the area repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if bleeding persists, then apply governance and treatment, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and should it be in water or abscesses, and the area where the water or abscess is very nervous, you should cover the bed sheets and cloths with moistened in wine and oil; and should it be in skin, and the area is fleshy, you should cover the sheets and cloths with wetness in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil, for three days, as we have said; then remove the abscess and cleanse it, as necessary, until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know this universally in treatments of abscesses: now I have told you how one should proceed before treatments of abscesses, and here comes the chapter.
des soros	of the womb
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	In the region of the head where small pus collections come about, and their methods are as in bandages, similar to a jeweler's needlework, and much is like these things.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fatty and of such types where there is moisture too like boils; and there are others that are hard and stony to the cutter, and there's no doubt that they affect an artery without contradiction.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the procedures of cutting involve you proving with all the instrument that is called 'entromissory', from which the form comes afterwards, something it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, do it through its entire length.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture has been drained, carefully scorch without leaving any residue on the skin containing that moisture, because it returns immediately if you leave nothing behind. Then dip a cotton ball in Egyptian ointment if available; otherwise, soak it in water and vinegar, then apply to the wound and let it sit until the next day; and this will cure what remains from the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then continue with the cotton as before, on the second day and the third, until you know well that it does not stay during the night; then apply ointment to treat the wound as suitable, while it is sound.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds in not too much fat, treat it according to this shape, along its length; and cut your incisions, and burn from all sides, and apply your entire treatment directly on the wound where it is; and if the artery goes against you, then do what I have instructed you after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also treat the abscess if it is stone-like, and cut and treat it as I have instructed you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And when cutting the stone-like abscess and moist one, it's easier as they contain less blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if in any of these abscesses or head or there is no moisture and from these future abscesses that I removed or head of an old woman; and found the abscess as hard as a stone, coarse and white, and could not break it; and if one had pierced none of them, one would have made the incision just like with a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	For other abscesses coming from head or ear, should these come from the infants' heads and the roots of the ears, the opening shall be left for as many days as necessary depending on its nature, so that the blood may escape; and they should be treated in accordance with what is suitable.
des scrophules	Of the scrophulae
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times these abscesses occur at the neck, and around the armpits, and under the arms, and do not come to any other part or body cavity, they are round, and they are interwoven with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scab is properly within its fold, as with the nut and abscess on the head, as we have said; and the appearance of these scabs is many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that do not want to obey health measures.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In those that you see with good position in the flesh, and resemble the color of the skin, and mute from each part, not touching the neck muscles or the artery or the ducts; it's necessary for you to handle them properly above, scrape off each part of them, spread out the two lips of the mouth if needed, as we have said about abscesses on the head; then remove slowly and carefully, ensure that you do not cut through the nerve or the vein, avoid any deep cuts and scratching, keep your hands inside without going too far ahead, making sure not to cut what is unnecessary.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and this doesn't let you operate, then put vitriol broil or any powders that stop blood loss into the wound, and keep the wound restrained; leave it like this until the abscess subsides, and the wound softens, and begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the patient is healed, return to your work until it's completed; then follow your judgement if there are still small nodules remaining, remove and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein in the root of the nodule, it's not proper to remove that nodule from its root, but tie it with a double thick thread, and let it come out through it without harm; then dress the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you remove all the scabs, it is necessary that you join together the two lips of the wound, and suture them now, then there should be no excess material due to the size of the scab.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	It is necessary that you understand how to treat its root, draw out the pus, and stitch it up as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scabs that contain excess matter, pierce them where they open up; and pierce them in the same manner as was said previously, dependently, then you apply poultices with ointment and similar things, so that they are corrupted by the corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, then with ointment treatment applied to the flesh until it is healthy.
de squinance	regarding squint
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old ones spoke and wrote about the operation of the throat cutting; but I never saw anyone do it in our land, and this is recorded from their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those with squinting vision, it is necessary that the incision in the throat referred to as "epiglottis" be made; and one should not seek aid for this, because all the veins and the heart are sensitive to individuals who have abscesses either inside their mouth or in the throat or between two almond-shaped structures.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the illness is within the channel of the heart, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the loss that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we wish to split the epiglottis, we should split it across three circles or four small slits through them, between the two circles or by the size of the slit there, not in the cartilage; and this allows for the sectioning of the epiglottis so that no flesh remains, and the vessels are long beyond the cut.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the surgeons are fearful, it is necessary for them to stretch the throat skin across the entire inch (ounce), then cut along the keel until they reach the windpipe; and avoid the blood vessels, should you see anything, and afterwards cut the syphonic sinus, as we have said; and this is demonstrated by the section of the blood stream from the windpipe that jumps forth through the area where the body has been broken, and by the loss of voice; and leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the time has passed since one doubts strangulation, gather the two mouths of the wound as neatly as possible, and all along the skin but not through the cartilage; then administer medicines that produce flesh until it is clean.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim insists that one should not perform this until the throat is completely swollen, and the patient is judged dead, and the defect has been made.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then cut into the epiglottis because the organs cannot move and he breathes through the wound, thus preserving him from death; and to command the old ones was to leave the wound open until the disease's malice has passed, and it has passed in three or four days. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and clean it, as long as it was cleaned; and I will tell you what I observed.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a maiden took the knife, and stuck it in her throat, and cut part of the channels from the lungs; and I was summoned to treat her, and found her as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound, and found that blood was issuing from it, and indeed she did not have a cut vein or exit route but rather her veins were exiting through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I rushed quickly and cleansed the wound so that she could be healed; and to the maiden it was only that her voice grew hoarse, and she returned after this ordeal. Therefore, I say that in tailoring the operation for removing the epiglottis, one should not fear.
de la grosse gorge	In the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Cysts called "neck hernia" are also known as large abscesses of a deep purple color and are very common in women. They can occur in two ways: naturally or accidentally; naturally occurring ones do not involve an organ.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And accidents occur in two ways: one resembles fat that belongs to us, and the other way is like an abscess coming from our veins. There can be fear involved; thus, it's not advisable to create a surgical opening except in cases where it's small, and you thoroughly examine everything that enters: if you find something similar to our fat and unable to reach any vein, you should remove it just as one removes fat, treating its surrounding skin completely; search meticulously and treat it accordingly until it's fully healed.
des nous	from the wound
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many ways there are for this, of which I will say all similarities; and now it is fitting that I state all the differences between us and disease.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that dislocation is characterized by heat and fever persisting until the ebullitions have passed and putrefaction has occurred; thus, the fever and heat are brought to rest.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With us, there is no heat or fever or pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins also like a boil, and becomes large; and are according to two similarities, or greasy, or moist, and much of the color are as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	When you come to the treatment of a new wound, you should first test and inquire about all the instruments known as 'entromissors', according to whether their form matches or comes before or after in the chapter.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the method of incising abscesses in us is that you seek out the moistest part than you find in the abscess, and turn your hands a little bit at a time, until you know that the instruments have reached the flesh, then according to the size of the abscess; then remove the pus, and take care not to rupture it.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If there is moisture involved, let it be in any form, if you make the incision as I said for other abscesses; and should no pus come after the first intervention, know that it's greasy, then cut straight across, and take hold of it with tweezers, lightly scorch it from each side and cover the wound where you did not apply force until you can remove it safely with the needle; and if you are unable to remove it safely, extract it in pieces ensuring nothing is left behind.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if nothing remains, it will keep recurring many times; and even if a little does remain, and doesn't bother you, apply powders that are corrosive but aqueous to the wound, restrain the wound, place hot poultices on abscesses, and treat it with other remedies until it heals properly; and should the pus be large, stitch up the two lips of the wound, and heal the one that is infected by something else.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein is too small or otherwise causes concern, do it quickly and fill the wound with powdered vitriol, and let it sit for two to three days, until the wound begins to heal, and rest the hot bleeding; then continue with whatever has been left over from new treatments.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of entrapped instruments, and there are three ways: large, medium, and small; and if there are three squares that are called 'albaret', one is called 'breb', and there are also three kinds: large, medium, and small, for enclosing abscesses from fistulas; and they are like needles which are used to pluck threads, and they can be made of amethyst glass, or iron, or silver, and yellow ones are more effective than black tacks for enclosing the angles of a fistula; and there are three types: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the slits.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of the forceps are like these, as you see here: large, medium, and small; there are also forceps that have two angles in three ways; there are those with three angles and they are also available in three types; there are those with two angles and one-edged forceps, and these too come in three forms; all of these are necessary according to their usage.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The tip of this you make sharp, and of such that they do not cut force from one side only, concerning which we burn the flesh, because in these cases neither vein nor nerve are cut; and of these penetrators their knives return into handles, so that the patient does not feel them during the opening of abscesses; and there are three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see; and none is used with force except on fatty parts like thighs, arms, nipples, and underarms, and in similar places; and no other small instrument is made like the blades of woodcarvers, according to this shape, on which we stop bleeding.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And it is placed only once at the healthy site of arteries and veins, and never in accordance with this large form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	None of the nipples of some men swell when they begin to become corrupted, until they seem like nipples of women; and they remain ugly and swollen, and anyone who wishes to cure them should do so according to this method from .b. up to .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then remove the fat and apply medicine to the wound, then sew together the two edges of the wound. Keep treating it until it heals. If the nipple leans down and is flattened by its size as in women, cut it into two parts above, through two similar cuts; so that one holds onto the other at the end of each, such that the larger line contains the smaller along this form, from this line .b. up to the line .g.; then remove the skin between the two edges and remove the fat. Follow with what we have said about sewing and powders, as well as what is necessary for treatment until it heals; and if it doesn't heal or the incision isn't fully done due to the discomfort of the patient or bleeding, you must fill the wound with cotton in an corrosive ointment; leave it until it discharges, then remove the fat, and continue treating until it is completely healed.
des apostemes des asselles	removal of abscesses from the armpit
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Wounds that come from around the glands are methods of scrophula hard swellings or when there are nodes, and if they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. until the line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and apply ointment as long as the wound is healing.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are like scrophula swellings, cut them as we have said in cuts on scrophula swellings, and if the wound is filled with pus, then apply a cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	from the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is damaged and the skin above it is sewn together, many times pus comes out from there. And similarly, when the vein is cut, the same happens with a wound and pus; if one knows this that it's due to the artery, then the pus comes out long and fully. When you touch it with your fingers, you can feel it squeezing; and when it's in relation to the vein, there's an open wound appearing outward; cutting such pus is foolishness, especially when it's near the joints and angles or under the armpit or other body parts, and it's very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, one should avoid the iron cure; and in the case of a wound on the head, you should also avoid this. For wounds that result from an artery cut, proceed as follows: Cut through the skin across the entire length, then operate along the veins with incisions, ensuring complete exposure of the artery; afterwards insert a needle above the skin, and puncture it all the way to the opposite side, then bind the artery with two threads according to what I've taught you about extracting two arteries from temples. Then pinch out the tissue between the two threads, until all pus is released, and remove the wound; next provide the treatment that speeds healing as much as possible while the thread remains; if the pus results from a vein, there will be an exposed opening outward after removing it; cutting such pus is foolishness, especially near joints or angles under armpits or other body parts. After providing this treatment, ensure proper ointment until it heals completely; and when the pus is coming out due to the cut in the vein, paint your hand with the pus over the entire skin area that's infected; then insert a needle through the skin you're holding with your hand, puncture it, make two threads double-ended and pull them from the opposite side; then tie the pus as I taught you before; if you doubt whether the thread will come out fine, insert another needle into all parts of the pus at the first needle's incision point, and tighten the threads further with three more. Then cut off excess pus until it does not come out anymore, cut out any remaining superfluous tissue carefully leaving what is tied; finally place a moist cloth with wine and oil on top, then provide treatment with bandages and ointments until complete healing occurs.
des apostemes des ners	removing of abscesses from nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also like abscesses that come into the artery and the vein, abscesses occur in nerves when they are punctured or due to too much work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more often with shoulders and elbows and in all places where joints are present, and it involves discharging pus, its color appears like the color of flesh, and is experienced in various positions without pain; and when it's squeezed firmly, one feels pain in the patient and doesn't pass through well from within but under the skin; and moves very much from all directions, neither forwards nor backwards, neither under nor above, and that which is jointed does not fit to be covered with iron: by chance there would be a contraction; and that which is on top or forehead, makes the skin puffy.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the pus is small, take a pair of forceps and apply them to its root; and if it's large, suspend it at the elbow, then scrape, cut away the bone, stitch up the wound with the skin, and treat until there is no fever.
des grosses boces pendans	And large swellings hang down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	No instance happens in the wombs or anywhere else, and it's a disease that is called "fungus" by its appearance, and has subtle roots, and large seeds; and there are small ones as well as many large ones. And I saw one person who had two bellies that looked more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, they were white, and had a small root, they were split, and corroded by moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I copied and found them in the one weighing 18 ounces, and in the other 6. And in this operation, if you look, the mucus is moist, and the color of the heart is white and moist with a subtle root; if it cuts through the broad spatula, then bring the fire cautery to its presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For when it comes to the surgeon there are many times too large blood losses, and if you do not have courage, then quickly take a cauterizer; and if you see the patient scared and fearful from the incision of the iron, then hold a well-made copper thread, and tie the knot as we said, and leave it two days; and then restrain, and never cease to tighten the copper thread until it heats up, and does not cause pain; and if the roots are large, so that fear gets into them through the belly, but you can well cut half of them, then cauterize so that it does not rebleed; then treat the wound, and make sure you do not cut off the thylulus which is pale in color and lacks a sense and has milk-like appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an abscess that has opened, and I will come to the treatment of gangrene afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	And if you are blind.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	The appearance of the burn comes from the cauterization of the wound or the tear in the stomach, and it is on the belly and there are some burns, as happens in other perforations, or bleeding that starts from veins or arteries according to what was mentioned beforehand, or due to wind exposure. And if it's through the stomach rupture and by the exit of the pus, its color resembles that of flesh, and it's a slight thing without pain, and it opens up from different outlets.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it's due to the opening from the intestines, then it's more diverse, and when you press it with your fingers it comes back and then returns again, and by chance it gets stuck, and swells quite at the entry of the bath and through strenuous work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it's due to moisture, it's a simple matter, and opens well when you press it with your hand, not restraining it; and if it's due to blood, it opens through these signs - the abscesses are large and hard, sticking out according to their quantity; and if it's due to windiness, it sweats at the face, and the works are such that you see if its appearance is due to blood from the artery, or from vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	It is necessary that you let the treatment proceed.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear with it, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if its appearance is due to the intestine or the bladder, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to bleed their alaina, and have it extended completely straight, then cut all around the bladder; then command him to treat with vinegar between your hands, then go inside as far as the area you indicated on the entire abdomen, then extend half of the abscess above all the large uncines; then tie that half with a strong thread or a sturdy silk string firmly, and make sure it is securely tied; then stretch the second half of the abscess over this bandage, and bend your index finger and check for the intestine; if you find it caught by the bandage, un-tie it and bend the intestine out from under the belly; and if you find the bladder, take it at the uncine and remove the excess; and if the artery makes you do otherwise, or the vein, go straight as far as possible in it, then return to your work and take II needles, and tie two threads onto them, and bend the needles into a cross that you pierced; then draw out half of the abscess above the needles, and if you see anything, remove the needles, and let the wound heal until it boils, and remove the dead flesh on its own; or cut off when she becomes tender and boils, then treat as we have said with the remaining parts, and bleed or drain any blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound according to what is necessary, and sew up the wound.
dou chancre	and gangrene
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have discussed the signs of gangrene and how to treat it with medicines, as well as avoiding iron treatment. We say that if gangrene begins in a moist area or in the same place repeatedly, such as in breasts or cooking areas and other similar places, you should remove it entirely when it's just beginning; but for large and old gangrenes, it's not advisable to touch them, because I've never seen anyone recover from them, nor was anyone ever cured of gangrene before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And for the incisions, if it's in an area where you can remove it, as we have said before, you should cleanse the patient of black pus once. Then let a surgeon assess if there is any swelling present, then proceed to cut open that area; this means making sure the incision site is clean and ready for treatment. Next, scrape off all traces of gangrene and hair from around it, and remove everything from the edges as well, ensuring nothing remains. Let the blood flow freely without obstruction, cleanse the wound thoroughly with your hand or anything else you may have on hand, and if bleeding in opposite directions occurs compared to an artery or vein incision, cauterize until the bleeding has stopped; then treat it further until it heals properly.
de ydropisie	From dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have mentioned in the division similarities of erysipelas, and how water assemblage is made, and signs for each similarity, and treatment which is done through medicine, and that which is treated with iron: it's all clearly outlined; and one must not use iron in these two similarities: which means tympanites and yposarche, because this is a life-threatening matter; so when you use medicine to treat the similarity of erysipelas known as 'blanchets' through medicine, and if the treatment doesn't benefit, then observe whether the patient is weak or if they have another disease besides erysipelas, such as stomach solution and similar things; if not, don't use iron because there's doubt involved; and if you see the patient has very strong symptoms, and they only have erysipelas and are neither too young nor too old, then proceed like this: lift the swollen area directly above your hands, and the assistants press the abdomen towards the lowest part of the buttocks, then take the spasmula (spine) and follow this shape:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let there be a division of two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	A point is needed, but it should not be so deep that it reaches up to the intestines when you insert it, and should not be able to pierce; then observe if there's a drop of pus near the intestines: in case this is necessary, make an incision three fingers above the stomach; and if the pus indicates illness related to the liver, your cut should be on the left side of this location three fingers away from the stomach. And if it’s due to bile, it should be on the right side, not allowing for any pus to rest under the cut so that excess fluids don't flow towards the weak area; then pierce all the skin with the instrument and pull, and raise your hand completely within the spleen space as you would while skewering an animal by the quantity of a nail or more. Then puncture the spleen until the pus reaches up to the ninth part from the top, this is the end for water-like pus, then apply pressure, and remove this tool according to its shape:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a fine silver rod, and of an eagle or cat's claw light, and in the middle part there are three small cuts; and if on one side there are three, then two on the other side, and one elsewhere; and the shoulder bone is cut so like a feather, and this is the form of the incision that the writer describes as cutting the feather.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top is the chestnut, so that when the instruments reach the water, they start to come out from under the instrument; empty it then one half or a third of it, because if you empty more than necessary in this moment, by chance the patient might die due to the release of his spirit from the weapon, or he might faint, or he could be close to death; but empty according to its potency, and according to what the dispositions of the potency indicate for the patient, and their pulses; then take the instrument and hold back the water, and it is held now due to the swelling that fills up the small cut which I have mentioned, from where I spoke, that you pierce in this manner; then restart the instrument on another day if you see the patient suffering under this, and draw out a little amount of water; do this on no other day, and keep yourself from doing anything until it stops but just a bit of water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the patient, and leave a little water there, so cleanse it of burial or sand heat, and by much sweating or bathing and in the sun, and if it darkens from drinking; and treat with desiccative medicines until it is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and spleen after the removal of the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Regarding the constriction of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	None of the times children are born without defects in their penis, or if they do have defects, they are small, or they do not occupy their place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is appropriate to quickly pierce all the pus very finely according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then place or pierce the subtle plug of wood and secure it. Keep this for three or four days, until when he wishes to urinate, if you remove the plug, urine will come out, and then put him back in that position; and by chance there should be no need as the urine that comes out does not leave the plug closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	Those whose ears are long, if they have a remedy with the dew of pine, as we said, if it becomes wider.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the ear in their head are blind, for no one is born with an ear at the tip of their penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting up their penis; and they cannot impregnate because the matter cannot reach up to the nose, and it's a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the way of treating it is that the patient lies on their back, and holds their penis head and testicles in place as if they were holding a feather's length, so that the hairs lie flat in the middle, just like it should; and be careful not to let blood flow out many times, and if it does happen, stop it with someone who stops bleeding, and treat the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	The boils of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times sores appear on the penis, and there's a terrible appearance to them; some are bad and others aren't. It is necessary that you weigh them at an ounce and a half, then prepare and cleanse them all thoroughly, place Egyptian ointment-soaked cotton over them; then cure with diaphanicon balm until they have healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the bath is malevolent, with pus and discharge, it's necessary that you bring in the fire cautery to treat it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have completed it, and if the bath is inside the penis, having part within the skin and part outside, it's necessary that you remove the bath which is inside first; and when it is fused, then treat the one outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it together, see to it that the tip of the penis is not pierced, and there comes blackness and corruption in its penis and anus; so one must cut away all that is black and corrupted, then bind it with a paste made from walnut shell, mixed with honey and flour. After this, apply other treatments until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And when there is the discharge of blood, if you apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauteries should assist in two positions together: that is to say, at the discharge of blood and during corruption; and if the head of the penis becomes corrupted or retracted, you must insert a thorn into the penis and let the patient urinate amongst it. And when the skin has stretched over the head of the penis which has become exposed in those who have not been uncircumcised, or because of an injury or abscess, then it is necessary to use the circumcision instrument on its tip, until the ties are freed, and the head of the penis is released from all sides; and if devising this is problematic, you must burn on the foreskin at the tip of the penis and under the skin; then cut them neatly between two fingers, and put a thin linen bandage dipped in cold water over it so that it does not become moist.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not an injury to continuity like other wounds; however, when we perform this work of our own volition and for children, it must be necessary that we do the best job, and cause the least harm for their health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the old did not instruct circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we only have this practice based on what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I wanted the largest part of the masters and surgeons who performed circumcision between the first day after birth and one week later, and for all a newborn; if there was a knot because there are two sheets, and by chance one is placed above and the other below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the wound is covered, and there is double pain, and in the first days after birth the tip of the limb is not secure; and in the trimming of the nail by chance the knife misses the mark and cuts too much into the work, and they are born like this more often than necessary, and I want this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the trimming done with force on all the threads I found the value of experimentation, for the strengths cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you press your hand, cut it in an 'I' shape equally; but let the child's hair be well tied under the skin; and have the manner of the first operation such that you make the child think you are only tying the string inside the penis alone, then let it escape in all manners that you can. Then place the child straight between your hands, and rest your strength on your hands or near your feet so that the child cannot see them or any of the instruments; then push your hand to the penis and blow or pinch, and pull upwards until the head of the penis is enclosed; then clean it well from the dirt assembled around, then tie its first sign with a double string, then tie it closely together. And hold these two signs in place by the second row at pouch and right index finger, fold between these two strings, then raise the pinch quickly and pull out the head of the penis; then let the bleeding stop little by little as this is nature; spread powder over and over the powder with a piece of cooked egg yolk strained with rose water, confit with fresh and rosy oil, and leave it overnight, and cure it further until it becomes well.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The shape of force during creation is like this: the two shoulders should be placed and cut, and the shoulders should also be as large as the arms evenly.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in creation is when the kidneys within are displaced by incision; thus it's necessary that you extend to your fingernail, so that the ribs make an opening; and treat equally; if you cannot hold at your fingernail, then use tweezers, and then proceed.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they exceed three days, and the one near the penis is swollen, let him stay until the openings are alleviated, and lightly scarify; if you can move it as much as you can, and avoid the part of the penis, it will not harm him at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the internal parts of things with powder that we have spoken about in treating powders and if you press too hard on the kidney and it goes above, it will not cause harm. So treat it accordingly as we have said until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	regarding the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	Retaining urine is caused by the formation of stones, or blood clotting, or blockage in the bowels, or from birth injuries, or similar issues we have discussed in the division; and if the urine retention exists due to stones blocking the bladder outlet, then it is required that the patient lie on their knees; and their feet should be placed under their back, spread out their stomach upwards towards the back part of the body, and restrict them so they are not able to move at all; and thus constrains the bladder neck allowing for stone expression above it due to which urine flow is facilitated. If it does not come out as explained earlier, if the patient feels extreme pain, then it is required that you administer extraction with all instruments known as 'syringe', this has its shape: made of subtle thin metal thread like feathers of a bird; and should have the length of a hand and half longer, made subtly thick at the head.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the way of making the urine flow is this: take a double thread and tie it to the tip of the first hair or cotton fiber, then put the thread inside the syringe; cut off the excess fiber until you reach the tip of the syringe. Then smear the syringe with oil or butter and hen’s egg oil, place the patient on a seat, lift the bladder and penis while moistening them with oil and olive oil; then insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then move the penis up towards the opening; then push the syringe in front of the bladder until urine starts to come out. This must be done according to this order unless guided otherwise because she was twisted; then twist every fiber little by little and the urine follows the thread, then squeeze it gently, and correct the urine flow; repeat using the syringe until the bladder is emptied and keep repeating until the patient recovers.
des maladies de la vessie	On diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When burns or blood occur in the bladder, or pus is assembled there, and you see distilled waters and remedies, then prepare with all the instrument which is called "clepsis" (water clock), and its form is:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed and if it has three parts: two from one side, and one from the other, as you see; and let your medicines be such that they soften the verge without addition, so that if moisture can be removed and pushed when necessary; and when you see that your medicines are flowing into the bladder, put the head of the penis in the moisture, and direct it towards the one doing the pulling; if you pull out the moisture from the penis, then push the puller firmly forward afterwards; if the moisture enters inside them and reaches the bladder now, so that the patient feels it; this is the form of subtle cystitis where one flushes the bladder: it's like this:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it can be made of silver or lead. And let the shoulder be positioned higher; and around one breast or where the penis is placed; then take a sheep bladder and place in the moisture that you will use to flush the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts using a well-made double thread, and heat the end of the moisture on fire; then push the head of the catheter into the verge, then stretch your hand towards the bladder until all the moisture is used up, so that the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder. And if you don't have the bladder, take a piece of parchment paper, and make a circle out of it, and pierce it roundly inward; then tie the thread strongly in these parts, then assemble the circle like how one assembles a loop, and put inside what you see from the moisture and water and oil, and tie it into the device; do this as you did with the bladder, squeezing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
de la piere	from the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have discussed in the division methods for stone expulsion and medication; and we have explained the differences between mature stones that cause pain, and all their signs, as well as which stones should be surgically removed; and regarding the bladder and penis; and I will explain this clearly and briefly to you.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone in the bladder often occurs more frequently in children, and this is a sign that the urinary infection has spread throughout its subtlety; and it causes pain repeatedly, and there's a sensation of fullness in their urethra, and they urinate many times, then develop an urge again; and at these repeated urges lies the kidney; and until about four years old, children experience lighter healing due to their condition; it becomes more painful for those who are older, being somewhere between childhood and age; and the treatment is generally easier for those with larger stones than for those with smaller ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient by purging, in order to remove all the feces which are inside.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	Because it clogs every time when trying to cut into the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then hold the patient by their sides, and lift them up moving downwards, so that the stone falls to the front of the bladder, and comes out no longer from its top; then have them sit between your hands, with their hands placed under their thighs, so that the bladder is fully hanging downward; then grab and touch inside; if you feel the stone in space, now hurry to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it doesn't come out completely with the toucher, wet your left hand's index finger, if the patient is young or old. Or wet your middle finger, if the patient is of adult years; and hold in his foundation, and grab the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, snip it off at the neck of the bladder; then press up to your finger, and pull out from where you see to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the attendant to press the bladder with his hand, and tell him to extend his right hand up at top, and with his left hand hold the skin that is near the scrotum in the area where the cut will be made; then he pushes out the prostate gland, which is its shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And cut between those who are between the ribs and the foundation, not in the middle but at the edge of the left snowbank; and stand upright on the stone, and let your fingers be towards or against the foundation, and shape them like a snowball: wide outwards and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large; by chance press so much onto the finger that is against the foundation, that it jumps without effort; know that there are parts of the stone where angles and edges exist: they are sore to pierce; and if in such parts you encounter something below resembling a glistening pebble and rounded, whose exit is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And where there are angles and edges, make the size larger; if it doesn't jump, then you need to tighten with the tongs that resemble a file at their head, in order to force the stone such that it doesn't escape. Or you dig out from under the instrument using a subtle curved tool; and if you can't work this way, then widen by just a little more than half its thickness, and if it's soft on the inside, force it with vinegar; and if there are multiple stones, first break the largest at the neck of the bladder, then proceed upwards, then pull forcefully, and the smaller ones after that, assuming there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if she is very large, then it should be removed, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: or he dies, or his urine starts coming out immediately after treatment when his limbs cannot heal; but nonetheless strive to drain or fragment with forceps until you remove it piece by piece. And once you have completed your task, fill the wound with frankincense and aloes and dragon's blood, bind it tightly, and place a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, over it to cool the abscess; then set the patient up on his side, and do not untie the bandage until three days have passed.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you remove the stitches, rinse thoroughly with oil and water, then treat it with diacynicon ointment and basil ointment until it heals properly.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses expand in the wound and cause corrosion, or blood clots remain in the bladder, and this causes urine retention in such a manner that without urination there is no escape: then you must drain your tools in the wound, remove that blood, because if it remains, it will corrode the bladder and damage it; then elevate the wound with water and vinegar and salt, and assist him in all ways possible until he recovers. And it should be that when you treat him, tie his two legs together and combine medicines over his body.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it's located where the penis leads, stuck in there, and urine can't pass; when treating as I've described, you must cut it many times, and forgive any loss due to this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already gained this experience thus.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron fork according to this form and have three pegs fixed into it:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take the thread and tie it around the penis near the stone, so that it can't come back into the bladder. Then pull out the tool in the penis gently, until you reach the stone; and push the tool into the penis slowly, until it touches the stone. And move the tool with your hand inside the stone gradually, as far as you can penetrate the stone from another side; if urine comes soon, then press your hand on the part of the stone that is still in the penis inside the passage.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it's broken in one place and jumps along with the urine, it shocks the sick. And it hurts the patient greatly; and if you can't do this for any reason that prevents you, tie a thread over the stone and another above it, then put the stick between the two threads near the stone, then pull forcefully, and release the knot, and cleanse the congealed blood in the wound; and treat until it's healed.
de la piere des femmes	From the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It happens that stone is found within women, and if it occurs once, then it is treated carefully, and is forbidden for three reasons: one is perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that no one can find out a woman who is not aware of her condition even when she is pure.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third method is that sometimes one cannot find a woman who truly understands this art of hands; and the fourth method is that the stone in a woman is often deeper than a man's stone, which means it requires a more profound incision and there is much fear involved. And if necessity calls for such action, you should seek someone well-versed in herbs, and place your hand where you find her, and if you cannot find one, then at least do not choose the shallowest option; and bring forward an experienced woman's remedy or a woman who understands part of this art and instruct her to perform what I am asking about the stone; and look very carefully whether that woman is virgin: then she must push her womb outwards, search for the stone; and when she finds it, force it back into her womb and advise her to push her womb down onto the female organ, squeeze both hands on her pelvic area firmly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, it is necessary that she moves it gradually from the entrance of the bladder until beneath, while it reaches to the root of the thigh; then cut on the bone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the knee, where the bone apparatus appears and you can feel the bone in this part; and do not move your hand above or below the bone, make the cut first in a small area; then push out the rib in the waist, if you sense the bone enlarge the wound until the bone can emerge forcefully, and know that there are many types of bones: to say is small, big, rough, hard, long and round, and which have grooves.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you know the signs to determine the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if it is not bleeding, put sulfur powder on the wound for an hour until the bleeding stops. Then return to your work as long as the bone is still bleeding and have with you the tools I told you about in the extraction of stones so they can assist you in your task; and if it does not bleed and it's from a cut artery, put the powder on the wound and tie bandages and don't repeat this method again. Leave the stone and do not remove it, for fear that the patient might die by accident; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the limbs are resting, return to your work as long as the stone remains intact.
de hernie carnouse	regarding fatty hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Watery hernia is nothing else but a gathering of moisture or white pus, which resides in the skin of the kidneys, what contains the egg; and it's called 'pus', and it's not properly on the membrane of the egg if one thinks there could be another egg; and that's the skin under the kidney where we've said white pus resides; and this doesn't have a hole.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the production of this watery hernia is due to weakness that affects the kidneys, and this substance spreads out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And no matter if it comes from tapping on the kidneys, and this moisture has many colors: or it's a declining color to jaundice, or it's without redness, or black, or aquous white, and this happens more; and these are signs to recognize this group. Because if it's white and faded as we've said, then it is pus in the abscesses, I do not last as long as the figure of an egg, and does not open on the kidneys, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if he has moisture in the proper tissue, then it is pus with part of an egg, and because of this we think it's another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the kidneys and the faded white, you can smell it well; therefore when you see to know the color of the moisture, you must test throughout the entire inner surface square, as shown here.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	As for those who come after the introduction, judge by what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we heal it with iron, the patient should be treated according to our ability and their body's recovery; then they must rest on their back, slightly raised at one place, and put some cloths under them. Then sit on their left side, command the surgeon to sit on their right, stretch the leg towards one of the two ribs near the breastbone; then take a scalpel, cut out the skin among themselves until past their nails, and make a straight cut along the skin of the chest till you reach the white inside, and gently scrape off the fat. Then pierce the white part fully with water up to its depth, remove all the water, and then apply the bandages, stretch the cut upwards; do not touch the chest area but only the white part; cut everything or in pieces right across their side precisely, as if done well this will heal quickly; and if the wound jumps out during your work, set it back into place when you have completed the job at the cut; then stitch together both sides of the chest area to one incision, then treat it like other wounds until they are healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find that the egg has been affected by another disease, it is necessary that you tie the suspensory vessels, in anticipation of bleeding; then remove the scrotum down to the suspension point, and extract the egg, then treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the wound is divided into two parts joined together, know that these are two branches; so treat the other part in the same manner as you treated the first equally, then release any blood, and put oiled, moistened wool into the wound. And place another piece of wetted wool soaked in wine and oil over this, and place it on both sides, and cover it with doubled cloths, and bind everything together according to this form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths and use them to bind the torn fabric according to this pattern, having them joined by sewing in the pocket of the breeches. Place one of the shoulder blades on the foundation up to the back, and the other at the part near the elbow; place both shoulder blades over the two joints, ensuring that the rest of the cloth is tightly bound around the loop of the garter; this remedy for the cautery branch replaces iron sizing, and you take a delicate surgical instrument known as a cautery blade. Take out the leather from the joints and heat it up until the white substance contained in the water is revealed; then hold the cautery according to this shape, pierce that center with oncines, and carefully cauterize using this subtle hot instrument.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the operation in all ways that you can, until you have completed everything; and remember that fire should not touch the egg; know that this work is more safe; and keep it free from blood leakage, and be skillful at cutting to size; and if any obstacle stands against you, or pus, or bleeding, or other issue, then treat what obstructs your progress according to what was previously explained.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the illness is severe and cannot endure this treatment due to its horror, then perform a perforation, as I instructed, and remember that when you are sure by the meanings we discussed, that watery matter has accumulated, place the sick person upright on their raised seat; thus puncture in the part under the skin throughout the whole fatty layer, and make the opening long along the body; and if the pus is large, so that all the water flows out; then put cotton onto the wound, bind it, and let the healing water flow out; after which you should continue treating until the wound heals; and if a white surface remains not letting water escape from the wound's mouth, then it's necessary to insert a feather or an instrument used for draining water in dropsy patients, as described previously; and widen the wound, knowing that water will return and be assembled afterwards after six months or later, and once it is reunited like before, then the illness will pass its days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess in the breasts
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the part of this branch there is much fear for various arrangements, which makes it seem best to let it be; and I will tell you about its treatment and characteristics of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	So then I say that many abscesses come from or around the scrotum, and even the testicles; and this happens through chance.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is to know about the sour and fever illness which spreads among people or through tapping; and its color of the abscess according to the body's color; and you cannot find pain, it is a painful abscess; and by chance there may be many painful and pimple-like abscesses with a distinctive color, and it never comes from the heart or swells veins.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it comes from the heart, you can recognize by the distribution of fever blisters when you press on them with your fingers; and you should not touch this area.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Those made of veined skin are known by their layout in the depiction through touch with fingers, and one can well do the sizing on this likeness, and on other creatures; and it is that you count the cows' hooves, then is the egg up top, and the white bone beneath, and release the suspensory from all sides of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is joined with these creatures already born, then it must be that you remove the egg, and take care; and if it is in white bone or inside the veins, then it must be that you release everything from this tension, and roundly take care.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the egg is at the rear of the womb, then you should hold onto it completely and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your tasks are completed, if you dress the wound with wet wool in oil and wine, then continue other treatments until it heals.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess in the breasts
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is a boil enveloped in an apparent wrapping around the hip, with softening of the hooves; and if it moves, the patient feels pain. And the treatment for this illness is as painstakingly detailed here as previously mentioned, yet we will still inform you about its workings according to what the old ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary that you have the patient sit on an elevated seat, then pull them up by their armpit suspensory ligaments near all the vessels near the testicles, and pinch the masters of these vessels, spreading them out. Then cut along the vessel trench sharply wide across from one end to another while they are exposed. After that, sear each side, as we have spoken about in the extraction of arteries in temples; then sew a needle with doubled thread, and tie it at the original place where the blood was, and tie it directly on either end; then cut halfway between them straightly along the length of the body, removing all corrupted moisture. After that, treat the wound as others with bandages, ensuring no vessel is pierced by both sides of a testicle; because this does not cause harm, and if every vessel comes from blood, then you should drain the testicles to all vessels; so that the male doesn't lose his function due to incisions in vessels, and dry out and be unable to assist.
de la routure dou syfac	from the rupture of the syphilitic sore.
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The occurrences of this treatment are by section coming from a fall, or the extension on the belly in the part of the ribs, so that the intestines descend through that opening to one of the lungs; and this opening is either where the fall occurred, or from the extension of it, and come these two ways of causing: by percussion, or by jumping, or by neighing, or by the lifting of a burden suddenly, and by similar means; and the signs when it's due to extension of the fall, so happen gradually and over a long time, not coming suddenly; and the abscesses are equal until towards the front, because the fall presses on the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it's from abdominal section, that a sudden pain begins at the start, and various abscesses are visible, around the skin area, and this is due to the discharge of the intestine and body outside of the abdominal cavity.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the loops descend with the intestine, and are held back, causing great pain for the patient, even when they are pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments involving fear, it is advisable to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	The method of treatment is as follows: you command or guide the patient to pull the intestine back with their hands into the wound from within when it can fit; then wrap it around the neck. Place your hands on their hips and lift their buttocks; then raise the belly up, and remove all the skin covering the lungs along its length; then insert a finger in the opening according to your need for opening the wound, so that it can exit easily; then scrape off the pus from under the skin until the white pus turns white everywhere. Then insert your index finger into the area where the lung is found, between the white pus underneath the egg skin and between the second lung, and remove the one behind the egg and between the second lung; afterwards move with your right hand in the region of the lungs, and place the white pus on top of your left hand, lifting the egg towards the waist; then command the minister to extend the egg upwards, and release the one behind the tying. Check with your fingers if there is any intestine wrapped or hard white pus, and if you find none, push it into the belly when you can. Then take a needle made of thick thread from ten threads, and insert it in the rear part of the pus after the skin covering the lungs; after the waist, remove all threads that appear until there are four threads left; then gather them together in a cross shape and tie the pus with this thread tightly, according to what we have said about being under the egg skin. Then cover the ends with wet wool and place it on wounds, and apply this thread as described above.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And once the white suture space that we mentioned has been cauteryed, after incision, due to fear of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens many times, and let the bandage stay until it heals by itself; and if it takes too long to heal, then immerse it in hot water, and place on it what we have said, until it heals. Then treat the wound with another form of care, until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	regarding fatty hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I never see anyone who dares to undergo the treatment by iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the old ones said it is made like a branch assembled together in such a way that you tie the vessels after cutting them lightly below; then cut it into half and treat the abscess from which pus is working, until the vessels bleed. And treat it as we have said, until it heals completely.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	None of the times come rupture in anger as we said and open the legs; and no pus comes out from the intestines into the coagulants, and if any does come out, it's minimal, and reattach them every hour; and all along, if they remain too long at this point, then believe that the wound or ulcer forms until the intestines bleed; and this happens due to the extension of syphilis in anger as we said, because it is extended, then becomes soft and inflamed around the legs, opening them. And treat it with a cautery as we previously mentioned; and never treat it using iron in this way: and let the patient lie down between your hands on their back, then cut the swollen wound across according to the size of three fingers; and then remove the syphilis which is beneath the skin that follows, take out the rind and place it over the visible part of the syphilis; and press it flat against the belly, then cut both of the visible parts of the syphilis around the rind, and cut one from the other; then remove the tip of the rind, and do not press or stretch the rind nor any other thing as I have explained in the treatment of intestines; then treat it with the treatment for wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you dress the wounds, if it cleans and heals the wound, until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The stomach is constrained, and does not show any sign in the operation, and the cauterization burns nearby in this area, and closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	from the softening of the skin around the genitals
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin around the genitals becomes soft in some men, because the parts inside soften and it can be seen; when one wants to treat them, it's necessary to make the patient lie on their back with the softened skin on top of natural skin; then join the two halves together at a seam, and if you wish, sew off the excess softened skin at three seams or four securely; then cut between the seams, and treat the wound like any other, until it heals, and stitch the sutured skin.
dou chastrement	about sexual abstinence
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	You know that punishments are prescribed in our law, and because of this I would like not to speak about them in this book; they are only necessary for two reasons: one is that a person must be able to answer when asked something about it and know how to treat it; and the other, because we often need to punish some animals to help us, such as goats, sheep, cattle, and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	So I say that punishments are done in two ways: either by attraction or through breaking.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In this way of doing it through attraction, we make the animal sit in hot water until its horns become soft and flexible. Then we take them with our hand while they recover and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	In the process of castration: you need to mark out the beast, then squeeze its mammary skin on your left hand and tie up the hanging parts afterwards. Proceed with each animal individually until all have been well scorched over the fire; ensure no hole remains by syphoning off and removing the fine secretion that accumulates between teats; this way of castration differs from one done through attraction, for when attraction is used there might remain some traces of mammary glands in her, causing her to crave lust. Then treat the wound until it heals completely.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphrodite can be divided into two ways at home: one is where between the two openings they resemble the natural figure of a woman, or that it has hair, and sometimes in this case urine is produced.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	The other way is for women, having one opening like a penis and two openings.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment of the wound and the cut is that you treat all stitched areas just like other wounds; in the second way, for men whose urine jumps off the skin of the buttocks, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	Of the warts
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Tattooing is an art applied on the natural part of the body until it becomes too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, which is its treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you dye the excess of the tattoo with your hand or with onions, and do it gently; don't go too far around it so as not to bleed internally, then cure it with another method until it heals. And for another mark that appears at the mouth of the vagina, and the anus, and accidentally jumps fire, and is like a cow's head, hence they called this ancient disease 'cow sickness'.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you must handle it, as we have said about the scabbing process, and the treatment until it is healed.
de erratique	Of cautery by fire command to the ill one that he leaves the hairs until they are long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic is if the nature of the woman is not fully understood or she lacks certain characteristics, or it naturally occurs by birth, or accidental through sickness that has come upon her; or it's due to obesity, or subtle or dense fluid, and is distributed throughout the body in the thorax, ribs, under the arms, wherever it may be; and one should consider the conception and childbirth, and sometimes even the flowers of pregnancy; and knowledge about this requires observing the signs on the face.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the injuries are noticeable nearby, then look at your arms or to the waist.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it's due to subtle syphilis and is near the kidneys, then hurry, here's what you should do: place your two index fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back, spreading out her legs. Then form the two kidneys until the subtle syphilis is properly positioned over the injuries. Next, take lint and oil it up before placing it on the kidney region. The woman should rest in this position every day until she can connect (heal) it.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the hard, thick node appears, it is necessary for you to grasp it like a leaf of myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it's a hard node from childbirth, suspend it and grasp it; have hemostatic medicines for stopping blood, such as myrtle leaves, dragon's blood, incense, mixed with enough eggs. Then apply a wide poppy stalk, so that the wound cannot heal together; do this for a long time, then cover it with a linen tent. Afterwards, perform other treatments until everything has healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the uterus it is from childbirth, if it's necessary to handle according to this manner, if there are attached abscesses, they should be treated.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the infected abscess in the uterus, one should not touch it with fire.
des emorroides	Of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Bleedings are openings of veins where without proper custom or skill, and when the bleedings become old they turn hard; and we have already mentioned in the division similar examples, and their symptoms, and I will now discuss those that indicate healing.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that the bleedings and the hard ones, when they occur internally in the anus, do not appear to touch them by smell, except for when a cure with iron is applied.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the mouth of the anus can be felt and those are what you can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore, you should put the woman in a cold house, then place the altar of the pliers above her, and the cross under her roots, then powder with medicines to restrain bleeding such as comfrey, dragon's blood, and incense, and similar things; then bathe her feet at the edge for an hour, then put her in cold water; and if bleeding remains, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and peel from apple pips and galls and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and almonds, and make it into a plaster on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops bleeding, that's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, make him use suction cups on his back and breasts without cutting them. Then take wool and the moisture in the juice of plantain or the juice of agletier with old wine, and apply it to him.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess rests, treat the wound with ointment until it is clean. The one called "albathir" is red and resembles a hard head, if it needs to be treated as I have described the lethul; then treat it until it is clean.
des apostemes de la marris	Dealing with abscesses of the mucus.
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many methods of abscess come in the female body, such as gangrene and stone abscesses and herpes and ulcers and fistulas and hemorrhoids and fever blisters, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	So then it is necessary that I say in this treatise about the pus coming out of the marrow, which is not among the pus that sticks to the bowe; and if you want to understand the work of iron, look at whether the pus is agitated at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and if it turns red when you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	So do not hurry to pierce but let him die until the pain is relieved; and then place the patient on his seat, with two small seats where he can lean, supporting himself on his back and assembling his legs towards parts beneath the knee; and spread out his arms over his thighs and tie them well with a strong bandage; then guide the patient to the right side of his body, and bring the tool used for working on the marrow into place from the mouth of the patient, from which comes this form; so when you see the tool being brought into place, make sure that its position at first is to determine how deep the marrow goes, so that whatever enters through the tool does not go deeper than it should and cause injury to the patient; and if the tools are too large, cover the depth of the marrow with cloths, so that the tools do not cause discomfort; and let him place the funnel of the tool above, and sharpen the tool.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess is opened, and one lets it drain with gentle hand, then it should be covered at the head, on the wound's edge. And when the bowel has been emptied, then it is fitting to put in the wound oiled-soaked cloths or oiled-pressed oils; place the cloths so they lie against the wound’s border and cover the margin with oiled cloths underneath a clean, moistened cloth in water or cooked vinegar; then after two days of balm application until healed, always lift out the margin and wound using an aqueous solution of honey and then of water or cooked roots of lettuce and long-leafed aristolochia; afterwards apply balm again.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is being treated with maris, then it is fitting that you avoid cooking with iron, but treat it as we have said in the section on treatment.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Proficiency is first in knowing the form of natural childbirth, and these signs are as follows: when you see a woman preparing to give birth and desiring to smell something, then the child begins to exert force to emerge. At this point, you know that the delivery proceeds according to its natural form and emerges through its head, followed by its body; and when you see these signs, it is appropriate to gently press on her belly so that the child comes out quickly. For when they descend through their head, the body follows them, and is born cleaned of its excesses via proper delivery care; anything else does not occur naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it happens at no time through its bones, and emerges from the body or the shoulder, and hands, or through its belly, or in the groin, and is converted by chance through its neck, and through other malicious shapes; it requires that a midwife be wise and subtle in these matters, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the shapes as to how one should assist her.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	When the child comes forth through its head by natural outlet, and the woman labors heavily in childbirth, and her strength is weak, make her sit on a stool or have women hold her; and from this nature where fenugreek has been cooked, then place the midwife between her hands with the small spoon that follows here in form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	And cut the second [infected] part, and remove as much of the moisture that is contained inside; and press on the woman's abdomen until the child descends. If it does not descend, then one should treat the woman with fennel seed decoction mixed with safflower oil; afterwards, have her drink and inhale camphor, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: thus the child is expelled now.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if these two hands come out far, you should gently pull them in and out; and if they can't enter, place the woman on a stool and raise her feet. Then lift off the stool from the ground, and cut the woman as she's being lifted so that she doesn't relieve herself. And if neither hand can enter and the child has died, take a knife beforehand and extract the baby, then pull equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	From the birth of the child from its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child is coming from its feet, what should be done is to push it up high; and then turn it little by little, until it becomes equal; then take hold of the feet and spread them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	Can't he jump up to his hips, if the command is given, and makes him snort with consideration; if it jumps further, may God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it doesn't change like what we have said, if you turn it a little bit at a time, as long as it follows the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Therefore, handle it lightly.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it doesn't jump as we have done, say take a muscillaige of high altitude, and oil of sesame, and gum that has been melted, and grind all in the mortar; and place this ointment inside and outside the woman's nature, then make her sit in warm water until under the ribs; and when she is moistened thoroughly, have her wear a mirrre collar, and put it on her, and leave it on for an hour; then make her sit on a stool, then make her snort and restrain her mouth and nose, and touch her belly lightly, because the child is jumping now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From the birth of the child upwards to his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the baby comes in this form, gently place its hands gradually and gradually; then hold its head on its neck, and have its feet hanging down below, and lie it somewhat sideways in bed; and bend its hands gradually, then hold its hands on its belly, and lift its knees off until she is well situated below; and if the baby does not jump, take its feet firmly and give a strong push, then move its head upwards, then thrust your hands; and pull the baby gently and gently; and command the woman to pray as long as the baby comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the birth that occurs when a hand comes out during delivery.
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It's necessary to engineer in bringing back the hand: if you cannot bring it back, make the woman stand up and walk; if she can't walk, have her lie down on a bed and lift her legs firmly. Then prepare the massage that I've described. And if there's no childbirth, make her sit on a chair, then try to guide bringing back the hand. And treat the baby according to its natural position, and have her sneeze, and command her to pray as long as the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the issue of the child at its neck, and spread its arms, and its face turned towards the back of its mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It's necessary that the barber clean his hand, then turn it gradually and gradually, and gently apply it. And when they are equal, place them on the nature of muscle movement up and oil, as we have said, then command her to move gradually; and once you've done this, make her stand at the stool, and command her to kneel; and make her hiccup.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same manner for all the second half
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it proceeds in this way to its full extent, until the second part is completed, then the second part should be with you up to the nail; and as long as the moisture is emptied out; and if the baby can be found both on their face and around their neck, then have them breastfeed without holding back, and let not the baby die; then push the child inwards, until you have placed it correctly, and command the woman not to kneel at any time: then gently stroke her.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the passage of the twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	You know that twins are born often, and sometimes three or four at a time; and this is not an unusual thing, it just happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two things are extracted and do not live, if you ask; I know this, that they multiply and are exposed by the syphilitic affection which devises them, which is bound to the blood; and none of them emerge naturally as all under one, just like we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they emerge forcefully, with the treatment as we have said, and it is of the subtle fluid, perform what she does right away and lightly; and do so in such a way that it contributes to healing.
de plusors enfans	of multiple children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	None of them are formed in the Maris I through XV or more than this, and they are all shaped like children by the measurement of their glorious humor, and it is necessary that the fluid know all this, for such a thing might happen; do so according to what is fitting.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman with dead fetus or belly issues, as I explained in the division section, and if it doesn't come out, forcing manual work; it's necessary that you know whether the woman is healthy or has faced fear of death; it's important that the woman lies on her back, her shoulders are lowered and her legs raised; then apply two parts treatment on the abdomen, if she is bound to the bed so she isn't treated during childbirth; next rub the wife's mouth with moist oil using almond paste and fenugreek seeds and flaxseed powder; then grease her hands with these oils and pastes; then gently put it on the wife, then place the thumb nails as far as they can be useful to this process, and take care that the child is dressed for its descent onto its head; if insert the nail in its eyes or neck or mouth or palate or under beard or collarbone or near ribs, and if the descent happens by feet, it's inserted or a knife is used at midcosts; it's proper to trim the nail with his right hand, put the handle between his left fingers, and grease it lightly on all sides, and insert the nail in none of these areas that we've mentioned until he reaches the empty place; this is the shape of the nail:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then find another bone, or the third one if you must, so that the extractions are equal; and then move them equally from side to side, so as to facilitate extraction, and ensure that the bones have teeth for gripping when needed, as this is how it should be done.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if any part remains, if it has lost some of its senses from that place, and bind it in this part, and remove the other part; and if no part remains, then place this bone or higher up, do as follows until everything comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be pulled back due to squeezing, then you should cover it with a cloth until it completely comes out; then cut in the joint of the sole or at the cut line, and similarly do this for the other hand, and for both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the child's head is large and it is entangled in the exit, or if it has an assembled sharp point, then you should push the thorned spatula between your fingers, and place the point and extract the sharp; or pull it with the tool called 'almidach', from which its form comes along with the tools or chapter that follows this one; and thus do the same for children with large heads naturally; and then pull the bones with force using tweezers, and if the head jumps out quickly and stays in strength, while the moisture is inside; and if it cannot exit, remove pieces of it as you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then puncture until the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the swelling is on his feet, it causes light pain, and the flow towards the mouth of the vein is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is entangled in the belly or udder, then you should extract by pulling out the skin roll covering it on the hand; and pull the belly or the udder as far as the moisture is exiting. And if any other member is osteitis (inflammation of bone), and the child remains, then force your thumb in from the backside of the cow's mouth, and pull until you reach the mouth of the teat; then force out the quarter or halves, and pull with strength; and if the mouth of the teat is narrowed by a clot that has come up, it doesn't suit to try and push; rather, it suits to administer things moist and greasy; and apply ointments there, and soak in a liquid softener and moisturizer.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is on his side, and you can put him level, then follow what we have said about the live birth infant; and if it cannot be done, then take the fetus apart piece by piece, leaving nothing of the second stage.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, follow what we have said about the treatment of pus-filled blisters that come in marriage; and if there is a discharge of blood, then it should be treated with water, restraining it, and apply other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whom there had been an abortion of a fetus, then examined another on that spot, and found it also to be abortive.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time he developed an abscess in his mouth, and it inflamed so much that when opened, it began to cause severe pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was summoned for the treatment, and I thought for a long time, and couldn't find a way to heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I placed on a strong plaster, and out came a bone, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very surprised because the belly should not have any bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If I thought they were bones from a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I examined the wound, and in my hands until the woman was at her best condition; and kept the woman long in this state, and it became a bit of blood from below. And I recall having written this chapter only because when the masters find an unusual thing, they should know how to provide assistance.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To return the arm to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Following is the form of the presser, which the books refer to; and in two turns for each shoulder at four joints.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Always, the horns should be more delicate than the restrictor and made of wood or boxwood. And the mouth should be twice as wide as the trunk at its base, and the branches must be long one palm and a half; and in between the two trunks there should be two joints of this same trunk, which are firm on each side, about half a palm from front to back or slightly more. And these two joints are set into the mouth of the vice so as to open when you turn the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, resembling more delicacy and lightness, should be made of a boxwood or ebony trunk according to the shape of the pliers; and it must have two horns at its base. As you see here, they are each one palm long and about eight inches wide; and when you observe the vice fully open with all the instrument, place the woman on her bed, her legs hanging down and her legs spread apart, then position both joints together in the vice, holding the head of the tool between her thighs. Then work your hand over the whole instrument just as you would do with the pliers similarly, according to how you see the mouth of the vice open, until she gives birth as she wishes it.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	All this instrument is well mounted and has multiple similar counterparts; and when you have them all set up, the work progresses more quickly, and they are higher for their size when compared to others.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not breathe with the tool when you have equipped it, because your need is unacceptable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the secondine is retained during childbirth, it should be commanded to the patient to hold back their urine, and then have them hiccup with a cold drink, and keep your hands on their mouth and nose; and if she jumps out of this, all will go well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If this does not work, take honey or butter, and place a lid or cover on the pot, then put in herbs that can open her mouth, such as hellebore, rue, anise, chamomile, cinnamon bark and centaurium; all these herbs, or any of them, are cooked or boiled in water over the fire. Then place a stick or butter inside the pot lid, and the other end in the mouth of the pregnant woman, and let the steam rise inside her until she hiccups, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If you jump to the next one quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this cure, and is not forceful, then instruct her to moisten her left hand in oil of sesame or muscilliage of highland grasses, and then apply the paste naturally, and wants the second one; and when she finds it, take hold of it gently and gradually straighten it a little bit, so that the ring does not get stuck during extraction. But you must lightly move it to the right and left, and then pull; if this happens and it loosens off.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the ring is too narrow for her finger, as we have said, there's a cure for sneezing and herb fumigation. And if she doesn't find relief from everything we've said, you mustn't rush into applying medicine; however, it's necessary that whoever is by the mouth of the ring ties it to the woman's wrist, then gives her an ointment enema of tetra-formula medicine; she'll apply and recover, finding strength. But even so, if there comes a foul smell in stomach and head, and irritates her skin, one must be careful with the application.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore, the use of suitable fumigations is necessary: none of the old ones have proven the efficacy of fumigation with sowthorn and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument used to fumigate a woman during retention of flowers and secondine is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is to see a semblance of a cane, and place the subtle head in nature, and the wide shoulders on fire; and let the fumigation be over the coals, and the leechcraft until it is extinguished, then start another.
de percier lou fondement	of piercing the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not have the foundation perceived, but instead are deceived by a subtle syphilitic infection: thus it is necessary for the child that she pierces this syphilis according to its nature, and does not allow her to develop an acute ulceration. Protect the place where she doesn't touch it; then apply moist wool soaked in wine and oil, then continue with the ointment cure until it's healthy.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt it won't re-attach, then apply a piece of treacle, and let the area heal for days, and remove it when the child starts walking in the chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And always remember the sudden healing of wounds or abscesses; if it is necessary to treat this suddenly, then do as we have instructed with treacle.
de la fistule dou fondement	From the fistula from its base
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that originate from the foundation are swelling, and swellings that originate above the foundation or in the space of two parts, either for one fistula or multiple; and when that swelling is old, if it leaks, and accumulates white or subtle pus, and such fistulas tend to be permanent; they can be identified by observing whether there's diarrhea or windiness when the disease causes diarrhea, and occasionally moving from one place to another.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if the fistulas penetrate up to the bladder, and halfway down the penis; and reach up to the knee joint, and up to the root of the scrotum.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one comes to know the fistula persists at the foundation, and does not persist: and it is that you bend your index finger or foundation, and you insert a fine needle or spider's leg or iron pin into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there be twisting, should you insert a fine tentacle, or the hair of a horse, until you feel the tentacle or hair on your finger; and if you do not feel it, and no discharge, nor wind, nor worm comes from it, as we have said: know that it does not pierce through; so hasten to treat it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is nearly to the bladder or nearly conducted by urine, if the urine jumps out of it and cannot be united with medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it's pierced up to the joint of the leg, then you'll notice a flow reaching as far as the middle. If there is no twisting and the pain occurs within the wound itself, it means that it has penetrated deeply, and it does not benefit from medicine or immediate treatment through ointment; and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure other than effort, and foolish endeavor of those who interfere with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In this neither Persian nor old method, there is an expectation of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and that the patient lies between your hands on their back; and lift their legs up to their thighs, keeping their thighs inclined towards their belly; then place a spider tent or a snail shell if there are twists, until you know where the tent comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain deep in their body, it is necessary to place your index finger there. If you then sense that the tent has pierced, and if you can feel beneath your fingers a syphilitic sore or pus, then you know it is of Persian origin; if no treatment works on it, then it cannot be cured.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	Still, one can often successfully treat some, but this happens rarely. And with the aid that we perform, if you heat the delicate cautery according to the width of the fistula as previously mentioned; and then apply it fully hot in the fistula, until it comes out from under the foundation. Repeat this process two or three times, until you know that these sores have been burnt, which resemble a feather of an owl; and then treat with butter for moist tentacles until those sores have disappeared, and then apply ointment to seal the charred areas.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it's like this, then it's well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If it is like this, nothing else can be done; and if you try this method, not reaching to the membrane at all which is or becomes the foundation, and in between your finger and the tent you have an abundant layer of flesh or syphilitic tissue, and when you see the fistula beneath that layer within the healthy area; if it's covered from the beginning of the fistula, push inward before the tent, and then apply the cautery afterwards until it reaches the tip of the tent; and remove the tent, and allow it to drain. Then cleanse those swollen tissues that resemble a bird's feather, leaving none behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if it doesn't affect you, and there is a cut between you and the wound, then apply either a fire cautery or a medicated ointment.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cauteries combine two good things: this means, the burn of these swollen tissues, and the evacuation of blood and drainage of moisture; then treat wet tents with butter or ground substances, until they boil out, and the burned tissues drain into the boil. Then treat the wound from joined, hardened flesh, and are dried medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, if it heals and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes just up to the edge of the foundation, and is removed from the body, then cut at its base or foundation, and inquire about it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tentacle, and there's II within the mesh or syphilitic ulcer or sores, when it's about to pierce, if there's only a way of finance and hope, through the administration of one of III methods: or you cauterize it as we said, or you pull till the bottom, or if you can squeeze if I put in tentacles and cure as first; do not go too far beyond this limit, to ensure you don't pull out what holds the foundation, and allow eliminations to happen naturally; then treat, as we've said; by chance if it's healed, or you remove that covering and clean after it has been pulled from under the ground, or through attempt or another instrument pointed; then cleanse the charred flesh that's within the wound, as much as possible; then study how to heal the wound, and maintain the pus in the part below the foundation: if it is a lighter matter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And no time are fistulas according to this manner: and when you pinch the tent in the fistula, and it is where the bottom touches the leather above, if take a tent pierced through the head following this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And I pierce two threads intertwined together, and push the tent peg along the entire length of the thread in the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it's Persian in the margin under the foundation within, then extract that thread of that torn one, as you pinch your thumb or base; and pull the head on the thread, and join the two ends together, and hold them to each other, and leave it for one or two days; and do not hold it again until the thread fits these parts that are between the two and intertwine; then treat the wound until it is healed and cured.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If there is a fistula that does not pierce, make it pierce through all the ways you can, as long as it's not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For there should be no need to make the insertion too deep beyond what is necessary, and then treat it, as we have said, until it heals properly.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spiny surface used for making the fistula is much and single, with digging on one side; and on another side no, because you neither fit nor should not fit this, as you see here:
des emorroydes	Of bleeding injuries
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Emorrydes [galls] occur in two ways: either they are within the foundation, such as a grain of resin, and there may be small or large ones, and they remain inside the foundation and cause bleeding. If there is only one or more of them, and they have left the foundation towards the head of it; but those that have left do not contain much moisture, and still have a little bit of yellow water or a little blood, and they take on the color of flesh; and for treating those with the galls inside the foundation, you must instruct the patient to expel them through chambers as far as the foundations come out, until the filaments are seen; if you hurry, use tongs or keep it by your nail, then cut into its roots. And should one gall not be able to be held due to moisture, take it with a cloth or cotton wool or a piece of camel's wool; and extract them with your fingers, then cut them, apply some warm powders that can replace the cauterization powder; you must cauterize them as it is said or mentioned in the chapter about cautery, then treat other treatments until there is bleeding. And if the foundations do not allow to come out, leech the patient with leeches biting and sharp for washing what is at the foundation, so that it may come out openly; when the patients heal, and when their filaments are inside the foundation, treatment is light; and you must grasp them by your nail or tongs, then cut them, treat them as we have said until they heal and fear knife incision.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you sew according to this manner: take twisted thread and place it in a needle, then pull the thread over and make the needle pierce from another side, then twist the two ends of the thread around the needle, ensuring it's wide; then hold the thread properly in form, tie the thread firmly afterwards, remove the needle and do so for all others, leaving some to drain away any excess blood; then place under the foundation a moist cloth or an ointment pad on top of it, place over the wound, instructing the patient to rest; and leave until they bleed out completely, once they settle, give oil treatment and other treatments until fully recovered.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	do drying through sweat or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times, there is a drying in the intestines and due to the nature's compulsion, and when the disease is old and medication does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you scrape at the tip of a spike or on your nail over the skin above, which does not allow moisture to penetrate; then treat it until it dries out as it should; and if it doesn't dry out, redo the scraping more vigorously than before, until it begins to heal and is scraped off; then treat it until it fully heals.
dou fremit	with shaking
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	A small sign is formed before the body and goes throughout; and every time the breath leaves it, and one feels it also like a death shudder, and comes to all parts of the body, and more at the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the treatment is that you take a cane of goose feather or a strong vultul feather, and place this stick over the shudder, until the purple circle surrounds the entire shudder. Then turn your hand on the whole stick until you grasp the entire circumference of the shudder and place it inwards, and uproot the shudder from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see it, do this to a spider's hair or iron according to this form, and let them be slender underneath and piercing above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Don't pierce it, for you will hold onto both ends and squeeze it firmly. And if you see the twitching (of the wound), so like it is in front or chapter of the cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	in the shape of a bladder
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never make a bladder of silver or tin, or melted spider; and never make these small and large instruments according to their intended uses.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those then are treated in the care of children and those who are weak and painful, being small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the bladder is small on top and large below, or the belly is arranged in this way:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and there's an inconvenience where the belly is twisted, as you can see, and the intestines are pierced through. And it has two holes on one side and one on the other; and put medicines in the belly of a beast or parchment, and pierce it all around with small holes. Put an inch of space between each hole. Then weave into these holes a thick thread of raw silk twisted in X or Z shape inwardly, and sew the belly like a goat's skin. And once the medicine is inside, bind it to the tool fronted by a strong string, then enemas; this forms a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine neither be too hot nor too cold, and grease the head with oil or yolk of egg, or similar thing, then gently rub it in. Then the healers press his hands together, while he is able to see everything, until he sees nothing else, then remove the lump, and lift up the patient's legs towards his face, and if the medicine appears, take it out as much as possible; and if he sleeps a whole night, this will be a greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you have diarrhea due to a bowel obstruction disease, and the medicine hastens to come out, then repeat it until it is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the bleeding is from the source or base, or the abscess, even if it's as subtle as for an infant; and this is the shape of the subtle lump on which the skin is held.
des plaies	from injuries
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have discussed the treatment of wounds in the previous section; now we will discuss hand care and medicine according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I state that wounds are various depending on how they were caused, and where they were inflicted, as well as the reason for their occurrence.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The reasons for injuries are due to blows from stones, the size of a sword and a knife, or from spears, sticks, or arrows, or other similar things; or according to the nature of the body, such as a wound on the neck, or on the head, or on the chest, or on the abdomen, or on the liver, and similar parts; and I will tell you how to treat each wound, starting with simple injuries to the head, because the memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes or bone injury occurs and the bone is not broken, you must be cautious to ascertain if it's due to stone or similar issues, and the skin has completely been torn open and the wound is large, and you slightly doubt for pus formation: If such is the case, take immediate sanguination of the cephalic area itself even if there is a little blood from the wound. And treat accordingly depending on the part that's removed; let the patient drink full of wine and eat heavy meat and provisions afterwards.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if they do not wish to bleed, let them reduce their meat intake, and do not drink wine nor eat heavy foods; and place the wound with oil-soaked cotton or rose water, or in wine that has a constricting effect. And if there is no pus present, place it on the wound, provided it's fresh and its blood hasn't been disturbed by air; then apply the powder I will mention shortly. And if the wound gets infected, apply some ointments until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like that of a tailor's cut and such, and the edges cannot be brought together with stitches, then join them by suture, as I would say about wounds in the belly, through suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound exposes bone, it may stick but only for a little while if it is handled; then treat the wound with medicine, restore the hard flesh instead of skin, and instruct the patient to consume large meats such as testicles, cooked wheat, and similar items.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find or suspect a skin infection and it does not reach the bone, remove the infected part entirely, then treat with anointing. And should there be blood vessels in the wound or vein that cannot be stopped by medicines alone, you must cut out the vessel, and if it's found to have been dislocated, tie it with a thread; and should this not prove beneficial, apply heat cautery to it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and you should put this powder on which bonds together like when the heat of it has spread.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the way to prepare the powder is as follows: take one part of incense; two parts of dragon's blood; three parts of living charcoal, and finely ground it, then apply this mixture to the wound, compacting it so that the air can circulate well and adhere thoroughly to all its blood; then tie it firmly in place, leaving it undisturbed until it doesn't swell; because medicine should not be removed while it's still healing.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And this is done only once with charcoal alone, when one does not have the incense or the blood of a dragon, but that the surgeon has cleansed the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the stomach has caused the wound to open while in this state, surely do not apply this powder; but apply some digested ointments instead, or oat flour mixed with water and honey, until it stops bleeding; then continue other treatments until it heals.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the bone breakage comes with the wound and it is small, you should use fine probes to insert; I will tell you about the fractures of the head later.
de la plaie dou col	from the wound on the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	This wound comes from the neck and it is simple, if there is no difference between this and that on the head, but if the vein or artery in the neck is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it's the nerves, leave only the dressing and don't put any restraining thing; as this harms the nerves and causes them to recede. Don't apply anything cold on the wound because nerve substance is cold and has continuous communication with the brain, which is the highest member of the body; but use a warm medicine like rosewater in water or mixed with rose oil, and bathed cucumber also in water, and other metallic powders as per this method, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, so that it needs to be bound tightly, then treat until it is clean.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and filled with blood, then pierce or go lower than there; and if a vein is cut, and bleeding ensues, then open it up, repair it, and cauterize as necessary; and if the spine of the neck is cut off, or bones, and the way is guarded, through which meat flows, if you place bone above the windpipe, and do not touch the throat but place it according to its natural shape; and then tighten in the appropriate manner, and leave for a few days, then treat with desiccated ointments until healed; and if there appears an impression in the bone, then take; and if there are pieces of bone, all you can remove them, and these that you cannot remove, let them wait as the wound heals, and drain and heal from its source; and if the wound is fresh, then apply powder to the powder I mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there's bone in the wound and there's a sinus, treat it as I have said in this chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	from the wound of a spear or a knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it's from a spear or knife and the wound is deep, observe if the air flows out of the wound without any patient resistance: this means that the injury is fatal. And if it isn't too deep and there's fresh blood throughout, don't apply powder or bind it right away at first hour, because the blood won't clot properly due to moisture escaping and re-entering the body, making the patient ill; instead put a curative ointment on it and bind it twice a day. If you have no ointment, place old cotton in the wound to soak up the moisture and let the patient rest over the wound for 3 days, or maybe 4, or more. If there are no spasms or heart tremors that indicate further damage, then when you see good conditions and know the injury is saved,
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat with various remedies and other treatments as long as there is blood flow. And if it cannot heal or function properly, immediately realize that there's an abscess; in this case, treat as you should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut and it's simple, or worse, or behind the back, treat based on who's treating. If it's large, use stitches; if small, use powder; and if it's close to the bone, or has been left in place, make decisions on whether to remove the injury or let it heal by itself. If not removed, allow the wound to fester until extractions can be made; and for other wounds on other members, make decisions as we have discussed.
dou derrompement dou ventre	Regarding the protrusion of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The operations of the abdomen are large, medium, and small. A large wound can involve any part of the intestine or the intestines themselves, allowing foreign objects to enter; stitches on this require more difficulty, and it's never worse than a small wound compared to a large one, because you need to reposition the intestines multiple times when treating them, unless they're brought back in layers. This is due to the fact that the intestines swell upon contact with cold water, hence returning them further down becomes difficult. Therefore, operations of lesser wounds are better, as you can more easily maneuver and return the intestine to its correct position than with others. Be aware that there are four ways a belly wound can occur: The common stitch procedures happen in the abdominal stitch area, while stitches for other body parts and certain specific wounds follow these same common methods; however, all of them are better when dealing with the abdomen-related wounds, and I'll explain each one separately.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I state that when the wound is small and there's no matter from the intestines involved, and if there are any injuries they need to be treated, this can be done through one of two methods: either because of the size of the wound as we have said, or due to the intestines being swollen by cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm him in this manner: soak a sponge or use part of the linen garment in water alone, or you can boil it with water and add thyme and quince pith and spice, and pull on the intestines until the swelling goes away; and every time do this until the drink starts to reduce swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestines with water or tea that has been cooked and let it cool, for by this means does the entrance allow for little matter; and if it cannot enter, then make a small cut in the wound using the instrument from which we remove gallstones; and the first treatment should be to ensure it can pass without needing any unnecessary cuts; and these are the instruments for splitting: if you cut inside along its curve and outwardly not, and observe this form.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestinal organ jumps out, if you can place it back according to its natural form in its proper location, because this is better than leaving it out.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is broad, and it's in the belly area, you should help the patient by lifting their back, and put their legs higher than their head. And if it's in the belly area, place the head and the buttocks higher than the belly parts, similarly when the stomach rupture is in one of the two parts, then adjust your approach so that the retracted part is above the other; and thus you should manage what I say in regards to large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds use whatever is available to you, and always have the necessary instruments at hand that will help you pierce the entire wound with the needle on both sides, then stitch it together. This is the common method of suturing, and when you need needles, take one or more depending on the size of the wound. Leave an inch from the edge of the wound before starting to sew; then insert a needle at the very beginning where there should be good strong thread; pierce both sides of the skin with the needle that is inside the skin, as much as you can into the wounded part, and join the ends of the gutters together for three stitches. Then sew through the threads twice on one side and stitch together the edges of the wound in this manner until all the wound is joined; use needles of moderate size between fine and large, because sharp needles cut through the flesh completely, while very thick ones do not enter well. These should be medium-sized needles; avoid sewing too far out from the flesh and skin so they don't tear open before suturing starts; then tie off each stitch when you're done so they won't irritate the patient at night. Cover the needle holes with bandages or cloths to prevent irritation, and leave them in place until the wound has healed; this method of suture works best for small wounds as it requires only one needle for every second stitch and joining both gutters together on one needle with strong medium thread; after piercing all four ends together, pull back the needle from where you started sewing like when you weave cloth. Leave an inch between each stitch as large as a thumb's width; this kind of stitching heals patients well, and I sewed up a belly wound that had been cut by a knife, which was nearly a palm wide, contained several palms' worth of intestines and was in the middle of the abdomen.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine then after it had been out for twenty-four hours, and the wound healed up to fifteen days, and I treated him, and he recovered.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And when the doctors had judged that he would die, it was a miracle; and I did not treat him with ointment, because I was in a place where none could be found or any medicine; instead, I changed a piece of old cotton twice a day on his wound and washed it with honey water until he recovered.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the two proper methods of sewing: take the needle and insert it from below up until it reaches inside; when it has pierced through the skin straight up and down, then place your thumb on the suture or wound location where you have inserted the needle, and let the needle pierce through again from inside to outside at another part; and with this type of sewing, you sew in the same manner as the squirrel furs their fur, leaving a hole once on one side and pick it up again on the other, until the entire seam is completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of sewing, as Galen properly described it, is such that no one does, who combines the two natural parts together, and applies one end of a needle or thread to another end, in this manner: put one needle or thread close to a piece from near the edge, then make only one opening on this side and leave both pieces from the edge; then turn the needle, and have it pierce from below just inside up to where the two pieces from the edge are; then pierce through both of them from below just inside with two other threads or needles that come from the opposite side; and this is the method of sewing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen said this word, and no one affirms it, that the belly should be stitched with two needles or each thread; and one needle must be inserted on one side of the wound, and the other on the opposite side, as those who stitch corroies do. Know that when the injury is in the middle of the belly, this stitching is more grievous than others' work on their bellies.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgments of the wound are similar to those of other wounds: and this is that when you find the fresh wound completely filled with blood, as long as the art has done its part, you should reinsert the intestine, and the mouth; then apply some stimulating powder on the char. And if the art has performed its task, place no ointment until it heals; while the wound heals; then sew up any lacerations, and seal the sifac and mirach. Then treat the wound as you would others, until it is healed; and should you lack medicines, apply an old cotton cloth at the start, changing it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you do not need other medicine in various conditions when the wounds are simple; and if you fear that the wound might spread to the main members, then it is necessary for you to soak feather linen in oil heated with heat, or in rosmary oil, and place it between joints, and around the elbows; and if there's pain or gangrene anywhere, and this happens many times, then you should clear out black wine as a cathartic, and similarly, if gangrene reaches to the intestine; and puncture inside it. And know that when it is large intestines, it heals more easily than small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine known as 'young' cannot heal when it is diseased, and this is due to the obstruction of veins that reside within, and the subtlety of the entire body, along with its proximity to nerves in terms of its nature.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the knot jumps out of the wound, then place it back again as with the intestine when fresh. And if it is old and turned towards or black in color, it's necessary that you tie up what is black, so no bleeding occurs from it, for there are veins and arteries inside. Then cut open the link, and hang the two ends on either side of the wound until out past its edge, to ease extraction when the knots fall off, and let the wound heal over.
de la routure dou boueil	from the rupture of the bladder
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, it can sometimes be restored in some forms, as I have seen that a man was wounded by lance or stomach; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, it got infected and became a fistula, with the discharge and wind. I treated it according to what seemed right to me, and continued refining until it healed, and sealed up the wounds.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw him bound, I doubted that the patient might have pain in his belly; and there was no harm but he stayed in better conditions, eating and drinking; and said none of the experimentors that if he had a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied in such manner: take furs with large heads, then join the edges of the wound together, and when the fur has opened its mouth, place it over the two lips, if it tightens its mouth upwards; and then press down on its head, and this should stay so that it cannot slip out, then put another fur in this way after before, until the whole wound is covered; and thus the wound heals.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If a foreign body lodges in the intestine and causes no harm to the patient, one can tie the intestine with a thin thread cut from the intestine of an animal, like this: take most of the intestines out from this thread's end, then attach it onto the main part of this thread. Then insert the thread into the needle, sew the intestine and stitch it back together; do so in such way that the stitches resemble the weave of a fabric or hope. And when the wound is large and wide, especially if it's located within one of the large intestines, it must be treated carefully to ensure no infection occurs due to its complexity.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	from a fistula, or if it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it matures, is universally called 'fistula', even if it's hair-covered and swollen.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is according to the true swelling firm and white, or one where you don't feel pain, and it's also covered like feathers of a bird; and sometimes it's clear in size, and at other times it's thick; sometimes small, and at other times quite large; and I have spoken about this under the division of wounds, that any wound not healed, and if there is no flesh present, leaves through one of the eight causes: namely, due to the tiny quantity of blood or pus; or because of its malice; or because there's hard flesh inside, and on the skin, which doesn't allow for pus to form; or there's too much pus; or the lungs are damaged, and the matter has a bad quality; or the medicine used in treatment isn't good; or because of how putrefaction occurs in pestilence-like manner; or due to its nature's slow digestion process, which also slows down healing, and is expelled by itself; or there's veins or bones present. And I have already shown all these causes, their signs, and the uses of medicines under this division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	So it is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of fistulas which is performed through manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that fistulas exist in all body members; for there are fistulas that originate from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, either internally or externally, or within the stomach, bladder, lungs, or any of the ribs, or the spinal column, or any joint of hands or feet; and when this affects the main function of a limb, in which they appear.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that occur in this manner are due to negligence and lack of knowledge. There is no other explanation than digging or misunderstanding; if there is any fistula that does not extend until what I've mentioned, then you have made a treatment mistake, and you realize its location, so take spider silk or iron wool; if the fistula is straight, use it; and if the fistula is curved, use a subtle silver tool to search for its way since silver bends with the curve; and if the fistula has lost its path and you cannot properly search through tools, then flush it by one of those paths because moisture flows from one path to another, clean it out. Then wisely cut it according to your strength, find out whether there is bone or nerve passing through it fully, and ask the patient about the pain they feel when pressed with your hand, and where they feel it; and when you truly know its location and that it's far from joints, nerves, arteries, veins, or any of the parts I've mentioned, treat it according to what I've said, remove the pus and rotten matter inside it; then continue the treatment until it is healed. If the fistula has been properly cut at a right angle, then it is fitting that you cut into its full length as much as possible, then put wet bandages soaked in an ointment into the medicine water, and replace them up to the mouth of the fistula, until the medicine can corrode the excess left inside; and then apply healing dressings until it heals completely. If it has not healed by this method, cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is rotten due to the fistula, then cut into it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If the vein or nerves are not hindered or main limbs, as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there's decay and darkness, you must remove the king until all decay is gone, then treat with hot substances until it becomes healthy; and if it doesn't become healthy and returns to its original state like before, know that you are not finished up to this point: so uncover and clean until you're at the bottom, and remove all the decay, then restore the place; and if it is in such a state of health afterwards, then it's well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the corruption has spread too far, and you cannot restore it. If there's no other option than to leave it to nature; and if there is only a small corrupted bone, and you can pull it with your tweezers, use an appropriate tool for this task, and if there are many bones, remove all of them but don't leave any behind; and if moisture is making things difficult, without error or fear, combine force, moisture, and heat, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you can't remove them within an hour, place something stimulative for putrefaction on the wound and leave it until the flesh has rotted inside the bones completely. Then they will become lighter in weight; and if it is a large bone such as from a leg or thigh, remove it up to where all of the corruption has been taken out, then heal the wound; and if there's a significant part of the putrefaction that reaches down to the bone; you should treat everything until it reaches the putrefaction, and then continue healing until it is sewn together; and I will tell you about an ailment which occurred in someone's leg where you would take it as an example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was once a young person around thirty years old, who had pain in their leg due to something that came from within the body, until the substances reached the leg, and there was an inflamed lump (abscess), and no reason could be found to open it; but the doctors by their folly opened so much that the abscesses were opened, and they ate away at a lot of tissues, and became a fistula, and they suffered many losses that caused the entire body to be swollen and full of pus; and many doctors continued this treatment for two years, and there was no wise man in the art of medicine until I was called, and saw their leg and the medicines used on it, and what was eaten away by the pus within the body; and the parts of the body that were affected became red like youth's skin, and had a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent at one of these hollows, and then searched all the hollows, finding that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hurriedly acted, and cut into one of the hollows until I discovered part of the bone, finding it decayed and pierced through; I saw that the corruption extended all the way to the innermost parts of the bone; it appeared as though it was the decay that stood out from the bone, so I thought there was no other corruption than what I had uncovered; I began to heal the wound with medicines for a long time, but could not stitch it together; then I started again and found the bone just as before, discovering that the corruption continued within the bone. It felt like decay itself, so I took out the affected part of the bone and tried to heal the area, but was unable to stitch it properly because I cut through about a palm's width of the bone, which was then sewn back together with medicine; it healed quickly and became stitched together perfectly, there was no need to start the operation again except for fear of the illness not being able to endure, as well as my fear of death from this patient.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For during blood evacuation, it often happens, but it was completely healed. In the place of the bone came out a hard flesh, and it had good disposition and did not cause any harm or opposite anywhere at all, neither in appearance nor in function.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, as it should be done: take hold and pull at the end of the bone that sticks out, and command it to extend upwards; and put another rope made of thicker wool than the first one, and tie it on the flesh coming out from inside the bone, pull up the top so that you remove the rotten flesh underneath, reveal the new flesh where there was a break, ensuring not to harm the new flesh; place coal or a board under the bone to replace the rotten flesh. You should do this as much as visible and felt decay allows, and repeat this process again if necessary.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is rotten and does not open up, or if the corruption is within or in a part of it, then uncover all the flesh; then place the tip over it, and thereafter allow the infection from one part to the other until you cover it for as long as the infection lasts, just like we said; and if the corruption is inside a joint, remove the corrupted joint and place bone on the opposite side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, there must be another angle than that which needs to be cut through; and if the corruption lies under a finger of your hand or foot, it's very hard work indeed, but still you must investigate this corrosion according to how it opens up; and clean it with all means possible yet so that neither the vein nor nerve prevent you from doing so; know that both the incisioner and tool are for cutting these bones in various manners depending on the bone structure, appearance of its edges, size, fineness, size, thickness and hardness; thus each work must show which tool suits its needs according to knowledge of this art form and the testimony about illness modes. If you think through the tool that suits your need based on what is appropriate.
dou feu	by fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The joints become dislocated either through internal causes or external ones; and when you have treated this corrosion via the medicine cure, but it doesn't improve, then one must treat that member until where the corrosion occurs, so that the patient escapes from death or from the harm caused by the deficiency of the body; and the signs are: the limbs turn black, as if they were burned by fire, and after the blackness comes that corrosion spreading member by member, and it takes over the whole body; you should hurry to treat this corruption, and if it's due to the impact of some poisonous animals such as sea scorpions and snakes, and alike, when the corrosion affects the head of the body, then treat it, and don't give it space to reach up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it reaches up to the hand, if you fix the joint, so that the corrosion doesn't extend up to the elbow; and if it extends to the elbow, if you take care of the wrist; and if it passes the wrist, it's death, and nothing can be saved beyond its quantity of power; and in this way, when the corrosion comes or progresses: If it comes at the first joint, if you fix after the other joint; and if it progresses or spreads at any point, if you treat all that point; and if it ascends into the leg, if you treat at the joint of the knee; and if it reaches above the knee, there is no other option than to let the patient die from the loss; and the method for treating or keeping the limb involves binding it up both over and under, spreading one gauze across each layer of bandage, and placing another gauze on the other side moving upwards, and you cut out the flesh between the two layers until the bone is exposed; then treat or care, and place a piece of linen from each side, so that the care does not touch the healthy part, and brings no further injury or pus to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if blood comes out when you operate, if you quickly cauterize it or put on some restricting powders; then return to your medicine until its completion, then bind the limb with a suitable bandage and treat until it heals. And I will tell you what happened to this man: he had a blackness that seemed like a flame burn and the corrosion came first in his right foot, until she consumed all of his flesh; and when the man saw the corrosion, he rushed to cover his foot, and became well. For many days after that the corrosion returned on his hand's second digit, and he came to me, and I put on shock-absorbing things after cleaning out his body cavity, but could not stop the corrosion; and he said that I should cut off his hand because it wouldn't heal, as the strength of his body was weak; and he lost hope entirely and returned to his land, covering his hand and became well. And this story is told only for someone else's sake if need be.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	No time comes to the site of meat injury and remains so long that it forms a large group of pus; and then bursts and drains, causing the pus to shoot out and the injured parts to be left, just like vessels; and the skin above is as delicate as fine cloth and does not reach up to the bone or nerve, and this disease is called 'clean' also not called 'fistula'; but if it extends so far that it reaches through completely into the bone from beneath, then it's called 'fistula'; and regarding the skin it must be cut all around, even when delicate as fine cloth; and does not heal by itself due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you suspect that the skin is burning and the corruption isn't complete, and the skin is full of flesh, then use castor oil in such a way: check if the breasts are large, and the bladder contained within them has an unpleasant smell, therefore you should use Egyption castor oil treatment as follows: take castor oil, olive oil, and litharge equally, then heat it in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and thickens to honey-like consistency; then follow your needs by adding this concoction in water or honey form, applying it on the breast, and restraining its surroundings. Let the medicine sit for two hours, then drain it with squeezing; repeat this process as many times as necessary until both breasts are thoroughly cleaned and any pus is removed; otherwise, if you don't have Egyption medicine or ashwater when you're using castor oil or ashwater, use water and honey or a mixture containing some litharge for the treatment. Alternatively, mix honey and wine together, as honey has the property of cleaning and washing, while wine makes the skin burn and cleanse; once done with this process, and you've determined that both breasts are thoroughly cleaned, then apply castor oil to form a paste with rose oil or wine; alternatively, use other medicines and ointments whose properties I have discussed earlier on ointments. If the opening of the breast is small and the applicator can't enter it, widen it using an iron tool slightly and then insert a tent of Egyption ointment or basil ointment until it's wide enough; if the wound is too large, let the seam be such that only as much fits into where the applicator can enter. And if pus lies above it, apply the tool either higher than its current position or even lower down.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bowe is in perfect condition, you should not allow it to swell with flesh; and if you can't cover under its skin exactly as you see, arrange it so that the bowe goes as low as possible of what is there. For when the bowe is in perfect condition, you shouldn't let it swell with flesh and if you can't cover under its skin exactly as you see, arrange it accordingly: that the bowe goes smoothly downwards, and leave nothing of the bowe; and take consolidating medicines to be placed within the healthy part, and are spread on the linen cloth which covers all the healthy part. Then cover the slightly larger area around the breast with a little more ointment according to the amount of the swelling, and place it around the swelling in the healthy part for easing the bowe, and remove none of the large linen cloth except after several days once; and that which is under the swelling on the breast, remove often to get rid of the bowe, and know what goes from the bowe, whether it's poison or less or enough, or digested, or indigested; and watch so that if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there's an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in this manner you see the nature going on to the swelling on the healthy part, know that the breast is now healing and approaches health; and then release the wound in the morning, or on the third day, and when you've released the wound, change another linen cloth, renewing the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts discharge undigested matter after several days, know that they have not grown yet.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if venoms are subtle cuts after a long time, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are people who take longer to heal from injuries in their wounds and those who do the opposite. And if indigestion begins to occur after many days inside them, know that their stomach is not working; and if the stomach takes a long time to breathe after being far away, adjust your medicines with dry moist substances or with dry medicinal properties, such as ointment diafinit, because there is a large portion of vitriol in this, and it is the final medicine. Take ointment diafinit, mix it with rose oil, and apply it to old wine mixed into substance; then cook it and use it; and do the same for cooked honey that has thickened, when ointment diafinit is not present or you take myrrh and aloen and incense, grind them together, add this powdered mixture to the honey I mentioned, and use it. And if a long cure does not work out and cannot be treated with this method, then know that corruption has spread throughout and made an impression on the bone, or in hard parts of the body, or in organs; if you treat the cure for the boil as we said previously.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	From the incision of the nail.
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that arises under the nail of the palm of the hand, or under the foot, or by chance arises on other toes; and when it becomes old, and no care is taken about it, if it turns into pus, runs and spreads as long as they spread up to the root of the nail, and by chance it spreads all over; and then comes corrosion up to the bone, as long as it causes stinging pain, and makes the toes of two widths wide, and changes the color.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have instructed in the previous section, and if the treatment does not improve, then it's necessary to remove any remaining excess from under the nail. After that, apply cautery to the wound.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The fire cautery is very useful when the bone is healthy and the nail is healthy. If however, the flesh presses against the nail bed and begins to inflame and blister, it's necessary to place a heated metal under the nail up until it touches the flesh and then elevate it slightly at the top. Carefully remove this thin layer of flesh. Then apply hot and corrosive medicines on the wound to remove everything. Afterwards, dress the wound with healing ingredients until it is well.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, you treat it by cutting and forcing strongly, because as long as the bone is corrupted it cannot heal. And if you see that the bone has decayed, you should cut it out exactly as described previously, then treat until it heals. If it is hard and bent, and feels intense pain, it's necessary to first cure it. Then cut off the nail near the tip with a sharp knife in a crosswise direction, and be careful not to cut through to the flesh underneath the nail because the patient would feel too much pain. If this happens, place something on top that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain deepens from the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The heads of some men are born in the hands by chance and have tough flesh. Sometimes there is a division or bones, and no nail forms at all, and none of them are born at the root of the joint, where the birthplace is in many parts on their heads.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those born without any new tooth do not move, and those born at the gum line may occasionally move. The size of the one with a robust body is so light in this manner: cut it down to its root as wide as a narrow spoon.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those that start at the root of the joint are issues to cure: if you hold onto copper, it is effective.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the one who is born or needs to add a new tooth, it is necessary that you first cut around the gum until reaching the bone. Then carve out the bone with a suitable tool, and treat it as long as it remains healthy.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The decisions that come together at the shoulder joint arise from birth, or due to injury, or through burning by fire, or through similar occurrences.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	It is necessary that you join this seam, so that it can be repaired according to its natural forms; then place between two wet cloths or linen in oil rosettes, so that they do not weld together. Or you put between two pieces of fine paste until the seams fuse as they should.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If we are to weld it with the palm side towards its edge, then perform this welding as would be fitting.
des vils	of the villages
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Vices are big veins swollen and tightly packed with melancholic excesses, that come from multiple parts of the body. There is more happening in the legs of those who walk on feet and work, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It follows that you must administer one purging of bile to him, and then heal him with basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The iron treatment has two methods: one is to cut and bleed the black blood. And the other method involves opening a vein and pulling it all out with force.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The treatment involves: first, immerse the leg in hot water for quite some time until the large veins become thin. Then tighten up from the ankle over the calf down to just above the knee; then cut the vein at one, two or three places with a broad incision and pull out black blood by hand as much as possible until enough of the impurities has been expelled; then bandage it and instruct him to cover his body in dark meat for healing. Repeat this evacuation and sanitation when veins are full, which is harmful to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The method of bloodletting proceeds as follows: raise the leg from beneath the malady, if there are hairs present, then submerge it in a hot bath. And while raising the leg to a warm and hot water until it turns red, and the veins swell; and should you lack a bath, heat it with fire instead. Then place the heated part along the vein from its longest to the knee or at the spot below the ankle; then peel off the skin, and burn each side of the vein until you can feel when it is done; and so that you see red and black veins, and when it appears within the skin like a white cord; then remove this layer of flesh beneath the vein as far as possible, making sure that it lifts from the skin. And then press it gently onto one side, then place your other hand on top for about three finger widths. Then peel off parts of the skin over the vein until you see it clearly, and lift it to a hairline if done properly, and then lift to another inch following the first process; then place this next section back on with care, and once more press down onto your thumb and index fingers for about three more finger widths. Then continue to peel off each section as needed, ensuring to do so in order from largest to smallest. And when it appears that all force has been released within, burn it again. Should you be unable to lift or pull the skin with ease, then insert a thick double thread and bind it firmly, pulling and lifting until it comes out; and ensure not to burn this section too much because burning will prevent further lifting or pulling and cause harm to the patient. When you have fully processed all sections, place wet wool in wine and rose oil onto the wound site and cleanse it thoroughly until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the body is twisted and curled together as a whole, and it isn't straight, just like we have said, then you must cut forcefully but don't peel it; and handle it in the way that we explained before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron used to cut the tool is bent, and it doesn't slice or carve, in order not to damage the vein; and it has a large bend because if it were too slender, it would damage the vein but as we have described it here, it should be in this shape.
de la voinne civile	from the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein exists in the legs, in warm areas where no herbs or trees grow, and on land without moisture; and it happens to be born elsewhere than in the legs, this occurs due to corruption that comes from under the skin, just like serpents and worms do inside the body, existing between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein so occur that there comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then it changes the blood, and begins the vein to push out, also like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And when the shoulder opens, it should be that you wrap around with a piece of linen from three-quarters to two-thirds and bind it, then leave the linen on the leg, and every time there is need for more, if you wrap around the linen and bind again; and if it's too long, cut off part of it and re-wrap it without cutting at its root until all has come out. For fear that it goes into flesh and causes pus or ulceration at the site, which leads to a bad disease; so it should be treated bit by bit until it is fully done, leaving nothing behind. And this vein when treated can be about five hands long, or ten if it's from ten hands long and when you wrap it up, if you have one rod or more, and puncture down to the bottom, that everything may come out; and let the inside matter drain away, and take care of anti-putrefaction medicines for a single day, then treat as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never at this vein use cold hands, and similarly when it opens in the joint of the foot or leg, or when you step on something; treat then accordingly as we have instructed before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	Vers that are born between skin and bone
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "cattle disease," because it often afflicts cattle, and it involves a small worm that grows between skin and flesh, which travels throughout the body up and down. It can be felt starting from part to part until it reaches the skin where it goes, and it jumps around; it's infected with the corruption of various fluids, such as worms, snakes, maggots, or roundworms in the stomach; one wonders about its maliciousness because when it travels through the body, and it ascends to the head, and comes to the eye by chance, it can return, and destroy the eye; this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it being treated and drained, one can only do so as follows: therefore, it is necessary that when it goes: thus, it must be that you tie the head above and below with a strong tightly bound rope, then operate upwards and drain it, and ensure it moves fully in the flesh, if you don't find it, then cauterize it with fire until it heals; and among its greatest injuries, these are when they affect the eye, as we have said; and should you see it coming near to the eye, then firmly restrain below him the eyebrow formed, then operate upwards, and drain it; and must use the aid of purification of bodily fluids from medicines that dissolve substances for illnesses due to body miasmas, and be wary of eating rancid meats that cause putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	The pain comes from wind disturbance
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This illness is called in our land " vakirir ", and it's a pain that occurs in any limbs, and spreads from limb to limb; and I've seen the things I'm telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was summoned to attend a sick woman, and I examined her arms, and saw a small swelling in the vein near her arm; shortly after, I noticed it growing as fast as a worm on her shoulder, quicker than any other thing, like freshly cut silver when taken from one place to another; the pain left that spot, and settled into her shoulder, and then a little while later spread throughout her entire body, until it reached the other arm; she then told me that it had returned within her body, just as I had seen.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was amazed at how she moved member by member in such a way, for I had never seen this illness done in this manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	In short, I have wanted many times that the pain in one place move to another, but I did not want it myself, as I saw with the woman; and I thought it was due to the woman having a dry body, and her veins exposed, and because of this, that constrained windiness becomes visible; and they do not understand according to this reason those who are delicious, and have moist bodies and their veins covered.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see it treated for this sickness, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens up as we have said, apply pressure above and below rapidly, then continue applying pressure until that wind force escaping from the body; cauterize the body; and if you don't see it at your eyes, treat the one who debouches the winds, such as rotten pills, pill of serapin, and similar others.
des saiettes	arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	The arrows are various, according to their appearance and according to the nature of the animal they come from.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of them lies in the fact that there are arrows with large points, small ones, barbed, and soldered; and those with two angles, as well as those with tongues, and those made up of pieces. And among them, some discharge without affecting any member, while others do so according to two ways: or they pierce a principal member such as the head, brain, heart, liver, stomach, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and other similar parts.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it hurts therefore in no part of these limbs, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, appears: so you should be ready for the extraction of this arrow because death follows in multiple conditions; and when that bad sign is not seen and the arrow is not fully extracted, then pull it out, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, and jumps the spinal fluid which is above the brain, is when paralysis and numbness and inversion and redness of the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion in understanding, and vomiting of bile; and sometimes lacks strength from the nostrils, or the ears; and sometimes loses speech and voice; and there's a white moisture at the wound that looks like pus, and also burns similarly to burned flesh; and if this sign is seen, take it seriously and extract the arrow if it isn't yet.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign when the heart or seed drops is that it's near the left mammary gland and feels as if it were inserted into something hard, not empty; and by chance the heart also stops like a pulse, and black blood comes out, and brings on coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: therefore know without doubt that death is approaching.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that doesn't leave the body is that it bubbles up from the wound without much foam, and the throat swells, and the patient's face changes color, and they sigh loudly with their breath.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if an arrow stops within the buttock's covering, it penetrates below the small ribs; and causes great pain and much agony, along with sighing; and all parts of the body from the shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if an arrow stops in or near the stomach, by chance it may spill any undigested meat from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow stops in or near the belly, and it does not pass through the intestines on impact, there is no hope for treatment, nor in removing the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow stops inside the bladder, and the urine flow is interrupted and spills out, causing great pain to the patient; know that this wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, such as the arms and shoulders and neck and spine and ribs and hip and pelvis, and all similar limbs, are safe according to various positions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it's not poisonous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because you did something else.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to one of the people when an arrow hit him below the nose at the base of his ear: I tried it and moved it from another side through the fat of the ear, and found no serious injury.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And tried out an arrow that had hit him in the fat near his eye under the paper, and the arrow was found to be intact, unable to reach anything but the tip towards the shaft, and was a large arrow like a Turkish bow's length, without any damage to the person who performed it; the game was fine, and no bad accidents occurred.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And take an arrow from the throat to a Christian, and this was the Arabic arrow with ears: I would shave off the stubble, and trimmed it finely as I pulled it, resulting in the death of the Christian.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And pull an arrow from I house, that was stuck in the back or belly, and thought he was dying; and then after thirty days, if it didn't change its position; I cut into the arrow, I sharpened it, and pulled it out, and there was no bad accident.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if an arrow falls or pierces the back of a house, and the wound is joined from within; and the arrow stays inside, and doesn't change its natural positions, nor does it find harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And see another man, who was hit by an arrow in his face, and had the wound stitched up; and suffered great pain thereafter; and many others like this.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And one arrowed the king in the home of the princes, having been pierced through both eyes and leaning slightly to the right side; the arrow was entirely inserted. I was summoned for treatment after it was shot for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very tight.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I tried with all my subtle skill, and did not feel it; and there was a burn and pain under his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was due to the tip of the arrow. I placed a healing and digestive plaster on his ear because his ears were not inflamed; and I saw the arrow in the ear.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I placed the plaster on for several days and treated the wound immediately, so that the patient would endure this long duration, until they felt the arrow within their nose; and I told him this.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied corrosive aqua regia medicine to the wound for several days until it was opened, then tried it and felt the tip of the arrow moving toward my hand. After that, I placed the wound opening with this medicine, as long as the head of the arrow became visibly apparent; and passed through well in about four months, and then closed the wound so tightly that I could close the forceps firmly on either side, but it didn't come out; therefore, I continued to refine and engineer ways using tools until I took hold of the arrow with properly made forceps, as described at the end of this chapter, throughout the process, and left the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And they judge that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored: I will restore it then, and after sealing the wound, made the patient fully well.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or this is what I told you about the quality of extracting arrows, so please apply your treatment on what I do not mention here because books cannot comprehend everything; but wise masters compare well on even a small number of things, and when something is present or lacking, they find new work and new tools, in anticipation of and due to the occurrences that happen within this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I state that arrows penetrate the limbs through two manners: either by the front where they enter or from another side; and when an arrow penetrates or enters from the front, it goes inside the flesh, and no longer pierces any time now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it doesn't jump now, let it stay until the body is decayed internally, and until its exit is free; also if it's stuck in bone, and can't escape, let it remain like that for some days, and remove it every day; and then it jumps, and if it doesn't jump, penetrate internally through all thin flesh, as long as the intestines are widened there, and then extract it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if an arrow is stuck in the skull bone, and reaches up to one of the brain's cavities, or any other situation that I've mentioned for the patient: do not remove it immediately, but let it be until it stops moving after a few days. For when the arrow penetrates so far, this is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is only stuck in the bone and doesn't reach further than the sinus, and remains within the patient for any number of days without causing harm, then use a tool to remove it.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is only deeply embedded and cannot come out, if you administer hot baths internally, as I told you; then treat the wound until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is returned to its place within the body such that you cannot see it, then look all over; and if you feel it, try with any available tool; and if by constriction of the wound or depth of the arrow, and there's no bone, nerve or vein, cut as much as possible when the wound is large; pull out the arrow if you can, and if there are holes in the arrow where it holds, remove the flesh that has stuck from two parts, then break or bend the ears of the arrow as long as you can pull it; do so carefully not to break the arrow but pull it out more roughly.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot remove it in one go, when the shaft is already deep into your arm, then proceed with its removal, because the extraction is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the bleeding makes you contrary, then apply what we have said about treatment in our chapter; and guard against cutting near nerves and veins, and position as you can move to pull out the arrow without danger, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the shape they were at when the arrow hit them, for this is the greatest aid that it should be like this, and if you cannot do so, then place them according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from elsewhere, or if there is any defect in it, or the skin is swollen at the spot so you can see or feel it oddly: cut therefore up high, as long as the forceps can take hold, and then pull: if it jumps now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, rotate your hand around, until it enters into the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, let it stay there for now, and then start extracting again as long as it comes out; and if the arrow is stuck in her, pull out the whole shaft. And if she farted, and you see how to administer forceps, if you need to use a tool with a pointed end, so that the tip of the arrow enters into the tool's hair; and then force it, and if the arrow is caught by its point, then pull out the tool at its point entering end, to facilitate extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if an arrow has pierced you, then it is necessary for you to hold all the flesh around where I have entered, if possible, and then treat the wound as seems fit.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if an arrow pierces the head or chest or stomach or bladder or ribs and it is close by, and you can hold up, then it is necessary to hold; and be careful not to cover the vein or nerve. Then extract it, and then treat the wound if needed; and heal until it is healed, and treat as long as she/he is well.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used for arrows resembles that of an eagle's beak, and here is its form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are of many kinds: large, medium-sized, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape at the arrow's tip is also like the feathers of a bird, to puncture at the point of the arrow, as this is its shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape for pressing and gripping is like this:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the veins of the common body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are XXXI veins from which we bleed, of which there are XVI, namely: Two small arteries that are behind the ears, which are called "herbech"; and two arteries that are in two visible temples; and two veins that are in two eyelids of two eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is inside the forehead; and the vein that is at the nose's head; and the two jugulars that are in the neck; and the two veins that are above the mouth in the lips, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and two veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins that we commonly heal are: in each arm; one is the cephalic vein, and it is near the left rib, and they call it among laypeople "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called 'fascia', and it is composed of the cephalic vein and the basilic vein, and they call it among laypeople "vein of the heart"; and the basilic vein so is near the right rib, and they call it among laypeople "vein of the stomach", and it's above the clavicle, and this is the one that we heal, which opens clearly on the chest.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	The salvation vessel is the vein that's located between the thumb and the ring finger, and it has two courses; and in the leg and at the feet there are three veins: one of which lies along the curve of the chest near the left rib, and the second 'sophene' which is at the ankle near the right rib; and the vein that's called 'nurse', which is at the ankle on the other side. And in the other leg are three veins under these.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	Surgery on veins located behind the ears helps with cathar therapy and migraines; and here are the qualities of a surgeon as I tell you, and is that you relieve the head of the patient's ailment, rub the neck or area where the veins are with cloth, then hold the scalp so tightly around your finger until you can see both veins behind the ears in two lines coming from the head: then press your thumb there, where you feel the pulse under your finger, and cut; then take the lancet, pierce through the vein almost to bone, then raise your hand all up the vein, cut and remove the skin and vein well two inches thick, and let blood flow out until you see it; then tighten and secure, until it is healed; and I have already mentioned incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The healing of the two arteries located in the two temples, if it involves ancient embolism and thrombosis, and tears caused by cold water; and the quality of the healer is such as I say: and what makes the patient feel that his neck is constricted until both blood vessels appear clearly open; you can feel the pulse under your thumb, then raise up the head on the vein at the top of your thumb, and hold the lancet down, then raise the vein up and cut it, just as you have done with other veins, and bleed according to necessity; then release the patient, place your hand over the artery for an hour, then put cotton on it; and then sew it back up firmly, and let it heal until it is healed; and we have spoken about this method of operation and extraction, or where this book begins.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The healing of the vein at the forehead is as valuable as the healing of the cephalic in ancient diseases, and in migraines, and in congestion; and the quality is that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears. Then take the tool called 'featherer', which has this form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the tip at the vein, and press with your hand or some other means, letting blood flow according to the amount you see; then loosen the neck of the patient, and bind the vein until it is firm and without any trace of a wide scar.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	All the same, it is not right for the flames to be too strong; and treat them from across, because the bone is close by, and by chance the flame could break when they are fine.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The healing of the two veins that are within the eyelids helps with tears, in congestion, and in eye redness, as well as ear diseases in the ear; and the quality of their healing is that the patient twists his neck due to some lien until the vein appears, as before. Then heal them, and let the healing be straight across, a little longer than the width of a flame, for there is no flesh involved.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle and might break by chance; then make it correspond to the blood flow until you have the need for it, and then bind it with cotton, and bind well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The healing of the nose from near death, and when it's partially recovered, and for facial diseases such as migraine and reddening that comes in the face, and even when it's old; and the qualities of this healing are that the patient constricts their throat, then tightens their nose to your left hand, and takes up a subtle flame long, and plants it inside the lip at the space between the two nostrils, because the nose doesn't open well entirely, and now the water is beginning to flow; don't go too far in applying this, and apply it with gentle blood according to your need, then leave it overnight as she heals so quickly; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The healing of the two glands helps with constriction of the saliva, and in the beginning stages of mixture secretion, and a multitude of diseases, and tonsillitis, and ulcers, and herpes, and lymph nodes; and the qualities of this healing are that when you press on either side of the gland as we have said, and make sure the master is located at the head of the gland, and then treat from the point up to where it is, heal the vein a little more wide along its length, and then drain gently with some moderation, as required; then do another part in the other vein, then release all ties, but keep the pressure halfway on the veins so they don't get strangled; and let it be until morning, for the wound to heal.
de la sainie des leivres	Of the healing of wounds
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The treatment of veins in the mouth helps with cleaning the mouth and prevents gum decay, lip cracks, nosebleeds, and internal bleeding.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of healing involves having the patient face you and restraining their neck as I have said; then turn the cheek, and look at two veins, one on the right cheek and the other on the left, and you recognize them by the fact that they are black, and because in between them there are small black veins: so cut both of them, and if you do not know which ones to cut, and you're in doubt, then cut the thicker one from each part, and perform the same with both veins above and below, for this is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	Of healing at the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	Healing of the veins located at the tongue comes after the healing of the temporal vein and involves the constriction of the throat, as well as diseases of the uvula and mouth; the quality of a surgeon is that the patient's condition improves under their hands in front of the sun, they lift the tongue, and look underneath each side, noticing one black vein: heal both of them, and don't let it go too far, for around are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the arm that are treated commonly are treated according to two methods: or by applying them across all intense flames large, or with a subtle olive oil if they're cutlery blades like surgical knives, and are called "anisel"; and they are wide and subtle according to the width and tightness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of fire cautery is quite famous and is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it requires to open the veins full of visible large blood and impurity; and this contains large blood and disturbance; and this is in the form of olive oil flame.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more refined and pointed, intended for cleaning out subtle veins, or for the presence of subtle yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The surgery of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are in the throat, and around the neck, and on the abdomen; and it requires for the surgeon to treat carefully, and to be aware of the artery that's nearby.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if the artery is touched, and bleeding starts, if it needs to be stopped, as I said; and must not be held by fire but cut like before.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilica clearly doesn't open, it is necessary to extract it, and use another one; or you don't want any part of it, or you puncture through its own vein into the arm: it will clearly open; then apply fire as we said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you can understand the location of the incision, it is necessary to extract the arm in such a way that you pull on the limb until you feel the pulse; then mark the area for incision, and then tie the arm down, and cut into the vein with fire as we said. And be cautious not to pierce the artery when you see the area swelling up, because it's an artery: listen out then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see something emerge from above as high as a child's urine, and the stones are red and subtle, know that they are from an artery: quickly then, place your finger long-term, then remove your finger once it has stopped bleeding; this happens frequently. Secure the arm in this position, and do not move the patient until they recover; be prepared for fear, and do not move them until they have recovered completely.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the wound is not cleaned, and you need to, and the medicine is not available, if you can, stop the bleeding by pressing on an artery if it's accessible, because the head of the body retreats; clean the wound once done.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take the peel of a walnut, and cut it, and take one half and bind it well until it reaches the other side; if the wound stops bleeding, that is good; if not, then treat as we have said, using powders that stop blood flow. And in addition to these bandages, consider several positions for smaller wounds on the hand and the strength of holding the arm's connection.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The treatment of the vein in its middle requires care for blood from the head above and the chest below, as it is made up of basilica and cephalic parts, as we have stated; and the doctor should be cautious for the nerve which is there, and if he does not go far enough, and he finds the nerve, and it swells and the health is hurt, and by chance cannot heal; and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any men due to its subtlety, then you should suture with the surgical instrument beforehand; and feel the nerve with your finger.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, cut it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The treatment of the cephalic vein requires care for blood from the head; and it assists in the veins. It is appropriate to suture near the olive oil flame or the mint flame, because this is the safest of all veins, as there are neither nerves nor arteries nearby.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	In every way, it's necessary to strive for the lightest possible force, and there is no harm if one has to do it the first time, then try again; and perhaps swells some people's limbs when one does it the first time, but it causes no harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of cleanliness is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you need to know about sanitation is that sanitation should only be practiced for the sake of health maintenance and to avoid future diseases. It's necessary to perform sanitation in one of the three veins: namely cephalic, faecal, and basilic; and sanitation should be carried out at the beginning of prayers on your knees, during autumn and after meals in winter when signs of satiety appear; and sanitation should be done on the first or third day, two hours or three days after eating.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The treatment for diseases has no set time, but it should be given whenever need arises, day or night, and in all conditions; and a surgeon should not operate on children under fourteen years old, nor on pregnant women until the fourth quarter of their month has passed, up to seven months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	And one should not treat the elderly who have passed sixty years of age.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when any wish to be treated in any manner, if need is for laxative, should he expel the intestines with a light enema, if there is mucus retention, so that the veins do not draw off excess into the limbs; or not operate on one who has drunk too much food or alcohol, whether it causes illness or dropsy; and avoid surgery after colic passion, vomiting, abdominal discomfort, frequent urination in women, labor pains, staying awake, fasting, and anything that weakens health from the use of tools or wounds to the body; then cleanse the fluids if they are too thick due to meat, drink, and medicines, should you have oil at hand; then take a bath, provided no contraindication is present for this purpose to refine the blood, and cure it from the belly just below the third quarter of the intestines as we have said; and keep yourself away from work, pain, lust, and similar actions; be diligent and joyful, and make sure that your surgeon stands higher than the one you treat, and rub his hands twice or three times. Then slightly apply pressure with his left hand on the artery below his arm a little where he intends to operate, so the vein does not burst upon contact with the iron tool; then moisten the surgeon's finger with a bit of old oil, then place his left palm under that artery somewhat near the arm area where he wants to operate, in order for the veins to swell and be felt; afterwards moisten the surgeon's hands with some oil, until you can feel your pulse.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flow like strings when heated, and some have such qualities filled with windiness, so when placed near the flame, it retreats from the flame, and cannot open the vein. And thus they belong to these types; and if it overheats the vein, then the wound is too narrow, because in this situation, surgeons must be knowledgeable about these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if their veins work the first time, it's good; but if not, you may start again a bit near where they were or under quickly, if the area is swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the limbs are swollen and the patient feels sick, let it rest for one or two days, without binding its arm. By chance, it may result in pus being expelled; do not bathe or enter water afterward, then restart surgery according to your liking; and if the vein is small, or there's a subtle artery that you doubt doesn't allow as much blood flow as what you see, then directly apply heat across the entire flame to the hole. And perform the operation quickly afterwards, so that the limbs are swollen. This happens many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the limb swell, do not stop the bleeding again and place a little of an oil paste there, as it helps to alleviate the body's pain from blood, and the oil sticks in that area where the oil is placed; then apply oil paste with each treatment you provide on veins to stop the flow of blood; and do the same thing with thyme and wine when you put them on the limb; the air and the blood are distributed when they are too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if it comes about that there is a large abscess several times, even when you have not treated it since the opening of the vein is small, then hurry up and place an oiled sponge on the limb for a bit in hot water and wine. Leave it for an hour; this should be done after the bleeding from the vein ends. And if it remains in the limb for several days without any sign of improvement or change, this does not harm it at all. If you see anything like aloes or myrrh that has been made into a calamus extract, or something similar, then put some on it.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times pus and appearance occurred in the health of the basilica: therefore put your hand there, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of the hand, then this is the bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Listen then that you do not apply to any matter what we have said, for it could be done accidentally on the artery; but let him wear one bandage dry to harden the place, then treat with another method of care until he is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And take each according to their strength in their virtue, and the nature of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	And if the blood is black, let it bleed until it turns red. If you see that it's large, let it continue to flow until it becomes subtle. And if it's too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for the one who is strong and sturdy, needing extraction of blood, that he should make a larger wound and keep the flames broad. And for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it suits him to be cleaner less and more often, and he must be cleaned in cutting diagonally, not straight; and this way of cleaning saves from bleeding through and constriction of nerves, and is better than a long cut rather than a wide one.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for the one whose body needs healing through treatment, it is fitting to give him a diet of apple juice; if he has been overheated, let him drink blood three or four times. And if his complexion is cool, before any treatment give him an intake of apple juice with a thick, syrupy consistency or a fragrant syrup made from honey and spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, ensuring the syrup to have a pleasant aroma.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if it fails during surgery, after the release of a bit of blood, it should inhale a broth made from the heart and an aromatic subtle syrup, and use other things we have mentioned in the chapter on collapse or the division about vein evacuation, for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if they wish to sweat in their arm and again later on, when they are weakened by a great meal, it is necessary that they sweat gradually and according to the amount of its virtue continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if one wishes to pump out their arm after the first cleaning, and they have strong pulses, should they do so seven hours after the first cleaning, or after the new hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if one wishes to be cleansed another way, then it should be done on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is much blood inside the body that has been heated up and causes fever; if you need to drain large quantities, and widen the wound until it begins to heal; then when all conditions of health are met, place your hand on his pulse as he heals, so death does not come before the healing process finishes; this happens many times, when surgeons are careless; and it should not happen when you see the arm being pulled out a second time, and the wound is closed, pressing firmly would be wrong; but wait until it heals for the second time. Or you aim at the tip of the flame, until the blood that has frozen in the heart starts flowing again, then place a bit of sand over ice in water, and gently press on it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is bleeding, let it be, do not compress it, until the abscess subsides.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if the need is to drain blood a second time, do so in their own place or another vein, or on the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein under the arm is cleansed from the side of the main vein because it is composed differently.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the method of healing is that for the patient to dip their hand in hot water until the joints turn red. Then tie them moderately tight, so that the veins can be seen clearly, then cure now through it, neither wide nor long; and make the cuts wider, and cure very close to the joint of the hand, and if you cannot let it out, then put your hand back in hot water, allow blood to flow into the water until you have enough; and if this is the case, do not re-dip your hand in hot water again, as one puts it more in winter than summer; and healing with veins of this way is safer than all other veins, for there are neither arteries nor nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The treatment for saving the right hand from all liver diseases is valued in every illness affecting the liver. This method involves stretching your hand and immersing it in hot water until you see the veins; and if they are cured through it, and if there's no injury; and don't go too far perfecting this technique as nerves are everywhere without any meat, then put your hand back in hot water if it's frozen in the wound and cannot let it out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as necessary, place on the vein where and seal until it heals quickly, and do this with each case.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The health in the left hand is against the disease of the mouse (or smallpox), and do everything as I have told you for the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The healing of the soul is worth all diseases that afflict the body, such as heart illnesses, and congestion in plants, and kidney disorders, and leg ailments, and ancient leg issues, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of its healing is that the illnesses are treated with hot water and rubbed onto the body until it heals, and then bound to the joint of the foot. And the body is at the ankle, and passes through above the foot in many places; thus heal it wherever it may be more wide or large than usual, whether at the ankle or elsewhere.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal it on the leg bone, watch for the nerves that are nearby, and also treat the artery in the same way as cutting; may the flames stop there.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot be removed, then place the leg in water, and let it well drain the vein.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the healing is needed for the first time, then begin again from the second slightly above it, because the skin is salty; do not doubt about nerves as we have said, and thus treat both the right foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The muscles of the sciatic vein are at the knee of strength, and its health is valued for the pain in the hip, when it's due to fresh blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its health is such that the patient goes into or comes out of water, and stretches it above the ankle four times by twisting, because otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, treat it in all ways you can, and across. And move it when you catch it, for the limb is free, and she responds very well to manual handling.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you can't find it, heal no bone from what is open or on the foot, and towards the small toe, and be careful of the nerves; and do as much to correct the blood flow as you see fit, and then untie the knot, and place cotton over it and apply pressure; she is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of suction healings
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Pessaries are made from horns, or spiders, or snakes; and suction therapy is done in two ways: either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this suction which can cause harm is done in two ways: either it's done with fire, or without; and the suction treatment that involves bleeding and extraction of blood is carried out at fourteen points on the body. One point is completely under the head; another is around the neck; two others are along each side of the neck; one suction point is underneath the chin; two are located on each shoulder; they are applied over bruises; four more are spread across both arms; and there are four more placed on each leg; and ankle points. Suction does not involve treating bleeding, as it affects minor veins that are scattered throughout the flesh and thus do not weaken any of them, like bloodletting does; and suction should not be applied at all times or without fire in diseases caused by congestion, until all parts of the body are emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if it is due to the necessity of diseases we must suction or by habit, if we do this each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end and during and in each phase; for there are those who, when they have need to suction, find themselves heavy; and some who discover congestion and heat in their face, and in their head, and around their neck, and discolored eyes; and those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, whose tongue bleeds, and spits out blood; and there are those who think, see by dark blood and bruises and deaths and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially during the first month, we instruct to take a breath for three hours after each day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The treatment of the mouth helps with inflammation in the head... when it comes to the eyes, and it should not be after the evacuation of all throughout the body; this suction therapy is part of the treatment for cephalic disease, and it should not be used by those who have a cold complexion, or have catarrh, as it causes great harm to them; nor should those who use it when they have cold diseases in their head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And he who often gets healed from it, becomes forgetful, due to this one should place the suction cup slightly further down by the doubt of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventilation in the chest is located at the heart's place and the basilica's area, and because of that it's suited to compression under the ribs, and incision along the channel by the lungs, and everywhere else, and for reparation; and there should be some bouting, as if too tight, it may cause obstruction or stomach and/or heart issues.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventilation in the two chest regions is suited to heart pain, eye troubles and toothache, as well as strangulation, and pain at the roots of teeth, it's located near the heart and basilica; and you should instruct the physician to place his hand when applying pressure, not to compress the artery, and not let any bleeding occur.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	Ventilation around the chin can cause oral diseases, and gum decay, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and is in the place of the health of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Ventilation around the shoulders can cause illness due to heat and congestion.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	Ventilation in the arm regions is as effective as three veins of the arm because it draws blood from these large veins; instruct the physician to not press too strongly upwards, for the skin here lacks flesh and lies close to nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup on the back is as useful for bleeding from the ground and diseases below it, and it's necessary that the suction cup be large and made of iron, so she can bleed well. And by chance, if it were thin, it would break; I cause great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction cups on the legs are applied straightforwardly because they draw blood from all over the body and alleviate old pains in the joints, bladder, and kidneys, as well as bloating; and they are located at the knees and ankles, and throughout their use weaken the body over time, leading to debility in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of placing the suction cup is as follows: you place it first while empty and suck continuously, then quickly apply it and move it evenly without stopping. Continue this until you see the skin turning red and inflating, then stop noticing a slight bloodiness; afterwards remove them, and take care with how your body is positioned because there are those who have tough skin and open pores: one should pierce only once in such cases, making broad cuts that are slightly deep; and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the lump is large, it should be pricked twice: the first time to clear the way for the passage of larger blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the hair is very thick, it must be pricked three times; and when we wish to draw out a little blood at a time, we should only prick once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we are to refrain from blood, then we often resume it. And if there is no substance within, then pierce in the middle, and let the ends be such that the veins are pierced directly, suited for those who have thick skin and strength, and have undergone various processes, you must oil the joints with suction cups of the oil that stimulates and dissolves: if it's a cold state, use violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; and if it's yellowish in color, then use cress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or other similar types.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take turpentine oil, or balsam oil, or oil from anise, and similar types.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the skin is healthy and has broad pores, then it's not suitable to apply oil. Instead, you should wash after the suction with pink water, or cold water, or water from a rose, or water from a cucumber, or water from porcelain, or other similar types.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has some moisture, if he rises from rest or water of myrtle, and of sumac, and of similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large excesses rise from old wine, or from water of vinegar, or from decoction of nettle or chamomile, or other similar things; and they do not benefit well with a vacuum before bathing or while bathing, but after the bath one hour or two. And they should not sleep afterwards, and it must be noted when he needs to be suctioned and when he has been suctioned.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And watch over those who are purging and are choleric, and if their bile is too strong and inflamed; it is necessary for them to take cold things, such as pomegranates, endives, lettuce in sauce, and other similar items; and they should eat small servings, and veal, and pork roast, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold constitution, should take honey syrup, and a fragrant half-aged wine, which is between old wine and new wine, and they should eat small portions, and eat small servings of veal, and small birds and young chickens; and on the day he needs to be suctioned, he should drink more than he eats; it is fitting to give some men any three times triaile or muscat before suctioning, or after, to strengthen the main limbs; and cleanse his liver, but it is not fitting that those who are warm should drink.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The suction cups that are placed to hurt are those that are placed on the liver, and on the kidneys, and podagra, and on the belly and the buttocks and the hips; because this member does not tolerate being hurt in muscles, and it is done with force only for drawing blood from limb to limb, as we place them on nipples when one is healthy. To remove the viscosity that exists within limbs, and by their attractive power we put suction cups onto belly and onto the buttocks to diminish the limb; and removes pain whenever there's swelling or stone, it also can remove potentially by its attractive power an obstruction, or empties out a stone from its place; thus this is done when placed on liver and on kidneys when there's retained visceral congestion, and these suction cups are used empty only for suctioning just that. They aren't applied together with fire in any case, they're never filled with tepid water either, like in diseases with much weeping or sweating, and by the same manner one fills up a suction cup with hot boiled water or with water in which medicinal herbs conducive to this are cooked.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction cup administered with fire is like this:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it has two fingers of width half a palm in diameter. It has an opening through the center approximately a quarter along, as if to pierce a needle, like one from a spider, so that when it is placed on the body part it does not cause pain to the patient; and there's an opening at the center for an arachnid or iron thread across the middle, to insert a candle wick into. The size should be large and small depending on the diseases and condition of those using them; for children's suckers are different from adults', and slender ones differ from fatty ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And we should thus apply this suction cup to the body: take the wick or the thread of wax or linen, and insert it through the center of the suction cup, such that the light is at the bottom of the suction cup so it does not burn the patient; then place it on the body part, and your fingers either over the protrusion as we said, so that when desired, if the vapor goes inside, remove the suction cup; and take hold of the thread or wax in the same way, and repeat often, should you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the suction method therefore, which is administered in pleurisy disease, during all stages of fever, there is neither a tube nor a hole and it is not administered with force until it's full of water. And it is placed solely on the member; and this is how it should be done:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Without tubes are administered only in members where one cannot put suction cups due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar parts; and in their unclothed areas of flesh, like elbows or knees, and other similar areas; and the quality of using them is that when you find without tubes that are in mild water without impurities, you take them. And you put one in mild water until they become accustomed, and have nothing in their stomachs; and then cleanse with a vein and suction cup treatment, then rub the member so it turns red, and place the tubes on it; and when they are full, and excrete, if it's an area where one can put a suction cup, you place it there because this works quite well.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not this way, raise the arm with hot water very carefully, then cold water and mix them well. And then apply ointment. If the arm heals too soon after removing the stitches, moisten it with linen in cold water and place it on top until the wounds are healed; and if there are many wounds, put powdered vitriol or gall and similar things on them until they are healed; or you may put half a peeled bean under the arm, leave it there until the bean roasts on the arm, which will now stop bleeding. And if you need more of this method, prepare other stitches.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the wounds do not heal properly, rub with fresh blood or insert a needle into them until the blood starts flowing and then place on top of it; as soon as they smell the blood, they will stop bleeding. And when you see that they are discharging, powder a little aloes and powdered meal, or ashes, onto them; they should heal now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book on fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and are for restoring breaks and recovery.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, good son, that these matters of this chapter which concern the inspection and treatment of wounds and ailments are not mentioned in any old books or read from letters; because of this reason, this knowledge has been estranged in our land as I never found anyone proficient. And I know nothing, having studied only through the knowledge contained within the ancient books that I've thoroughly reviewed, through experiments, and through life experience. I have described all these matters to you in this chapter accurately and summarized them clearly at the end. Moreover, I have illustrated the forms of instruments used in these treatments as done in the two chapters preceding this one.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, it is necessary for us to outline or introduce the essence of this book and its chapters where wisdom places her understanding, remaining truthful, so that those who have been proven competent may know and learn this noble craft, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when any sort of injury, dislocation, twisting, or fever strikes anywhere in the body, you should attend to heal the patient on both sides immediately. If nothing seems amiss, such as weakness from coldness, young age, old age; if the affected part is too thickly clothed, too cool, or too cold; and consuming cold foods or drinks like cold joints (likely referring to raw meats), or eye or wild rabbit meat are not recommended. Do not drink wine, nor eat fatty meats, and do not fill up on heavy foods that can block blood flow in the veins until you are certain of no pus formation or spreading material inside the body; if only then should the patient be treated according to their first administration.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with foods that promote strong healing, or have a thick consistency, such as cooked wheat in water, and onions, and garlic, and liver, and kidneys, and cow stomachs, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For at any time of rupture it is necessary to let the parts move more quickly and soon the breaking.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that a bone broken in the old and the decrepit cannot be mended or joined well according to its nature due to the drying of the limbs, or those also which are too tender, such as bones of little children; but rather take care to reset on the broken bone the larger tendons which are attached and join the limb together, until it strengthens again as before. And do not finish his work hastily, for this is what befits him, nourishing with large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures can occur in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For breaking of the head is different from breaking at the ankle or leg, and I will tell you all methods of breaking in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are breaks that go to the tip, and others at the joints, such as the size of a feather for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it's a broken bone with an injury, or a break resulting in a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each way has its tool and proper instrument in the restoration, according to what memory brings to his mind; and it is known that bone breakage can be identified by the twist of the limb, an obvious opening from below, and pressure on the hand; and when there's no twisting or rubbing involved, and no sensation of pain, if there's no breakage; but one may indeed experience twisting, or cracking, or small breakage.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	But do not move it with your hand yourself, but apply the remedies that follow, and then gently constrain it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the breakage that took place in the arm, and are its two parts separated, they should now put them on equal terms, as if you remove warts or varicose veins; and when warts come off, do not leave any day until the wart is calmed; then adjust it to make slight yet prudent movement, and know that healing after this is easier than healing in cases with pieces left behind; then hold it tight following these instructions.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if there are broken pieces in the bone, and it is split into two parts, whether it's hands or feet, or near your hand for smaller limbs, or divided by two strings, or one string with your hand; and place the limb according to its natural shape so that when the parts of the broken body have been removed, you can reset them in all directions using movements as light as you can manage, making sure there's no injury or pain from your actions. And adjust both ends of the bones properly into their best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel it well with your hand if you think it's not properly set: if it is set beautifully, and don't over-tighten, or apply pressure as those do who extract abscesses by their own method of contraction in the limb, as we have done many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limbs are in place, severely restrain the patient so they do not move them, neither while awake nor while sleeping, neither while turning nor in any other way; ensure that the limbs are securely placed so they do not feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	And when they do not feel any pain, it means they are not in the right position, and you should put them in such a position that they do not feel any pain. And make sure to place them correctly so that no deviation occurs when they are restored; and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I am telling you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that limbs broken are varied by size and extent and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	And there are small limbs like hands and arms and similar parts: one should wrap them with soft and fine linens. And for larger limbs such as thighs and legs: they need to be wrapped with a large firm bandage because the wider bands embrace the entire limb equally, from all sides without any gap. Then tie it in loops of light linen around three or four times according to the size of the member, making sure that your hand grips each band tightly. Once you are above the breakage point, apply less pressure so as not to move the break too much. And gradually soften the bandages little by little until a large part of the healthy limb is within reach. Then take another band and wrap it around the broken part from inside outwards. Then return slightly below the break and apply moderate pressure, neither too hard nor too soft, just as we have instructed in the first chapter above. After that place the light linen or bandages between each loop until they are all equal, then wrap everything with a belt above them, and finally, place your well-made staples there, provided there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, put something soothing for the abscess in place, and which removes the swelling, and leaves it like that for a few days; then begin with your points, they should be half the width of a hair carefully inserted, or from the shaft used to make arrows, or of palm fronds, and align them according to this pattern:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the points that one places on the fracture be slightly larger and wider than the others; and should be as long as fitting to the size of each limb or greatness; then place them on the points just like you did in the first row, then fasten a small addition thread above, like in the first row on the breakage; more tightly is above, and less below; and it must be that the thread be medium sized, neither too big nor too small, and made of soft linen; for if the thread is large, as I want it from those who make their rows with twisted linen strings, and this is great error, because the row cannot be equal if it is too subtle, and it does not fit that there is less than two inches between each point.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patients are irritated by the shoulder blades after tightening during their recovery, place linen or raveled wool underneath them, so that they do not blister.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is accompanied by bruising, and the knees are broken, I will tell you the treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not right to constrain all broken limbs with bandages on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it is not suitable to use steel for this until after seven days or fourteen, or more according to your abscess situation; and here comes the manner of old plastering as restoration: you take flour that stands at the walls of the mill, mix it with enough egg, and make the concoction neither too thin nor too thick. Use this preparation and it is the common way for restoring fractures in various positions, equally so for men and children because there are no extremes of too hot or too cold involved.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another way of plastering to restore fractures and dislocations and twists: take 3 parts each of garlic, dandelion leaves, rue, and asafetida, along with 9 parts gum arabic and myrrh; also include .v. (5) parts of aloes; add vinegar seven times its volume. Mix this powder well with plenty of egg whites; if the mixture is warm, use this plaster since it has a good composition and heals broken bones quickly, and is effective for many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method of plastering for torsion: take mastic and myrrh, each in quantity X III; take gum-resin and aloes, each in VIIII III; take carob six parts; take boric acid ten parts. Grind them well together, then mix with water or enough egg to make a paste, and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another method for the treatment of joints and bones that have moved out of their places, alleviating the pain arising from this, and trimming uses bone, and bone abrasion: take new wool, and cook it in oil and fat, then apply it to its place.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Wound plasters do not heal completely, but they are better for soothing abscesses and properly setting bones.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method for plastering that heals broken bones: take dry fig leaves and terrestrial poplar leaves, grind them together, and make the plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method for plastering to restore bone fracture and to soothe the aftermath of an abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of wild lettuce, chamomile, violet flowers, ground almonds, take the same amount from each; grind it together and mix with wine. If the limbs are inflamed, mix it with moist aniseed water or just water, then use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another method for faster plastering than the first, when an indurated abscess comes to heal on the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of vismalemel, and flaxseed, balsemum, melilot, and sansucius, and flowers of violets and chamomile, from all take a part; then grind and mix with salt water or sweetened water, or wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book, Ippocras instructs not to place anything on a broken limb for restoration except cerate made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, stating that it should be neither too soft nor too hard between two.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems to Galen that one should place upon the broken member for restoration, dry things a bit heated, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to plaster for injury and pain: take mussels and goatskin grease or bird feathers, and vinegar, and oil equally, and grind them, and make a plaster from this mixture.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then remove the plaster a little later on, and be careful so that the patient does not feel any pain, nor is the bone of its place injured; if you do not remove it by hand day By day And when pain comes to the bone, or itchiness, without rest or swelling, then hasten, and remove it, and apply the plaster now; take a light cloth, and wet sponge, and dip them in water, and immerse the limb until the itch subsides and pain is relieved; then let the member rest for an hour, then place on dry wool, moistened with water or oil, and bind it to another nut, until you are sure of no more abscesses; and cool down the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then restart the subtle application, a little plaster, and do not strain it as much as before; and refine gradually until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you notice that pus has changed to a reddish color and pain along with swelling are subsiding, indicating healing throughout, then you will need to apply plaster and bandages again, proceeding in the same manner as before.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if there is no change in the limb that we have mentioned, or if it remains dislocated even after three to four or five or seven days; and leave it undisturbed for twenty days according to what we observe, until healing occurs, approaching the alignment of the bone; then you must hold back your restraint more than before, allowing the swelling's reduction, and focusing on aligning the flesh beneath; thus increase your strength, as I mentioned earlier; and if you notice that the limb dries faster than necessary, know that further dislocations are not possible; immerse it in hot water each time you reset it, every three days, cleanse a little of the wound; through this process remove the dislocations from the limb, correct swiftly what foolish practitioners do, causing the limb to remain bent: this is bad, and such practices lead to unnecessary harm, I have seen no other way than by patiently aligning and opening it directly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	Through various methods of breaking up
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many methods of fractures exist, and various forms. Their causes are distinct; for there are fractures produced by the impact of a sword, and the collarbone breaks all the bone up to the joint beneath it, just below the bone, as is done with an axe or staff. Thus, this method of fracture is termed 'hewing'.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword hits the bone from above without piercing it, and this type of fracture is called "absolute"; and both large and small injuries result from these two types of fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is sequential impact, or a crack or collarbone fracture caused by stone, or on stone, or other similar conditions.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if it has fracture all the way to the membrane which is around the bone, or on top of the bone, and this wound can be large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there is a wound that has penetrated into the bone as fine as hair, and where the crack is small, thus this kind of fracture is called 'hairline'. And if the injury occurs due to striking with rock or falling, or from any other thing causing the piece of bone to be inserted within, and it lies in the bone like candle holders when they pierce into the wax candles; then the stone enters inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	This happens more often in individuals with moist bones, like those of children, and occurs through all these methods of fracture where many fragments are involved, such as in starfish injuries; and I will speak about that in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all the ways of breakage by detachment from them, and the examination with forceps, and due to corrupted flesh that is present.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of hair is known by this: when one has exposed the bone and rubs it inwards, if there is an opening for black breakage.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of breakage, be vigilant against bad occurrences due to infection, and if you do not see any harmful adverse events, such as vomiting bile, loss of understanding, extension, fainting, ague fever, or if the eyes come out forcefully and turn red, and other similar signs in various dispositions, then cannot be healed without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a serious emergency, yet still hope for salvation, start treatment immediately.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the birth comes to you first, and it is in winter, it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the month when you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it's in winter, you should hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the flesh around the bone becomes rotten, and accidents occur as we have said.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the breakage of the bone reaches as far as the membrane that covers the brain, then it must be that you cut the broken part like this: and you take hold of the head from the patient's body and uncover upon the bone in all ways that you can, and upon the appearance of the wound more surely than you can, and if the bleeding comes to reveal the bone, or pus appears, then do what is necessary there, and you fill the void with wet cloths in oil roset; and make the wound rest until the pus has subsided, and be sure of bleeding; then begin within the bone to remove, and this is done according to two ways of work: one way is that you cut at a narrow angle ahead, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make another cut larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method involves having several different cuts, some narrow and others wide, all with points made of iron. And work them gently to avoid injuring the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and protruding, it is necessary that you pierce through it internally, so that cuts are performed with needles, not straight cuts so they do not penetrate further than the bone under the testicle, and there should be a margin or a circle of about .i. (which could mean one inch) above the point that does not allow the point to pass beyond the bone; and you must have more than this, so that each comes in its place by the thickness of the bone, so that you have needles for all tests; and this is how the three kinds of needles are formed.
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality of piercing through the broken bone is such that you place one needle on the bone, and turn with your fingers until you know that the bone has been pierced. Then move another needle slightly after this point; then do so all around internally. Cut out the space between the parts of the bone where the punctures are, doing this more subtly and gently than possible, as we have said, until you bring the bone to your hand or any tool you might use such as forceps, tweezers; and make sure not to touch the brain or the spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have cut through the bone and treated it, then it must be that you sharpen the scalpel which has remained from the bone to all other instruments resembling a file, but it must be more sturdy and more delicate than the other scalpel; and if there is nothing of small bones or any scales remaining, then gently scrape them off with the surgical tools; then cure the wound using ointments and treatments that we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another way of working is this, as Galien stated, which is more careful; and the needle should be very strong, for it's his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first to expose a part of the bone, where the fracture opens and moves, so that once you have exposed that part, you will place under the tip of this lens-shaped incision, from which the form is as follows:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side alone, and the limb is divided into two parts, so that you cut towards the bone; then with a small hammer above, such that you gently strike the entire bone, and be well cautious of the dust around it; if the skin is dry on the bone, you may lightly scrape it away because you remove the bone cleanly without harm and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture doesn't go through to the membrane, and the bone is cut only above, and there are small pieces remaining, then you should clean up afterwards with a sharp blade, using various sizes so that each can be used most appropriately according to the manual instructions and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you're using large剃刀, and then finer ones, and continue this process until it's done properly.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	For each of the finer hair trimming and subtle fractures, you must adjust your approach according to its direction; this is a matter that cannot be handled by someone who has dedicated their study to this craft.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the pus is revealed, it's necessary that you use linen drapes according to the size of the wound and soak them in oil rosette, then place them onto the wound; take another double layer of linen, soaked in wine and oil rosette, and place it above the first drape; do this more gently than possible, so as not to weigh down the pus, then administer another bandage from above, without exerting any force until only it touches the wound; leave it like that for one or two days, until the abscesses are no longer painful, then remove the bandage, and administer medicines such as roots of garlic, cornmeal, incense powder, and artemisia, among other things; from these create a powder and apply it to the wound, then administer further friendly medicines without causing pain; be careful that the wound is always clean, do not leave any ointment on it, nor allow any clotting on the skin under the brain, for when clots form there they spread and trouble the patient; because if you put something pungent on the pus, it will fester above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, take care, should anything undesirable happen to the patient, as we have said, it leaves room for doubt without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if fear does not come out only because of the medicine that we have put on it, that virtue exists, then you should take a part of honey, and three parts of roset oil, and one part in grease, and you apply this mixture to your skin; then you will treat as usual treatments, until it heals.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that neither of the two parts below the nose are broken, or just one by itself, because they are two bones; and this lower one is cartilaginous, it does not break, nor can force cause it to be bent or twisted, then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, you should pinch your little finger or under your nose, and place that break inside your index finger, and out from the nostril, until the nose wakes up according to its natural shape; and do this lightly, making sure that the patient does not feel pain with your hand.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the part above the nose, and cannot come to the nostril, it is necessary that you place it level with the top of a stick somewhat thick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is of two parts, redo this method, and try to restore it on the first day, if you can; if not, after the seventh or eighth day, when abscesses have subsided, then pinch under your nose with linen cloth pieces, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you apply another bandage from the other side, if the break is on that side as well; and make them large enough to cover the depressions around the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say no restorer tells us to grease the tentacles with butter, and change each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It doesn't seem quite right to me, but it should be that they are greased during the preparation of a mixture of egg yolk and powder from flour; then let the tent be until the bone is hardened and the cartilage toughened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And always use goose feathers instead of tents, and if you have two raw eggs to cover them, and keep the bandage in place, then let the wound be exposed, letting air through it; do whatever you can see.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if the pus comes out to the nose as you work on it, then put on a poultice or wet cotton in rose oil, or in a pinch of hydrazine.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscess is too deep to reach, then apply a poultice outside, made of poppy seed flour and incense powder, mixed with egg yolk; then place it on light bandages but do not tie them tightly around. If they bruise under the fingers into small pieces, and are broken in small fragments, if you have suitable instruments for this task, then scrape along the cut until the edges stick together with things that clean flesh, suturing them as needed using poultices and ointments suitable for this; and if there is no wound inside the bandage, treat it like a tent, and apply poppy stalks until healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	Regarding the rupture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is ruptured internally and there's no wound outside,
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It should be done as follows: If the breakage occurs in the right part of the jawbone,
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if there's a breakage in both halves of the mandible,
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the tooth movements occur, or a rupture, hold them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place on the broken jaw plaster, and place one double cloth; and place on the cloth a large ramp well made, or a piece of leather equal in size to the jaw, long and wide according to the jaw, and fasten it where you can, command the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you notice that the figure changes, let it loose on the third day, and then set what has changed back to its original position; apply plaster, mixing powder from a mill with plenty of egg or flour from almond meal, after you have removed the plaster; place wool lightly on top of the plaster. If the plaster hardens and the patient's positioning does not change, leave it until he is healed; many times are healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if pus comes out of the wound, then treat as we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a breakage and wound together, remove any piece of bone that has been extracted; this requires the use of suitable instruments for such tasks.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and there is nothing left, if the wound is wide, place one plaster suitable for this purpose on it to promote healing, until it heals properly.
de la forcele	by strength
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The force breaks many times before reaching the shoulder, and the breakage happens in three ways: it breaks and separates into two parts with fragments, which is easier to restore; or there is a break accompanied by injury.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And when the operation is for a breakage accompanied by injury, if you have two helpers, so that one marks the shoulder where the force has broken; and the other extends their arm towards the injured part; then make the break equal with your hands, so that the shape is as it should be, and there are no signs or movements.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, place a round sponge or cloth under the shoulder blade, and make it as large as needed; stretch out and secure the broken force with your hand, so that you can make the break equal, as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the neck due to resistance, because it comes from behind, it is necessary for the patient to lie on their back, and place a cushion under one shoulder, and guide the shoulder blade downwards, until the bone of the neck is elevated.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then apply pressure with your fingers, and if you find debris inside, it is necessary to cut downwards; and pull the pieces gently. If the bones cannot join under any force, cut near one of the incisions you have made; but place this tool on the neck instrument to avoid injury there:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it looks like a spoon, and isn't found inside, and is as wide as needed, according to the size of the bone and power of the operation; it has two ends, as you see, and one end is broad, and the other is narrow, as is the wound you made when treating the bones; and once you are sure about an abscess, if there's a cut in the wound, and if the wound is small, or if you doubt about an abscess, if there's no clear indication of it, then fill the wound with bandages and cloths, according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if there are discharges from them, then moisten with oil roseate and honey and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The grinding of the bone, when it is in wounds and size for tailoring, is to place on the bone the plaster made from powder of the mill and an abundance of egg whites, then lay lightweight lathes over it. If necessary, add a stick under the bone. Then take a very large band one palm wide, put two layers of cloth over the lathes, and apply plaster over them. Then take a subtle spindle three fingers wide and long, wrap it around this bandage so that the head of the bandage hangs down; place the spindle on the wound, twist the bandage up to the neck, and under both the clean bone and diseased bone; you pull from each part, when you see that the ligament holds the wound together, and you clearly see that the spindle does not move above the broken bone, then reward it every day until the bandages are changed. And let the disease heal on its back, put him in bed with a small pillow under the bone to lift the shoulder up; if this reduces the tension of force by setting the shoulder in place, or you tie his arm around the neck, and do not release it unless ill accidents occur, until 20 days; then redo the plaster if you see that it is needed and tighten and leave as is, until he recovers. And she is recovered at most in 28 days, and in some it happens less to certain people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	On the breaking of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	The following is about dislocated shoulders; that it occurs when the arm breaks or expands to either side and not fully, solely due to impact. The treatment should be carried out in line with the break's shape, restoring according to its natural form through various methods you can use. Then, apply flour from a mill together with plenty of eggs, lightly taping it down and placing a double layer on top. Next, place a broad but fine long stick somewhat wider than the shoulder, where there are no movements throughout the shoulder region; use linen threads to cover this stick so that it fits evenly; then firmly compress it into one large bend, ensuring the stick doesn't move from its position, checking each day; and every time when it begins to loosen, reapply pressure, ensuring the stick is placed evenly if displaced from its position, keeping the patient on their side. The dislocated shoulder should be healed in XX or XXV days. And when this number of days has passed, release the shoulder, you'll be sure that it isn't the bone that's being easily set lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a bone fragment protrudes and is not covered by the flesh, cut it open, and expose the wound; then follow what we have said about healing after muscle rupture to clean out any pus.
de la brisure dou pis	From the breaking of the heel
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The bones are broken once in the middle but this happens seldom; they often break at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, if there is collapse at the end, causing great pain for the patient, loss of consciousness, and vomiting blood, and exposure opens up within the broken bone, and everyone feels this well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And in restoration, if the patient lies on their back, and you place them one and a half cubits between their shoulders, then press the shoulders together, and join the two ribbones with your hands, and apply gentle pressure to make it equal in all ways that you can, until the bone figure is as it should be; then place plaster casts over this subtle salt outline, or another light object, cover them with a piece of cloth, and bind them tightly around the broken bone, so they don't move. Then turn the bandage back towards the spine, apply pressure to fit the bone properly, reward each hour for the treatment, and if the swelling subsides, tighten it; and if it seems suitable to release tension or due to itchiness that comes with restlessness, pain or abscess, do so immediately, then loosen them up, remove the plaster casts, and treat as needed according to the prescribed cures. Then replace the bandage, pressuring it until it's healed.
de la brisure des costes	Of bone fracture
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that bone fractures only occur in the larger parts of the back and within the head, and they happen due to their fragility; and one feels this well during examination at the hospital.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And for the re-setting, you should make the break equal, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	Then apply the plaster, and immobilize it for one day if needed.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is occurring internally, the patient feels great pain and stabbing, like crying, because the bone punctures the tissue; there are also swellings, chills, sudden vomiting of large amounts of blood, and this causes severe illness, and the old ones used to apply a lot of bandages.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if some say it's necessary to administer meat that inflates the belly, because it pushes away the windiness outside.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not follow this advice; we only use chalk if it has come to that.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And when it comes to that, then heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And let no one among us apply suction cups to the body, because of the sucking sensation and it seems reasonable; nonetheless, there is doubt that the suction cup draws excesses to the body due to its weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that when you cover the body with moist wool in oil heated up, and set wadding between the ribs to make the swelling even everywhere, then proceed with the treatment of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels intense pain that they cannot bear from the bone piercing the skin, and there is doubt for the patient as to whether one should cut at the site of the broken rib and if instruments need to be placed under it; then you must cut into the bone, gently drain it, then suture the two sides of the wound if it's large, and continue treating with plaster until healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you encounter pus coming out, place oily cloths soaked in rose water on it and put them under the wound; and treat while the part where the pus is supposed to be treated remains clean, and have gauze always ready at the site of injury until it heals.
de la brisure dou col	from the cracking of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No breakage ever occurs to the bones of the neck, and it does not bend; similarly with the spine in the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to anyone and you want to know whether they will recover or not, if you notice that their hands are swollen, pale and lifeless, and they cannot move or extend them; and when you prick them with a needle, if they do not feel anything.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	You'll know that it's mortal in various conditions. If they remain responsive and feel well when their limbs are held still, you understand that the bone is intact, and that the disease has been treated if a remedy was applied to them.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if such an occurrence comes to the spine of the back, and you need to know if it is healthy or not, be cautious that his flesh is softened, and that this event occurs near his hands, and above the back there is a gusty wind and spontaneous defecation; and when observed on his belly, it exhibits spontaneous defecation.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is observed on his back and wishes to rise, he cannot do so.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is mortal: if there is no work in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if such incidents do not happen to him, then it becomes a less serious matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that if there's pus coming out, you need to handle it carefully, put on oil at the point of pus or on the spine until it calms down; then apply a supportive and drying plaster and bind it with a bandage. And instruct the patient to rest. Don't sleep on that part where they feel pain until they recover.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is exposed, you must cover it with a poultice; and set the bone, then unite the two edges of the wound if they are large, with stitches, then treat with an ointment that heals and nourishes until it heals. And if the bone chip at the elbow is broken, which is called 'the elbow chip', take your left hand pouch, and place it evenly against your right hand power; then apply the plaster and elevation above you, should you need to use them. Then compress it, and if there's an exposed bone fragment, cut it up, set the bone, and treat the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	from the breaking of the bone in the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Sometimes the hip bone is broken, and if it happens, there might be a little pain in the head; and it extends long, declines towards the knee, brings pain to the leg, and bruising, and inflames what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand upwards, as long as you are over the fracture; and know where the break is and its shape. And if the break is only in the head, then make it equal to this break, until it has its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is along the length or it declines towards the inside, then direct the patient to lie on their stomach, as long as you can achieve the restoration of this break.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have placed it evenly, put it on the plaster. Then place a charcoal or earthenware stick under it and hold the wound steady, so that it does not move. And apply heat to the area of the back until the wound is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the abscesses drain out, do not disturb them until the discharge stops, as long as the abscesses remain drained, and apply what we have just mentioned; then return to the treatment and restrain it according to how it should be, provided there is no bad incident. This is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of the breaking of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder is that which is between the arm and the head of the shoulder; if it is broken, you should restore it according to one of the two methods: one way is for you to take a rod half an inch thick, like this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And join with two shoulder blades two pieces of string and lay them up high, and place the patient's back up on one seat; then pour their broken arm onto the rod until it reaches the armpit, and is midway along the length of the rod, then lay this against any heavy object or let the helpers hold it downwards; then place the joints in a position equal to their hands together, until the broken bone returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that you place the patient on their back, and tie their hand to their neck, then command two attendants that one should cut at the broken bone from his hands, and the other cuts down right in half an inch lengthwise, and each extends themselves to their respective part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more vigorous, hold on to the wound when it inflames, and near the inflammation, and extend each of the assistants to their share.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is near the head of the shoulder, it must be that you place half the tie above the edge, and the other towards the knife, near the wound; and similarly if the wound is facing the blade, it must be placed lightly, without effort, as long as the wound is even on the edge, and near the blade; then make the cut evenly, as it should, and hold it back, so that no pus comes out.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if pus comes out, do not tighten it for more than seven days, and apply greased wool in a quiet place and oil of roses until the pus is soothed; then tighten it, and do it with care so that you place plaster on the wound. Afterwards join the arm to the shoulder support, and put your hand on the shoulder or breast; and place the cloth, then tighten it on the shoulder support and the arm, ensuring that the arm is straightened without being hindered, or if the bone is not deformed.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you suspect the bone is not moving, use braces and place a larger and stronger brace under the cut than the others, leaving one inch of space between each brace. Ensure that each brace is wide enough to pass through the wound by about three inches from both sides; then tighten on these braces as I have explained at the beginning of this chapter on the wound, with more force but less distance apart.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the base of the nails, and the narrowing, as we have said, in your care when restoring a broken limb, and doubt about pus formation beneath it, let it be bound for up to seven days, as we have said. Then examine each person every three days on the bandage, ensuring that no itching begins or ulcers do not form at the site because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If it's an address, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such incidents occur, or if the dislocation only occurs after three days or more, and pus appears on their back, and they keep their hands on their stomach; put under the shoulder one cushion filled with evenly sized wool, and check every hour of the day or night, that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or that the bandages do not become soft; if it's an address by the virtue of medicine, and give them the food we have prepared in this manner so the meat is at the finest texture right away; and when they start to recover, let it be substantial.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be taken back to full size in forty days; then one must release them, give baths and apply ointments for the limb to recede.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the constriction is awkward and tangled, it may take ten days or two months to release it.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the 'fosciles'. One bone is small and it creates the socket. The other one is larger and it is located under the small head; sometimes only the large foscile breaks or even both the small and large ones might break.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small fractures are broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the large ones are broken, the healing is bad, and worse than if they were broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If only the small fracture is broken, it's sufficient to gently extend it and make it even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it's the large fracture, it's necessary to strain more forcefully; and extend it upwards onto one part of his leg, and mark the hand pouch higher than the others, and place the small tendons lower than the other bones, and have the wounds cross over themselves, with that part of the leg higher in front, so that the wound does not suffer any labor; then extend your assistants' arms towards the part below their hands, or at his wrist, and another assistant above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then place the eyes evenly, according to their best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the breaking into pieces, you place each one in its place, and if there is none that grabs the key, and you cannot restore it to its place, then do work upon the bone, as we said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if during the healing of the wound, I have spoken about it in the singular chapter; take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if during the beginning of the restoration abscesses appear, so prepare a bandage made from rosin and white beeswax, that it is neither too hard nor too soft; and fix the bandage carefully, until the abscesses have calmed down.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then apply the rosin, and place the plaster with powder from the mill mixed with plenty of egg, then insert the splints, and ensure that the splint for the fracture is placed farther outwards, and a little wider than the others; remember that there should be six or more splints in various positions: either when the fracture is in one bone, or two; hold it up higher over the fractured area compared to other parts, just as I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter; have the cloths above the fracture moist and soft, not hard nor abrasive; use the threads from linen that are neither too thick nor too thin, as we said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the limb and the ligament after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accidents happen to the limb, such as itching that comes on the limb, it is necessary for you to immerse the limb in hot water until that itch subsides; and let the limb rest undisturbed.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then resume the tightening process; if the ligaments have been severed and the bones exposed, doing so would seem right.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if care is taken so that no injuries can come to the limb due to it being too tight, it is necessary that you soften it a bit., and leave like this for some days, until the pain subsides, and then start tightening again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, or if it is up to 20 days since the dislocation.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Otherwise, hold their hands to their necks, and ensure that the necks are even, and take care of movement and disturbance, and sleep on their back; know that this injury is healed within 30 days or 35 days, and perhaps within 20 days, depending on the concoctions and the compositions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and in us, there are few breaks, and it doesn't happen much, but it does get bent many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the heel of the hand is broken or bent, it should be bound in a crossed manner and placed straight before him equally; then place his hand on an extended surface, extend the fingers of the broken bones, and place them evenly with the eyes, until they are well joined; apply bandages and splints, if no abscesses occur, then place one splint according to its size; it should be wrapped in a single layer of linen.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the break is in the heel near the belly of the hand sole, then make a ring from cloths, and instruct the patient to place their broken heel inside it; then apply a long piece of cloth, and place one splint according to its size as big as the hand's sole, and secure it properly.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is at the front, you should place one splint above and another under it on the foot, so that your hand is open and straight, then tie them all around the hand together, and seal the connection between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the break affects neither of your hands nor feet, it's likely a sprain; handle it evenly as needed; compress with the foot, and should you see fit to place a small straight splint to lift the sprain, so that it doesn't move; and if the break is in one of your hands or fingers, like in the index finger or any other, handle it evenly, then tie with the healthy finger following behind; or tie them all together while holding firmly, or place on a splint as you would for a sprain; be careful about the restoration and position of each wound, and take care when someone comes to help, just as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone in the arm is broken many times, and one can see it when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is like this: i.e., to bind above the breakage, and i.e., another underneath.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the muscles lie above their face, then extend each minister's tendon to their equal part; and this is when the break lies within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the breakage is close to the root of the nail, then one or more of the ligaments towards the knife edge and others near the breakage should be.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is close to the knee joint, then make sure that ligaments are in the knee joint, and do the forward extension; then place the metal rods at their two ends for as long as it matches its natural figure, and then apply plaster and the bandage, until abscesses don't come about.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess to heal, let it heal and then return to your work and treatment; the wound is treated in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary for you to wrap the area of the fracture with a strip of leather doubled two or three times and retain the excess. Then bend the leg until the ankles reach the knee joint, and fix the thread longitudinally between the foot and leg underneath, allowing it to emerge on top; then bend around the leg and the foot with the bandage, place another at the knee joint above, then check under it as far as you can go over the bone. And tighten in such a way that there are three or four twists on either side of the fracture area; when you move beyond this area, use less force. Then adjust the ends of the thread that you have placed between the leg and foot with three more loops above, making sure they fit around your ankle. Continue to check under where the thread emerges from your foot; whenever it passes by the bottom, make sure not to let anything else like swelling or pus appear.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, release and guide what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that catch hold, it should be removed if possible; and if it cannot, it is necessary to cut through the wound and drain out force; and treat it as we have said, until it becomes healthy.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And no part of the flesh is broken when such needles are inserted, as in the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, in such a restoration done there is no complaint from the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	Know that the flesh is restored within one day or possibly slightly more, or less, depending on the individual's complexion variations.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the alley of the liver
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that within the belly of the womb there is a little breakage, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, even if only with a small crack, or loss of tissue, it occurs in all wounds and as one would feel pain, this is felt very well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And for the restoration, one should place the long ones evenly at their ends until everything is assembled and moving. Then apply plaster, and place a round support if needed, then adjust as necessary. Afterwards, revise all preparations that we have discussed in other injuries such as abscesses or similar conditions; apply what is suitable to each situation until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	Of the breaking of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called by right "ham," and the other is called "femur"; and undergoes any injury or breakage just as it does with the arm, and its restoration is done similarly to that of the arm equally, and the processes are all the same. And if both these bones are broken together, then the leg turns in every direction.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bones are broken, then turn in front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it well; and it turns underneath.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Therefore apply the extension technique, making it even, and equally fasten the stars; but still, if the break is ugly and there are multiple pieces, then the extension should be smaller and lighter; and perform according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two fathom lengths of hemp rope that support the leg on both sides, and each should be as long as the leg from the knee to just below. Then wrap them with two strips of leather around the legs from top to bottom, tie them in the middle too, so the leg cannot move either to the right or left. And thus it is well; no one administers a single rod of hemp that’s as long as the leg and made of hemp, they set the leg straight for warding off movement, and properly do you perform this when there's injury; and move the leg every day, to see if there is an abscess or any other incident; treat it until it becomes healthy.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of bone fracture from the chest
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	An ankle injury does not come from a fracture, but each time there is a bone breakage and in the foot bones, it only means being hurt in various positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a bone breakage in the foot bones, and you see these bones pushing each other upwards, place your heel on the ground just like they would want to go. Then put your foot right under them at the point where the bones are raised; press it so much that blood returns to their veins. Then apply plaster and bandages over this area. Put a small wooden table with two filled foot holes under the belly of the foot, then pull it up to the heel extension, then wrap cloths around it or do other things you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, if you find the tie undone, because you will find the bones equal, whether broken or healed.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the ribs are broken, you should restore them as we have said about the ribs of a hand; then place one on each broken rib according to its length, and make it somewhat wider, then set the foot of this table that I mentioned under the patient's body, and tighten in the fitting. And if there are two or three or more, you should break them, putting one under each rib according to their quantity, wrapped in a single piece of linen, and tighten the table underneath the body; and while being at the front of the table over the abdomen below the foot, so that it pinches well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you should not forget the other things I've said about other injuries, just like we have discussed; and address each situation according to how it should be.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	regarding the breaking of the hand bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bones of nature are broken in a woman, have her stay for some time with swollen limbs, then incline her towards the lower part of the back and hold her from behind. Then fill the natural void where nature's wound is with cotton stuffing and also place it so that it reaches to the level of her breast. Then stand up the woman again slowly lifting her back step by step. And when she jumps on cotton, until it reaches the entry point of nature, then bring the bones together using her breast as support. And when she feels like urinating, take out the cotton and when she has urinated, put her back in position, thus performing this process for 7 or more days: once you see recovery from breaking, then use a goat bladder and tie it on top with a stick. Fill the entire bladder into nature; blow into the stick firmly until the bladder inflates internally. Nature will return to the broken part and fill it with cotton again, leaving some days so that it heals completely.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the hand is broken, or in women if it remains like how we have said about the hip bone, and these nearby fractures are not hidden from him who dedicates his effort and use to it, and listens to my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	And the breaking means in multiple positions the right path of restoration: therefore, understand this.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the case of a broken penis, take an opossum's throat and fill it with the penis; then wrap it in bandages around the area, and let it be for three days or as long as needed; it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	Of breaking with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the person who has a broken bone with a wound, even if it's large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or something similar, that they should be treated now, so that the treatments we have said show their effectiveness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healthy, treat it with vitriol, if you don't have anything else, then try again to heal the break at the same time or that day, or if no pus appears.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if pus appears, let the healing continue until the next day, as long as the pus is soothing, and don't touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause harmful incidents.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if you see bone broken out above the knee exposed, it is necessary that you place your hands on it lightly, in a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions have not been prepared to be equal in your hands, then use this iron tool that is made of iron, which should be between seven or six inches long, and its width is according to the size of the wound; for this, you must know how to apply three or four, depending on what it requires in each treatment for fractures; and they should be round and somewhat thick so they do not bend under compression against your body when working on the limb, and they should have a pointed tip at the front and be thick toward the middle in the front.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche" because it requires that the curved shoulders be placed on top of the head of the visible bone; and the bend needs to be made once, until it regrows, and be equal to each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the breaking is subtle and the tools cannot properly grasp the bone, it is necessary that you cover the head of the bone as long as the tools have the ability.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot return the bone to its place as we have said, if you have access to a suitable tool for this purpose, such as an incisor or scalpel, by your own strength; then remove what is remaining inside the hard and minor scrapes of the bone.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is returned, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it has not been placed in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you want it to be in its place, then drape the moist area with black vinegar bandage and properly if it is in a healthy state; and do not put any ointment or other thing on the wound instead of oil, which could lead to infection and decay; after this, administer herbs when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound exposed, covering only the entire surface area according to the size of the wound. And be very careful that the wound is not constricted by bruising; many times people have done this wrong and caused death or decay in the patient. Also note that the treatment should be softer than other injuries.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is deep or large, and you doubt that any adverse events may have occurred inside, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, then it doesn't suit to place plaster; but wrap around, instead of plastering, hard cloths, and secure them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the swelling around the wound has reduced, remove what you have placed with vinegar all over it, and apply a healing ointment to the wound, such as a tetrarrison ointment and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary for you to dislocate the limb two times a day, in the morning and at dusk, until it is healed and restored.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it must be that the limb is treated in such a way that the joint moves freely with light force.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if this happens for several days, and it cannot heal anymore at all from the joint movement, know that there are small fragments of bone causing this, so you must treat the wound with caution, and remove all these dead bone fragments that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a窦cture forms at the wound or any other kind of corruption occurs, it is necessary to treat it according to what he explained in his previous chapter.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when bone is broken and exposed in the body, such as in the case of the elbow or shoulder bones or other large joints, do not attempt to set it, for many die from this. Instead, let it heal on its own until it becomes soft; possibly it will discharge itself after about 20 days or even more than 30 days, then you can treat the wound if possible; but if you cannot, leave it as is.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	The blows that come from sweat
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	They often come after the healing of the bruising, even when it's close to the joint, and this is something to see in the form of the limb; and by chance cannot do its natural works.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Therefore, be vigilant when it comes to this fresh condition: if you administer any of the stictching medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, along with sarccocolle, senna, or similar things; as you would take any of these items, or all together, mix them with stictching wine, or plenty of egg whites, or honey; then place them on the spot in poultices, firmly apply, don't remove it by hand for days; and after that dislocate it, start anew until the swellings are removed; or you can apply this to a well-made piece of plaster; because the properties of the plaster is such that it removes all swellings from the limbs; and if the swelling has turned into hardness like stone and needs removal, cut through it from above, reveal the excessness clearly; or remove it with no barber's tools until it is removed, then treat until it heals.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The limb that becomes weak after confinement
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the breaking of bone is restored, and after it remains, if the limbs are weak and fine, this happens for various reasons: due to these conditions:
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the treatment is as follows: you must feed the patient with meat and make their body tender until they multiply within him. Then, administer baths and provide them joy and relief. Afterwards, apply grease to the limb, so that the grease draws towards the main bleeding point, and washes it frequently with tepid water, until the bleeding matches up with the limb; and restore its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	If the member is bent after recovery
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and if the bone breaks open, even though the form of the limb is ugly, it does not lose its natural function: nor should one believe those who say that you must break the entire member anew; many people have done this in our land; these practices are criticized, causing large harms, and even death. However, if the swelling and pain are fresh, they should be treated with hot water or with heated softening herbs like mint leaves, roots, and melilot. And one makes a plaster for softening, such as well-made dyaquilon, taking the mint paste and mixing it with linseed oil or safflower oil, then applying this plaster on top; alternatively you take greased figs, grind them with clove powder, and similar medicines that alleviate heat.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And no time is bone of dislocation made by rubbing continuously and for a long time with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let there be some movement in the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the dislocation has aged and hardened, like bone, and requires being treated with iron, if it suits to cover up to the bone, do so with a gentle incision. And apply pressure and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the patient.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation happens without any reason, if it corresponds now to be brought back without hesitation.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if you delay, it swells the limbs, and perhaps puts them in pain at their joints; this is not how they should move when they are swollen: many times it brings pus and other pains. Nonetheless, when this happens, have the surgeon attend to the patient first, then leave him alone until all abscesses subside; then immerse the limb in hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and cure each limb as it comes into its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have arranged the chapters on shoulder dislocations up to this point.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes the jaws are dislocated downward, and the dislocations of both occur in two ways: either they are slightly osteoarticular at their joints, and somewhat softened; or they are completely dislocated and hang towards the bottom, causing them to not be able to hold saliva in their mouth, nor can they close their mouth, and wrap their tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns through several positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is whole and completed, then you should reset it quickly, without hesitation; and in such a way that the attendants cut his head near the disease, and place one of her hands' pocket of the other part of dislocation within the mouth, when dislocation involves two parts; and the other two hands must stick out for balance. Command the patient to soften, his jaws, and move them around in every direction.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And press the thumb equally, until it regains its position in place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if returning it causes pain, even if these are the two jaws combined, if they arise from hot water and oil, do so lightly when resetting; neither should you force the return, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back equally, and the mouth of the patient closes well after being softened, should put damp cloths in a poultice made from rose oil and wax, then bind it loosely with strips of soft material; and let the patient rest on his back, and his limbs be between two cushions, so that he does not move either to the right or left, nor strain at all, but only eat light food, until the pains are relieved, and the jaws are closed; and then give him what he wants lightly, without causing any effort in opening his mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaws are well healed and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibles cannot be properly reunited in an hour and are not returned to their original positions, fever and chronic discomfort ensue, along with sudden stomach pain or vomiting of undigested food.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a loss; and many times, death has befallen the one who encounters it within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the lever
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The strength cannot relieve within the continuity of it and beneath the waist, and is dislocated every time at the back, and well we feel it.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is such that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then press your hand against him, and he will return to his normal form. Then put it on a plaster bandage, and bind it tight; and if he tries to straighten out, only do so once, then reset him at his original location as we have said; then again put the plaster bandage and bind tightly, and guide him to rest until he is healed. Thus similarly restored are the shoulders of the back when they are free from their original position.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Know that the shoulder is dislocated only in three ways: one way being when it's dislocated down to the elbow area and up to the armpit; and the second way being down to the heel part; and accidentally dislocated above this area, which happens rarely; nor does it dislocate behind for the shoulder blade, nor within for nerves; and often dislocates downwards towards the elbow area, even those with little flesh, because they jump quickly in these cases; those with enough muscle, however, it jumps outwards, and returns to its place.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And it happens to some men by accident or through bruising, and the shoulder swells from an abscess that forms quickly, and they believe it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It is necessary then that you try it out, as long as you are certain; and only then start the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known that the shoulder dislocations are when they move towards the elbow area. There's distinction between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their diverse manifestation; you'll find a pit at the shoulder's peak and from the elbow to the shoulder's peak as if it were an eye; and the patient can't bring his hand to his nose, nor move in any way. And also, if it is dislocated above, it isn't hidden either because you clearly find it at the shoulder's peak; and this kind of dislocation cannot be corrected except when new, or if the child has a disease.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And this method involves the ministers lifting their hand from under the flesh up high, then placing their thumbs on the shoulder blade and lifting the joint forcefully up towards its normal position; and the ministers lift the hand and extend it upwards, putting it back down in place; if it moves quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it doesn't come out like we have said after a few days, then the patient should be dipped in warm water; and they should apply soothing, calming treatments; for example decoctions of garlic, fenugreek, and mint in hot water, and these should be applied; afterwards cover the patient's back with this mixture, and place on it a pad made evenly, neither too soft nor too hard; then position one's hand on their heel under this pad, and gently lift up the shoulder joint, pulling the arm towards the body; and some other assistants cut into the shoulder area, so that they do not move downwards; that shoulder comes back immediately now; and if you see that you are able to pull it in this manner: then there should be a person larger than the patient standing present in the house; and stand straight toward the side, push the shoulder under the assistant's pad, lift up the pad high, so that the patient hangs down vertically; and some other assistants pull the hand towards the stomach from beneath.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the wounds are too light, they can move with anything heavy, and the dislocation returns immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And you can also reset it in another way: and you put the tip of the rod into the ground, so that the shoulder is placed as if on a trigger, but not too big or too slippery; then place it under the wound, but with straw underneath it for insulation, and keep the wound covered throughout the length of the rod; then stretch out your hand below from another side in formation, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it doesn't return using all these things that we have said, you do this treatment: take a two-branched rod that is three inches wide at the base, which has the tip rounded enough to fit through neatly by the underplate, according to this form.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then tie at the head of the stick that is covered with flesh so it doesn't injure the patient, then place the stick under the limb; and extend your arm along the stick as long as possible, and tie the shoulder support onto the stick, and your arm at the elbow joint, then put your arm on one of the handles of the bed on its wide side, and let your hand hang downwards from the other side: the joint will return in this position now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it has been done, in whatever way it is, so that you should place upon the surface of the bone an equal needle, then apply the plastered preparation with powdered from the mill, along with incense and egg oil, all over the shoulder blade and around it, then remove from under the bone addition, and tie again to the plastering, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let the hands remain like that.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it must be chewed a little, until the limbs are strengthened, because it will heal faster; and then chew more after five days or seven, and move it; and if it is firm and not softened, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has moved due to moisture that caused it or for another reason, then you should apply three cauteries to it, as was described in the previous chapter about the cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all of this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint doesn't hold, and cannot lift your arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder has been stretched or weakened; and know that the joint would never have been placed in its right position.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Dislocation near the buttocks, and breasts, or behind, is caused by pushing and stretching of hands, and it's administered elsewhere; and treatment should be given while it is still clean.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing comes itching on the limb, and slowly with movements, then bathe the patient several times until this itch is alleviated, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	From the dislocation of the shoulder bone
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated at its points and returns to them; it has been dislocated from all sides, as well as in front and behind, and dislocations are not restored because you see and feel it clearly; and it gets dislocated according to each position.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the bad skin with good flesh, if you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is twisted, and cannot bend the arm or reach the shoulder in any way.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary that you reset it in this way so that the abscesses are on each side when they swell, because if they were on one side and came out, there would be a complaint about bringing them back; and by chance, it cannot be brought back completely, even when it's behind; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and by chance, death comes from it.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And for its restoration when it can be brought to that position, you extend their hand with both of yours; and their arms are spread out, and the hands face towards the center according to the length of the arm, forward and backward, and push the joint onto the bones together, or at the base of their palm, until they return to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if it is a dislocation at the front, then it returns when they double their hand to their hand, and push from the base of the palm with the bone that has moved out.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it doesn't return to its place, apply strong extension; and in doing so, you extend the arm with one hand while holding it steady with the other, ensuring that it does not move during this process. Once this is done, bend the arm from both sides, having wrapped a double length piece of cloth long and wide around him. When you attempt to join the joint back into place by touching your hand to it, apply oil to soften the joint, then firmly set it in place until it heals; when healed, place it under dry plaster with some egg yolk, hold it firm, and allow the arm to be bent at the shoulder, leaving it for several days, then gently remove the bandage.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in its place, release the tie, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not fit well, reapply the plaster and the tie, and leave it like this for some days, until it is firmly set; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if they feel sore after bringing back the joint, and it moves, then bathe them beautifully, scrub well until their swelling is reduced. Or you place a fat sheep’s grease on the joint, let it be for a day and a night, then remove the bones, and have it take in water; and when sweat comes out, rub the joint gently, then put back the grease, and then enter into water; and do this twice or three times until they are healed. And if you see that, place wet heifer’s fat cooked with butter on it, and apply over it; if it returns to its position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The hand's dislocation subsides and the recovery is quick, more so than other joints. One should immediately bring it back to its place while it is still dislocated, in this same moment when it has subsided, so that the limbs swell or an abscess forms.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the bringing back is that you put your hand on a board and extend your subordinate's hand, placing their palm in line with the appearance of the joint, then press until it fully regains its shape. It is necessary to check if it's properly aligned; then place the back of his hand on a board during extension and during bringing back.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, you should have the patient place the back of their hand on a table, and then you place your hand at that point where the joint appears.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, that's good. If not, if the application of plaster poultices to treat abscesses is soothing and then they leave him without needing to restart.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he can't bear it, and you can't put him in the right position after some days, then the joint remains twisted; and it doesn't harm the patient unless they have their hands bound up until then, and cannot strain anything completely: thus you know that a nerve has been cut, or an artery; so if there's no other cause than to apply a cautery immediately in such cases, and by chance there is nothing else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are in place, place on the plaster as we have said, then apply pressure and leave it for five days, then release and let it be like that.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well and there is no stiffness, then use warm water, and rub until it becomes clean.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	From the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	No time is the shoulder set in one place on either side, no time behind the palm or belly; thus make the shoulder and hold the dislocation till it revives, then support its head with the shoulder, and lead it towards the part that's disjoined; and let it rest two days, then place it evenly from the third day onwards; and bind it as we have said, and remove the binding on the third day, then allow it to move, and rebind it on the next; and do this often until it is snug, and do the same if it's dislocated in the belly of the hand, doing so till it's healed; and do likewise when it's dislocated from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	For dislocation of the ankle, for dislocation of the back.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the ankle or the back (or neck) is dislocated, or when there are multiple dislocations, if no treatment is given, because death rushes to the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs of this are that the evacuations jump to one's will, cannot be held back, and many times soften various parts of the body, or both thighs or either arm or leg. Many times the knee becomes three ways; the one that becomes stiff at the back is called 'trembling': the treatment for this is you reward if the trembling has come from childhood: if there was no cure or healing until then.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes about from birth or from impacts or similar things, the old methods of cure spoke in grand words, but it does not bring all great benefit. I have shortened this according to my intention and formed tools in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I state that in the case of impotence occurring before birth, neither male nor female will be healthy; similarly, when it occurs straight to both sides, one cannot cure anything except that which is directly towards the back, as I say; and if the pain extends evenly on their belly up to the first level equally, with some strain all around them, so they do not get bruised; then plant two prongs in the head in the earth formed soil, and another at heels, and tie a rope between the nails under the muscles, and another at hips, and at knees, and at ankles; and both doctors know how to fasten the ropes, one at the head and others at heels, among the two prongs; they must be well closed, the prong as we have said, and the surgeon place their palms on the spiny form until she revives.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return through this cure, take a table of three lengths long and position it over the surface. If the patient is on the side, place the patient's head under the edge of the table. Then set the middle of the table above the spine; put his feet on the other end of the table, and press firmly until he returns to his usual state. And if you see fit, perform it on the wrist that turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And if you place two spits through the part of the patient's arm that is three lengths long, and above each foot two more, with one between each spit, half a length from top to bottom; and in each spit insert a piece or a corner, so that they are firmly in the ground, so they do not move; and between these two spits place another spit turning inward, near where their joints meet, and in this turning two small spits of about three lengths each, for turning the joint; and then fasten the string between the parts at the joint facing the head, and the other string towards the feet to the opposite joint, and each servant turns their own joint with all the ropes, and masters set the spine straight as we said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when they are equal, place them with dessiccative plaster and plenty of egg white, then apply the ointment. And afterwards use the ash from a tablet of three inches long, which burns down the fatty part and the healthy section of the spine, then tie it with a bandage as we have said before, and instruct the patient in subtle self-healing until they are healed. If anything comes during the healing process, at the end of health, administer softening medicines with the ash that we mentioned previously; and when any piece of plaster is given, there should be no appearance on the lower spine from behind, beware this might indicate dislocation; and it's the bone that opens up, so one must not have presumption: by chance could cause death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and the shoulder only cause dislocations, not in any other way like others. And the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and more inside than outside, a little dislocated in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation is this: when you join the diseased leg with the healthy one, it turns out to be longer and opens more in the diseased knee than in the healthy one, and the diseased knee can't bend fully on the fire; and the veins are swollen inside due to pus, because the shoulder of the thigh comes down there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him who approaches death is that this event is contrary to these before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him who approaches beforehand, are that his leg is well in accordance with completion; yet, he does not double even a step without pain, and if one tries to make him walk, he cannot move forward, and retains his urine, and swells the belly, and when he walks, he goes on the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him who approaches behind, are that he cannot spread his step, nor double it, and this leg is more curved than the other, and the belly is flattened, and the shoulders come down to the back under the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The process of this sign indicating dislocation is that you should confirm if the dislocation is old and remains in its position, without any treatment; and there should be no assumption made about it.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for those whose dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you quickly restore the joint, and stretch it inside and outwards, and move it to the right and left; if it returns, no other treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not come back this way, then you should take hold of the forceful minister, and keep the leg strong between two hands, or with one hand tied to above the knee; and another minister extends his hand over in such a manner that he squeezes his hands under his armpits, then pushes him off with a blow using the tied line towards the hip; and another holds the head on the tie; and extend up and down all at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground entirely, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This stretching method applies to four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns, just like we have explained, it is correct.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If this doesn't work, then you need to adjust it according to its appearance. When dislocations occur at the joints of the knee, ensure that you place the patient's healthy side underneath them before tying the line around their hip; and keep the part under the groin in its place, afterwards lift up the knot above the groin area and with force too. Then hold your fellow ministers by their arms and encircle the bulky area of the diseased leg, extend it forward. If it returns to its original position now; this way of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot squeeze it in this way as we have said, then it is necessary that you tie the two legs of the sick person together with a strong rope under both heels and under both knees. Then let the affected leg be extended more than the others; hang it by the head on a staff, and put outstretched arms to the ground twice its length. Then command the minister to embrace the head of the oven, and another ministers hanging along with the sick person who embraces the shape of the oven. For the joint is coming back now quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocations are at the front, if they lie on the sick person as we said in that with glibosity, and restrain one end of the ligament properly onto the affected leg, and also on the foot; then put two sticks, one at the head and another at the feet. Then place the stick between the oven's sides when it is formed; and plant wet cloths around for protection so that it does not burn the sick person. Then have each minister face him, and make all ministers' hands equal to his dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it comes back, that's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place on 'ie', the table, and press there just as we have said in bloodletting, and let the patient lie on their healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it must be stretched quickly, and according to what I said; and place the patient's pain on the diseased side, then press with the other hand, and pull down from the waist towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is at the back, if it should not stretch the patient's side down, or lift them from the ground, instead, they should lie in a position as if their hip was dislocated at the back; and let them lie on both hips; and their side extended just as we have said about lying on two hips; and be there on his backside, and the band is extended like we said earlier, and one must press against the joint to the table; it will be ready when the patient extends their legs, and they are equal; then adjust their thighs, put on the plaster, and tie with a band so that the hip does not move; and rest for three or four days, then let them get up gently until their limbs are strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	From shoulder dislocation due to arthritis
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knees can be dislocated in three ways: that is to say, from within and without, and behind; and do not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs so are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at their knee. And if they do not anchor at their knee, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all such matters is that you make the patient stand straight, extend their leg if they can, and place your back against their buttocks, and place their foot on yours; then take hold of their thigh with your palms, pulling it between your fingers, then fold the two sides around the thigh firmly. And another attendant extends their foot as long as the knee returns to its position, and the signs are that they easily bend their leg at their knee; and place a plaster, and heat the leg against the knee, and keep them together tightly for three or four days, then release; and do not disturb the patient from walking until the limbs are strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not completely gone, apply strong extension, as we have said in treating the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	From the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are never fully set and always partially dislocated, both inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle swells, and tries to move forward to the part where it has dislocated: the resetting should be quick, and one must gently extend it with their hands only when it is slightly back.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it has been reset completely, you should have the patient sit upright, and guide their limbs forward from under the leg, above the ankle; then pull the foot towards yourself with your right hand, and then with your left twice, then extend it upwards, and firmly pull the foot up; do this twice as we said, pulling and guiding the foot. If it returns, that's good; if not, restart the process, for it will return; and if it can't return like that, you should have the patient lie down on their back on the ground, bury the stake firmly between their buttocks, and bind it tightly to prevent bruising of the ankle; then cut your assistants' thighs, and another assistant extends the foot with both hands or to the waist where they tie it under the neck of the foot; then extend each assistant evenly, and place the stake so that it's firm between the patient's buttocks to hold the ankle when extended; then place the eyes at equal height with the dislocation in their hands, and another assistant cuts the healthy leg above the knee, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it's at the correct point, apply the bandage and bind it, making sure to firmly secure it. Then fasten the limb to the leg, and be careful not to tie too tightly the nerves that are located behind the ankle; then leave for two or three days, and if any loosening occurs in the bandaging, release it. Then untie after the third day or at the fourth, and guide the patient gently for another three days; and unless there is further dislocation before this period ends, it cannot be assumed that the joint will still be out of place.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the pus comes out and goes away, then you should soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, while it is still healing.
des dois	The text seems to be cut off at "des dois". Without more context or surrounding sentences, it's difficult to provide an accurate translation for this phrase alone. However, based on the preceding lines and considering the style of Old French medical treatises from medieval times, this might translate roughly as:
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When both shoulders are dislocated, if they need to be beautifully stretched for manual work, and this is a simple task.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is anywhere on the back or bottom of the foot, you must have the patient lie completely flat or directly on a table, and place your foot over what is visible from those joints. Press your foot firmly until it wakes up; when it becomes equal, and there's nothing opening, then place under the sole of your foot a table for two shoulders, press firmly, and leave for three days. Then release the dislocation; have them rest until they are well.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	regarding wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation and you need to restore it, many times death occurs: so do not be presumptuous in your treatment, if you are not skilled in the art and have not used it for long periods of time, and if you are not merciful and compassionate and patient, do not be rash; start instead by applying soothing remedies to any pus that is present, and leave the patient at God's mercy if you do not see an expectation of health; but when you do see an expectation, immediately reset the member in its place, as the pus should gradually decrease; once the limb is back in place, apply soothing remedies for pus, heal the wound according to what is appropriate, using desiccated ointments; and if with dislocation there was a breakage of bones, and small fragments are exposed, set them, and do what we have instructed for simple diseases; protect yourself from entering a state of fear, as I have said before, because you must proceed according to your Creator's will, and through the wisdom you bring to bear on this matter and its effects.
Amen	Amen
