O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	You, dear children, I have completed this book which is the essence of medical knowledge assembled together with its fulfillment, and finished it through its explanations and revelations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And in my vision, I came to know that I should complete this with this manual, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is well-established in our region and unknown everywhere else, so has knowledge been lost and surgery stripped down to bare, and nothing remains from it that wasn't recorded in books by the ancients whose hands have performed surgeries.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And out of this comes error and vanity, and minds are closed off and knowledge is lost.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It appears that I should revive this treatise together with its order according to the path of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and will come together with the forms of iron cauteries, and other tools for working, with the adjustment of declaration and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no skilled masters are found in our times, the art of medicine has been lost.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for the one who intervenes to master the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows how to judge the parts, and their shapes and connections and separations, and has knowledge of bones and nerves and sinews, and the number of bones, and their disposition and of moving and static veins, and where they exit.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And thus says Hippocrates that it is much easier to avoid illness than to treat it with medicine; and similarly in the art of manual skills.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We are telling you at the beginning of this book that if someone is not aware of the things previously mentioned, they may make mistakes and mislead people; just as I have seen many times where those who interfere with this science abandon their knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	And I have seen a fool who performed an operation on a woman's neck to remove a sore or swelling, and cut into the arteries in her neck. Because so much blood came out that the woman died from her own hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another surgeon who treated a large stone in the body of an old man, and the stone was large. He removed a piece of the bladder with it, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already been called to help draw blood, and saw the position of the body and the size of the stone, and if they had removed it while he was alive, he would have died.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another case where a cure took on the task of treating our lord's leg which was broken, and with the breakage came an injury; and the doctors full of ignorance caused the break to occur in the wound, causing it to become inflamed by strong winds, and did not allow the wound any rest from bleeding, and allowed it to happen like this for months; and he instructed them not to ever cause such harm again; and waited until the leg was completely swollen up to the feet and then went towards ruin.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was summoned to come to him, and I quickly came to relieve his leg; and when I heard that it had been dislocated so much that he felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But every path of corruption had already been confirmed or member, and one could not heal it; and the corruption would continue to spread within the body as long as the limbs were completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And look at a second sore which collapses an abscess that is deeply embedded, and then inflames through the wickedness of her lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For the ulcer, when it is full of melancholic humor, one should not touch it with iron if it isn't in its place where one can remove all that has been corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, dear children, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: namely, an area where there are dangers in multiple situations; and I will show each one of these divisions within this book where it has fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Because it is necessary that you keep this in mind, so that no one can harm you. Take your weapons into consideration, and treat your illnesses lightly yet firmly, and use the best way possible so that with God's grace you come to health and become strong; and leave the terrifying diseases without complaint of sickness; and remove from yourself those who cause you doubt, and have faith in yourself so that you can go from this world to glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galiens warns in none of his admonishments: "Do not treat illness wrongly, lest you be called foolish.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters deal with fire cauteries and medicinal cauteries, and these chapters are arranged from the head to the stones; and about the forms of instruments, and the metals of cauteries, and all that is necessary for the operation.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, as well as suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, along with similar matters; and these chapters are arranged according to the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapters concern the restoration of dislocations and twists, as well as similar matters; these chapters are arranged from head to stones, and include descriptions of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Just as we remind ourselves of the work, it is necessary for me to describe the quality and harm of each constitution.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid, and harm, are the longest word and most subtle science and secrets in response; and many wise ones spoke about this, agreeing with it. And they provided little to me through their words, for I fear the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the fire cautery universally applies to all types of skin where there is matter present, considering that there are two types of compositions: one being hot with matter, and another being dry with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the composition that is both hot and dry with matter present, they devised a plan and said that the fire cautery is great aid; while others said the opposite: that the fire cautery only works for illnesses that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is so hot, and should not be treated with hot illnesses by heat or drying; and it's said that he who says otherwise that the cautery gives great aid to hot and dry diseases that come into men's bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the nature of fire, you find that the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it true on every occasion by means of experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And every path, do not interfere with it except that which has been proven and by one who knows through long use the chapter of cautery treatments, and the diversity of human complexion, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the occurrences and time frame thereof. With other complexions we have no fear, especially for cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And let all the parts assemble and agree with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, children, that assembled fire cautery has secrets of remedies and greater goodness than the burning medicine cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come out anywhere except on the body part that is burned, and it does not harm any other body part.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fiery medicines spread from one part to another by moving away, causing diseases of sickness healing in the affected parts; and by chance, the patient's body with its height and due to the goodness of its substance doesn't do this if there isn't excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this is what I have found through experimentation and the longevity of my service and study in the art, which corresponds to the truth of things. And for this, I apologize for the length of speech, because I do not want to take away from you the secret that lies with fire and the quality of work, how it relieves diseases from bodies, as the philosopher says by demonstrating; now receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, child, that they determined when the cauterizations should be done, and studied their effects.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is suitable in all times, because the harms occurring are minimized by the help of the cautery; and moreover, if the cauterizations are due to necessary pains that cannot wait for the time when greater harm would occur to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think like the foolish ones do, my dear child; because a disease cured by cauterization does not bring back what was lost. And they say it this way: but that is not entirely true, for cauterizations are only medicine that changes the complexion and dries up the fluids that cause pain, and their value lies in expediting one's strength and in the virtue of their work and authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And the ability exists that diseases occur according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease and its virtue; and they gather in him the excesses through the consumption of meats and similar things, if not treated with cauterization where there is little excess and moisture, such as cauterizations for pain, and similar things, so that such pain does not recur; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And no one understands why cauteries are called after medicine, it's hard to see; but they do not believe that cauteries can follow medicine afterwards. However, their understanding is false, and in cautery being the latter of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in any disease and they don't work, then we administer our cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it's correct to say that cauteries are indeed the latter part of medicine, not according to the understanding of people there.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The old ones said that gold cauteries are more effective than iron ones, and they mentioned this only because of the quality of gold and its high substance. They also stated that gold cautery doesn't cause decay, which is not true as I have proven it; and found out that it does occur in some people. And gold cauteries work better than iron ones, just like they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And indeed, when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know that it is heated by the color of gold and it cools immediately; and if you heat it too much; then put it in fire; and so there is enough prevention.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And indeed, we use our metal cautery for the work that we have prepared for our task.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	So you have been instructed this chapter concerning the first joints up to the knee, because making it easier to find the way.
dou cautere olivaire	Use an olive pincer cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	A fire cautery is effective against moisture and cold on the head. There are two of them that we perform due to the cause of an illness called "soda", and due to many humors that descend from the head as in eyes, ears, and because of numerous dreams, toothache, throat pain, and especially all diseases coming from cold such as paralysis, soda (which seems to be a typo, possibly meant to refer to something like apoplexy), and apoplexy-like illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The shape of this cautery is such that the patient's condition is purified by a dissolving medicine altering the head. Either three times or four times, depending on how much the properties and the heat and the habituation to the patient's condition can bear; and then washes the head with the patient afterwards.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him lie down with his hands crossed between your hands, and place his hands on the palm of his hand; after put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two nostrils; and let it be where your middle fingers reach, if it bleeds from there, heat up the cautery which is called 'olivare', with this form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place on the joint with ink, and when you descend and apply pressure little by little while twisting your hand; then raise your hand alone, and check if you see bone. If you do not see it, start applying heat with the cautery until you see bone as I have told you; afterwards take one part of honey, mix it with a soft cloth, insert into the joint, and leave there for three days. After that, place on top of cotton soaked in butter; let it stay until the scab is removed; afterwards treat the wound with tetracycline ointment until it heals.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And if they were told by the old ones that the more time an open wound stays exposed, the more it will purify; and due to this, movements are taken.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And it was said by no one that we should leave the cautery in place until part of the bone is burned, and then remove what has been burned from the bone and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And the other says that when using a cautery, one should keep it in place there and push so forcefully that it lifts part of the bone as wide as half a hazelnut because this is what women do with their needles to let body fluids flow out; and one should leave the wound exposed for an extended period. Afterward, one must clean and close the wound.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cautery do not seem to me to be entirely good for all things; except when there is a way for fear in some people. And it seems to me that I should leave them as they are; because the joints weaken due to continuous solutions from nature, as we testify in other limbs; and even when the joints of illness are weak by nature, and my first impression of cautery is more healing and effective for me, and from this use I work altogether assembling salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	from the old pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When throughout the entire head comes chronic pain and lasts long, one must use the patient's remedies such as pills called "cochie", and treatments for the head and ears and bandages; and if one applies the cautery we have mentioned before, and it proves effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the sick person is strongly affected by pain, and is not too cold; then apply the cautery while it's a little hotter than what we have mentioned above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After you have performed the cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, just as we previously described, perform one more cautery near where the horns meet; and use two levers in which suction cups are placed; and move your hand so that it does not touch the bone: this type of cautery causes much greater pain for the patient compared to others, and I will discuss this further. And it should be noted that the cauteries on the horns should be more precise than those used on half of the head, and this is its form:
dou cautere dou chief	Instruct the fire cautery to operate upon the malady, commanding it to let the hairs grow long and even; if they prick at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain occurs in part of the head and spreads until it reaches the eye, and the disease is cured by purging medicines, and various other treatments have been done as I've mentioned in the division of diseases, but none are benefiting: then upon this I perform cauteries according to two methods, that is, with medicine for ague and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The medicine-based cauteries consist of taking a spoonful of vinegar, and using the peel and the inside of it for two parts of each shoulder. You then apply this mixture on the area where the pain resides in such a way that you can place the spoonful of vinegar under the skin; once it is placed there, make sure to tie and tighten it well and leave it like that for 12 hours; after which remove the vinegar bandage and let the wound heal for two days or three. Then apply a butter-soaked cloth until the soreness exits.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of ointment as long as it is sound; and if you see fit to use some of the burning medicines that I have written or the first treatise on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery follows this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery as shown here:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And call it "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a bell, having .i. point of curvature, and halfway through there is a small appearance; and place it over the painful area, hold your hand steady and gently move the iron for a bit, until half of the thickness of the skin is burned; then lift your hand so that the artery doesn't burn, when it's done, let out abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After this, put wool in place of the lint, and apply it over the affected area for three days; then replace with wet cotton soaked in butter, and continue to treat the area with ointment as long as it is sound; and if you want to cauterize this migraine using the cautery that is called "cultellare" (a type of hot iron), apply at the whole tip, but take care not to cover the artery in this migraine which isn't old.
de emigraine	Of a headache
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat headache as we have previously explained in the divisions of diseases, and if it doesn't improve, and you observe that the cauterization methods previously described in medicine don't work on him, then it's necessary for you to heat up the cauterizing tool known as 'cultellare' until it turns white; and so when there is a line half an inch long from the head, and your hand operates once, and you apply pressure ensuring not to cut the artery and stopping before reaching the bone; and beware of the jaw clenching when eating, and only let the tongue and throat be attentive during this phase, and avoid spasms that could harm the patient. And be cautious about blood leakage from the artery if it's cut or if the operation causes much fear in someone who is not trained and experienced, and who isn't aware of these procedures; and leave the work halfway done; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when the artery has been cut, and show you its correct location in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauterizations don't help with the illness and the patient is suffering, apply the cauterization in the middle of the head as we have instructed, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you observe this, administer the cauterizer as described or from the chapter on extracting arteries, using a cauterizer that has two blades. And these cauterizers are better than others and more effective.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When cold causes pain in the ear, and treatments involving solvents and other remedies that we have discussed in this section are applied, and if the pain persists, then prepare this type of cautery called "points", as follows:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After applying points around the entire ear, or around both sides where the pain is felt, move away from the base of the ear soon after marking its position; place ten points around each ear. After this, treat the area until it has healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the agony of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Pain that should be cured by a cautery does not include those that move from blood flow, as we have said in the sections on diseases; and no cautery should be done for symptoms that come from scarring and skin rashes.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this kind of pain that originates from water flow and head discharges, as well as gargling, and this does not work, then it is necessary for you to apply the cautery with three applications: one at the root of the ear, and another slightly outside the temple area, and the third in adjusting the two lips; place the cautery on the healthy part that opens, and cauterize that spot above the ear's root up to a bit under the head of the ear, and do the same for the temple as long as it is about one pace; let the cautery be placed there until half of the skull is burned; this is how you should use the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And for the appearance of cutaneous ailments as we described earlier, but it's a bit more subtle and requires that the knives be slightly thicker; after treating the area in the manner I've described previously, do so until it heals properly.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When dealing with a long-lasting apoplexy and you are treating it as we have said, and it doesn't help at all, and the patients do not have fever, then you should apply four cauteries: two on each of the two temple areas, one under the chin, and one where the head is located that is referred to as 'vassel' as we mentioned before. And perform the last cautery over the mouth of the stomach; treat it as we said beforehand.
de litargie	From Liturgy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness, you should give the patient large pills and mastic tablets that purify the brain; afterwards, wipe off the head of the patient completely, and then place the sinapical plaster under the back part of the head as written or described in how to apply plasters; and this is how to perform the cautery: do it just as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it proceeds thusly, well done; and if not, let three fire cauteries be performed descending from the head to the collarbone, with an interval of one finger's width between each cautery. And treat them as others are treated, and if you see that they adjust, and the patient is suffering, let a third cautery be applied in the middle; and should it require further treatment, two more on the two horns, and treat until they are healed; and make of those cauteries which are called 'olive-shaped', as I have previously mentioned.
de la froidor dou chief	From the cooling of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary to cleanse the head of years and what we have mentioned before; after soothing the head with the patient, then let a fire cautery be applied around the wound, on each horn, one behind and three on the spine beneath the neck; and if you need more treatment, and the area is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease continues, apply four cauterizations on the spine of the back; and leave it until the worst kind of heat is burned away, then lift your hand; after that treat until it is healed, and make of those cauteries which are called 'olive-shaped', as we have mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	From epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics should only use the cautery if they are phlegmatic, and first need to modify the head with years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section where the patients have large issues and suffer from medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if the child can't endure it, make them gargle and chew, modifying the head often with good meats; after that you place the neck halfway, and I apply one fire according to what we have said before, and one fire on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is overactive and suffering, I apply fires as I told in those who are paralysed and have a softening of their body, on the spine at the back and neck, and let the olive fires be done according to the method that I said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	And if the illness is in a child, then you apply one subtle fire according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy are the excesses or the moist substances corrupted and large, then the metal cautery of the fire cautery as we have said to him who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to the cause of melancholy is the excess declining into melancholy, and there is moisture in the body's organs, then it should drink something so that the brain becomes purified, according to what was explained previously in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After you have removed the head of the illness; after this make one and a half pieces of well-made linen, like one circle, put it around the head; if there is any complaint from the organs, place them in their correct position, held firmly all around; then present the liniment, and apply it with butter of old beeswax; heat it over fire until you know whether it can be tolerated or not; after this pour out the circle containing the head, let it cool down; and do this for each organ once a week using different management, as long as there is no further complaint.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you see it being cauterized, do so by making several marks across the entire cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cautering moistens the brain greatly; and then place wet cotton on butter and lard.
de l’awe des eulz	of the fear of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When fear first comes to the eyes through the signs I mentioned in the division, then begin and continue to instruct the patient to drink something that purifies the head, and protects it from all moisture, and make them sweat or take baths several times fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After having him clean his head and apply cauterization to it, and have him undergo two cauterizations on the two temples once his fear has subsided completely in both eyes or when it subsides in one eye; then take care of every application around the skull for all veins and arteries that are within it, and perform each cauterization long according to the width of the temple; and guard against bleeding out, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it at a point with the same method as before.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and incisions in the cautery, how to apply it properly; and whenever a cautery or cauterization is done, do not perform it over the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	of the path of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed, and are located on the veins, or beneath the arteries that are visible outside of the head; and it can be seen that they are cold excesses of phlegm. Therefore, do as I have said at the beginning of this work for the treatment of these things: 1) apply the cautery to the forehead, and 2) two cauterizations on each temple, and 3) two cauterizations or application over the bones below; and if more is needed, carefully apply the cautery up from the eyebrows with every small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	of the path of tears within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you apply the medicines according to what we have said in the division, and if they do not benefit, then give three raw chickens to the patient to drink. After he has consumed this, take his head, and perform a cautery or olive oil cautery; and make two cauteries using the ‘clavilis’ type of cautery on each of four nostrils, slightly over the hairline; and be cautious not to touch the artery when you perform this procedure.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery which is called 'clavilis':
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery which is called "oily".
de coi ci est li forme:	of which the form is:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that it takes two cauteries on each of the two nipples as long as they are present; and do not release your hand until only a third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of hairs that prick at their base
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	None of the times has it been that the hair at their nipples turns into the armpits, and pricks them, then one performs cauteries according to two ways: namely with fire, or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and equal, then instruct the patient to be in a state of health; afterward, on the page describing the eyes, draw a figure that looks like a leaf of myrtle, and make it resemble the beginning of the sign with the hairs. Then place moistened cotton infused with egg whites and garlic paste on the eye, then heat up the cautery which has this form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards cauterize on the figure that you have drawn gradually and many times so that it burns in the eye area, and signs of health are as follows: when you see the paper retracting, and hairs raised at the edge of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave thus for three days. Then place moistened cotton dipped in butter until the scorching is removed; afterwards apply ointment until it is clean.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And when hair and paper become soft again, then reapply the cautery to that same area as you did initially. If hair has fallen out, then cauterize until the paper is raised back to its natural position and evenly distributed, without touching the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	In the treatment of heated cauterization, you should instruct the patient to let their hair grow until they are long and even, then create a shape from parchment like the leaf of myrtle; next take one part each of French soap and fresh oil, combine them well; then apply it quickly without allowing it to cool, after which place on the form that matches the leaf of myrtle and put onto paper with your eyes; if the illness lasts for only half an hour, then cut open halfway, and if both are also affected; place a piece of wet cotton inside each eye akin to an egg; let the patient's head stay in your healthy position and apply your fingers on the medicine, squeezing once every time the patient feels the irritation from the medicine, as they feel it just like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, if you apply the medicine to your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the excision is past, lift up the arm, and reward it if you see that the paper has been lifted as it would be by the constraint of fire or through an incision; and if it is like this, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not corrected, the body might still recover through medicine on its own or if the medicine takes effect, until your organs are even and your eyes in position; then place damp cotton with butter where the fire has burned, until your ears are numb, after treating the wound from ointment called 'dyafenis' and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to protect your work by great caution so that no medicine leaks into your eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes moist and the hair pricks in the eye, then reapply the medicine to that part of your head which has been softened by the clean paper, just as you did before; after treating it until it is healed. This is like the form of a parsley leaf:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of humans vary greatly in size and smallness, and according to this apply your restraints; and do not let the right way be answered by him who studies this craft.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Regarding the treatment of a fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the sections of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary for you to perform cauterization according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place their head in your proper care; cut the hair on their head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or remove their head; afterwards, apply damp cotton inside an egg or garlic juice to the eye; afterwards, heat the cauterizing instrument which is prepared: and be next to the head as if of a feather from a rooster's wing, place the cauterizer there; if you see that it points from one feather edge to another, and if you see that it is also like a tent; but all the same, it must stay in place for the sake of your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it has been opened, and treat the putrefaction, and dry it off; and if it is sealed, do the work, and remove from under the eyelid; afterwards place something hot on the cauterizer in a shape form, hold your hand at the cauterizing instrument near the part behind the ear above the eye, so that your hands do not go astray; and put the cauterizer into the grease of the oil, and let it be corrupted.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be well.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then start the cautery again once more, and if needed elsewhere, leave it for three days; afterwards, place moist cotton on butter, and apply the ointment remover until it is dry, when it isn't, then put on corrosive water medicine until the bone is uncovered; and follow the instructions as they would come in their chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a method of cauterizing fistulas that none of the old ones mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Understand about fistulas and make it clear; after that, place in the incision a thin stick of whatever is shown here:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	And it should be the size of about three parts of lead; and hold your hand or camel firmly, and do not let the patient move, so that the melted lead does not drip into their eye; and when you place lead on the eye, use wet cotton dipped in egg whites or vinegar: the lead serves to treat the fistula, and it heals miraculously with great health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed through cauterization as we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, then it is necessary to administer to the child, and to bring the fistula back into the body according to what suits its own natural place.
des crevaices en levres	Of cuts in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, there occur cuts in the lips which are called "whiskers", and similarly on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cuts as we have instructed with divisions, and if the treatment does not benefit, then use .i. small surgical tool according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place them quickly into those wounds until they grow just a bit; after that, cleanse the wound of pus while it is still healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	from the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess arises in the root of the throat or in the lymph nodes, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has rotten and swelled up and become diseased and turned into a fistula; and you treat it as we have instructed in sections, and it does not improve: then it is necessary for you to have one cauterizing instrument according to the size of the fistula; afterwards remove the pus or foulness from the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron reaches the bottom of it, and even beyond. And do this once or twice, after treating as we have said in treatments, while it is still healthy; and if it can be treated like this, it's good; and if not, you should expose the wound and remove the decayed bone, according to what you find in your chapter.
dou movement des dens	movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine and this does not work, then place the head of the patient in their health; afterwards heat up the cautery as will be done later in this manner that you put a twig on the tooth; and place inside the cautery a small flame, and hold your hand so that the disease feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; after lift your hand and continue the cautery according to your will; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salt water, and apply it for an hour and then remove it.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way the tooth which was moving is now fixed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the moisture has been eradicated and dried.
de la dolor des dens	from the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes due to coldness, or there is coldness or inflammation, and medical treatments are ineffective, then it must use the method of cautery according to two ways: and the butter cautery and the fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Butter cautery if it is so that you take butter from a cow, and the tip in a spoon made of iron or copper; after taking cotton and wrap on the point of a tent, and moisten with the heated butter, then place it over the painful tooth quickly and hold until it has cooled; and do this often until its strength reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see wet wool and cotton in the cold butter, then put it over the painful tooth again, and heat one iron for as long as the fire goes into the tooth pain.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Use a fire cautery if that's what you desire, with something like an iron or lead tool, and make it large enough that the heat doesn't reach the mouth of the patient; after heating the cautery, from which it will form thus afterwards, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this often, for the pain will be relieved that same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fill their mouth with plenty of butter in anticipation for this heat from the cautery, and then pull it out force; this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a fire cautery of whatever size you desire, and according to your capability; this is the form of the cautery:
des scrophules	Regarding the treatment of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrophules are of blood and cold moisture, and do not obey to digestion through medicines, then warm the cautery as described below to create its form. And make two openings for the fumes to escape from at the other side; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or twice according to necessity, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, place the cautery in proportion to the size of the abscess, and leave it like this for three days. And put moistened cotton with butter over it until the pus is removed; afterwards cure by applications and dressing until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture invades the channels of the lungs, especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary for the patient to be treated first with diuretic medicines; after that, make the cautery at the root of the throat, and take care not to go all the way up to the throat, but just a little bit.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After this, I performed another cautery at the joint of the neck on the spine's head, and use the cautery which is called "clavile", after which we have a model before us; treat the area as previously mentioned until it has healed.
de la toust	To the cautery of fire, command the sick person to let their hair grow long and evenly; and if they prick at their base when young, hold the eyes still so they do not move until they grow.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	For all illnesses related to the womb are due to cold moist conditions, and the patients do not have fever or dryness, they're an old illness. In such cases, apply two cauterizations on their veins; and one other cauterization in the genital region between the two breasts; and let the cauterizations known as "clavile" be performed according to the form described previously.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see it, perform cautery by pressing on the entire "point" cautery which is called "poins", as it is shown here in ear diseases; let there be points up to XXX, or even more.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the area according to what was previously mentioned, and let there be three rounds of cautery following this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because of this, the cautery is lighter, for you make it three to copy.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	Regarding the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After that, surround the wound on its back and sides; afterwards, lift out the kidney inside the loins with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery which has two prongs as described here:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	And cauterize the knee until it perceives up to bone, and let the shape of the cauterization come together with three cauterizations; and this is done with a cauterizing instrument that has three prongs, for it makes three marks in cauterization, and they follow the intricacy of a tent, and this is the shape of the cauterization that has three prongs:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And each time it is set on this one nerve because there are seven cauterizations here.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After applying the hot iron, press it with a string; afterwards let the patient rest, and do not let the limbs stay in place for too long until they are properly comfortable.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it has been opened upwards, where little happens, then do a cautery on the thickness of the "clavile" cautery, or do a few cauteries by pressing.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture has been eliminated from the patient's body.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	For when colds and dampness affect the stomach to such an extent that they are in harmony with its constitution, causing multiple cases of purging, adopting common methods for treatment does not yield any benefits. Thus, it is necessary for the body to be wrapped in a blanket on his back, spreading out his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	From this on, perform three fire cauterizations inside the thigh by the ankle for the amount of a small coin each, applying all around the hip joint. Then apply two cauterizations below each side up to where the marks of the cauterizations form three angles and are spaced evenly apart so that they do not join together when they develop gangrene; ensure the cauterization is done properly so that it sears both halves of the knee, and shape the pattern of the cauterizations according to this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see it being cauterized with a large cautery in the stomach following this form; and whoever fears this cautery, cauterize by pressing and commanding it on the stomach at one point according to the amount that you see of it. Then completely cauterize across the entire cautery which is called 'points'.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the procedure we have undertaken, as long as it remains clean.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	Concerning the liver, which experiences pain due to coldness, moisture, and heavy wind. As long as it is weakened by excess through its natural disposition; and the illness is treated according to what we have said in divisions, but if it does not benefit from that, then it is necessary for the illness to be soothed on the liver's surface; and apply three marks of cauterization according to this form, figure, and quantity on the liver, below the lower ribs, where the pain originates; and leave a space between each mark the size of two fingers; and have the marks running along the length of the body, and do not press your hand too much across the entire area; and only let the inner half of the flesh be burned, and make the ill person lie correctly on his hands; and if he cannot, then lay down, extend his legs, and raise his arms; and this is how it should be:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you wish, cauterize these fire cauteries with a knife, be subtle and wise in the art, and watch that you do not burn all the area, for you would dry up all the body; and do not let it boil over to the point of burning, because the areas are very subtle there, and you should know how to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When it has infected the liver, and you want to know if it's within the liver tissue or in the peritoneum: If it's within the tissue, you will feel a moderate pain; and if it's in the peritoneum, you'll feel intense pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this treatment affects the liver, it is necessary for the patient to be treated on its head; and then pinch the area where the infection lies, and then light up the cautery that resembles a grapevine, as shown below:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And heat the cautery until the coals are red hot, and continue until the wound becomes suppurative; afterwards treat according to treatment for abscesses until it is drained; and do not use this cautery anywhere except where someone who has studied extensively in the art of medicine does so, and thus these diseases have been cured many times.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he can confidently operate, and always I believe it is better to let him do so.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the weeping cautery
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The old ones said that one should make weeping cauteries from the roots of aristological plant, and here's how: take a long root of aristological plant, the longest you can find, ensure it is dry, and also as thick and as long as your thumb; and soak it in oil, then place it on fire, and cauterize one cautery between the arm pit and the neck, and two smaller ones somewhat downwards on the part under the beard; and two more cauterizations between the fifth rib and the sixth, slightly behind; and one around the navel, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and four more along both sides of the hip below the cautery which is between the two shoulders; and do not squeeze your hand, just apply it as you would smell it.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And it was said by every old one that no man uses the fire cautery at the rash, and heats it up and puts it between the ribs, until it reaches that abscess; and when it escapes, the pain goes away, as we have stated about the gallbladder abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this chapter there is fear or death comes to those who now die, or a fistula occurs that cannot be cured.
de la mice	Of mice
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the illness of mice in those who we have discussed regarding the divisions of treatment, and it doesn't benefit, then they try three methods of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	In which there is a method such that you make III or IV cauteries, according to the length of the mouse, according to the figure of the liver as we have said previously; and do not rush your hand throughout the cautery, and may the patient be well on his back; and another way of using the cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two tips, as we showed in the dislocation of the shoulder; lift the heel which is located under the mouse, or where the pain comes from towards the left side, and make the elevations by lifting the heel according to the height, according to the length of the body, and the cauteries should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After I burn the two wicks until they are pierced from the other side, and then remove the cautery, and thus there will be four. And if you see, fully cauterize with all three on the entire cautery.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure when it has become rotten for a long time, and this one should be discarded like the other previously mentioned cures.
de ydropisie	Of cautery by fire, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	The cautery is not suitable for lead poisoning, except in the way that is called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat according to the methods we have discussed in sections, and your treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary for you to make four cauterizations around the anus, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one under the kidneys, and two behind the back on the spine, and one place below the navel. And let the cauteries be well near the spinal bone of the pelvis.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After allowing the cauterization to remain open for a long time due to pus formation, and do not cease the treatment on the disease after the cauterization; and healing would hasten, and both the two intentions will come together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the belly is that which we have shown before; and the one for the back is olibanaceous, according to what was set out previously.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of joints
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the fingers of the person who is hydropic and filled with yellow bile are swollen, it is necessary that you apply the cautery between the little finger and the ring finger on the backside of the hand. And move your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And don't go in too far on the underside, otherwise it would let out the yellow bile and follow the form of the cautery:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After this, make two cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the cuticle; and make the cauterization along the length, one in front of the knee and the other behind, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauterizations for a long time without curing them until the bile comes out; afterwards do the other treatments as we have said.
de la menoison	Of the cautery
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	Quantities of stomach discomfort come from coldness and moisture, as long as the retaining and digesting powers in the stomach and intestines are congested and cannot be treated by regular remedies; and you see the patient suffering greatly with strong green symptoms, so do this. Firstly, apply a large stomach cautery according to what he has mentioned previously or stomach cautery, under the heart. And secondly, place four internal stomach warmers throughout your body under each .i. delicate collar bone, and .ij. cauterizations on your hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, do this: apply a cautery on the elbow, and one on each knee, and two small cauterizations on the stomach near the heart, for the treatment is beneficial when there's good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	Of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When there are or have been bleeding veins, whether internal or external, and they are old and filled with large cold and moist humors that are corrupted, and if the treatment as we've said in divisions does not help, then apply a cautery: III on the spine of the back, right where it is completely outside the loin muscle gradually and gradually in triangular fashion, and I cautery under the belly II inches; and if you think that the stomach is cold and the meat doesn't cook, and you see swelling around the abdomen, then to relieve this apply a large cautery on the stomach as previously mentioned, and another on the liver, and another just below the collarbone using the entire cautery method; and let the cautery remain for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment until the wound is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	Of the pustule which is called "Thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you are working with the shoulder bone, if it seems to be one and a half inches in size, heat up the cautery that looks like two blades, then place it completely heated on the coped shoulder; keep your hand with the cautery until it reaches the beginning of the vein from which blood flows. Do this once or twice, and if there are many shoulder bones, cauterize each one as we have said; after the treatment for beneficial ointments is done when they are healthy. And if you cauterize with a large-sized cautery, it will provide more assistance.
de plaie mal curee	from a poorly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient is unable to endure a cut or opening, as we will detail in its section, if such sickness occurs that cannot be healed except by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	If there's no fistula present, and it decays into putrefaction due to corrupted moisture, if you need to examine thoroughly with sensitivity, make sure you understand how deep the examination should go.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After the scraping of the cautery seems to match, and when it is according to the depth that the examination has reached inside the fistula, apply the cautery along with its quantity. Continue until the putrid and corrupted part becomes charred, once, or twice, or perhaps three times depending on your need; and beware not to burn nerves and major veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes through the bladder and to the intestine, be careful of these organs, and do not remove it outside them. Only perform this in a nutrient-rich area. Consider that they are not perineal; after healing, ensure that the wound has been healed until it is fully healed, and if the contents are osteous (hard) for a long time, then know that the organ is completely healed. And if the contents are not hard, know that the organ is diseased, and the bone has corroded at its base; thus like one of these we will describe in their area.
de la maladie des reins	Regarding kidney illness
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When abdominal pain stems from the kidneys and accompanied by large wind movements, it affects women in particular cases, thus you should apply a cautery to both sides of the kidneys and to the arm where we previously mentioned; and if we cauterize it at the center, we would perform three cauterizations in line, which will provide more assistance.
de la vessie	From the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is diseased and weak from heat and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then one should apply a cautery to the lower part of the bladder, where hair begins on the penis, and one each on the right and left side, and each cautery should be as long as your finger. And you do one application of a cautery behind the back, or two if needed; and let the cautery resemble a small spoon in shape as previously described.
de la marris	From the maris (maris is likely misspelled for "mânes" which means souls)
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the manes are cold and moist, and do not allow for conception, and the flowers become corrupted and their ends delay; and when they come forth, one can feel great pain: thus it is fitting that you apply three cauterizations inside the womb, as we have instructed for the bladder or fire cautery, and two cauterizations behind the back; and let the cauterizations resemble a small spoon, as we have described.
de la hainche	From the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous fluids descend in the cavity of the hip, and due to this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the joints can be found from their origin, so you should cauterize the hair on the cavity of the hip with about one fire cautery resembling a circle, and mark in front of the joint inside the cavity as it turns, so that the cavity is within the circle; and have your cauteries like those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you don't have those fire cauteries handy, make three olive-sized large fire cauteries, and ensure that all the points of these are as well-made as the rest. And treat it until there is no pain.
de la dolor de la hainche	Regarding hip pain
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the hip joint, and this is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient is treated as we have described in the division, but the cure is ineffective, and the illness is old: then it is necessary that you cleanse the patient of large fluids using bad-smelling pills, or other similar good pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After you perform the cautery; and the method of the cautery is according to two methods: that is, in combination with burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery follows several methods, among which one is as follows: you apply three triangular cauterizations according to this form on the buttock bone, making them deep and wide, ensuring there's space the size of two between each cauterization, and using olive-shaped cauterizations. No cauterization should be done in the middle on top of the buttocks, since there are four following this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see that you need to cauterize at the circular cauterizer as we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the hip joint; but do it in such a way that the circles contain all the hip joint, and all the parts of the blood are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	This is the method used in sciatica, when pain remains in the buttocks and doesn't reach up to the thigh or down to the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it reaches up to the thigh and leg, make two cauterizations there or where the patient says that pain keeps them, and make one above the ankle four times, near the left part a little bit; and do so with the knife cuts, burn away the thickened skin of the knee; and if the patient feels that pain extends up to just below the knee or close to it, cauterize there where they feel the pain for three points or four at the cauterization which is called 'points'.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the job requires more; and should it be that the pain is from above the knee towards the thigh, then make cauterization with a surgical knife or circular cautery. And ensure you take great care in all your cauterizations not to leave any part of the process undone, burning nerves and large arteries as well while ensuring no unnecessary harm and contraction are caused to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen several who made the cauterization on the ankle up to the knee, and they were restricted until the leg was completely swollen, and even both feet were also affected, causing pain and decay in all of them.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After an abdominal remedy from which he/she/they died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pains are in two parts together, make a cautery on each one, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the surgeon said in regards to the cautery on the hip, as it is written here, make it such that you take one piece of iron and place it over your head also as big as a finger's width, or perhaps slightly less, and position it with crossbars and have them start between each other extending up until they reach another distance equal to the size of a pea; and let the crossbars be divided into two parts, and let them also resemble knots, and ensure that there is a solid metal rod in its middle; and this is the shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heat it until it becomes completely red and steam starts to rise, then place the heated iron on the spot of the hip ailment, and twist it over the healthy side. And apply the cauterization once with one iron rod and leave for three days; and after that, apply a dressing of butter, and keep the wound open for as long as possible; finish the ointment treatment until it becomes clean.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use very little of this cautery for the fear of his judgment, and we see few who use it; however, such is a good cautery which one can endure, and leave where it settles.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The hot medical cauteries are such that you make an instrument with crossbars in which the margin of the door descends, and it should be made of steel or iron with one long side, and at the height there are two inches, and between each there is the size of a pea; they should stand up straight and above this, and join together according to this shape:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing on the hipbone of the lying patient towards their right side which is healthy, and quickly place your hand mostly on the hipbone. Next, pour in between the two circles of the hot ash heated by fire for one whole hour, and let the patient endure the heat and burn from it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For there is such a biting like that of fire; and when the bite has passed, raise your hand with the tool and lift the hip slightly gently. Leave it thus for three days, and apply butter until the ashes which are black from the burn have healed over; and leave it for three days until pus appears. And this would be the last help after the treatment of ointments as long as there is no more pain.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread up to the thigh or even down to the leg, then use the same tool that marks flesh as you did on the hip but additionally; and this is how it works with hot iron, and I have written or composed about correcting medical treatment.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take ash and quicklime, equal parts of each, crush them together, then put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Let there be a small hole through which one can insert the tip of a razor; and place this pot in another well-filled pot, and add both ash and quicklime and a gentle fluid until you have two inches above the powders. Once it has been properly mixed to your hand; leave it thus until all the liquid is reduced to ashes and debris or the pot was filled with it. Then take all this mixture and pour it onto the lime and on top of the ash as before did you do.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then it will become liquid and administered in the form of various remedies and cauteries for other limbs. For it performs work like fire, and is used with other medicines when cauterizing well the hip in this way as with turpentine and anacardium oil and lime mixed with soap, all these things combined together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a treatment that one experienced men was treated for the pain in his hip and thigh nerve, and the entire body, and says there was no other treatment given, and that they were cured all at once after this treatment. They bathed as he instructs below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And instructs it in this manner that you take powdered green and dry argyrol, mix it finely with a little fat, and apply it to the hip, thigh, and leg where the pain is located, then bind it; and leave it for three hours until the affected area no longer feels the burning sensation.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make them enter or take a bath until their body is slightly invigorated, and have them lie down, and the pain will disappear completely and they will be cured.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	Know that no one should use a cautery of such remedies, if this is after the removal of pus.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides states that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with the dung of goats, if assistance is not much needed; and the cauterizations should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take animal dung and mix it with old oil, and apply it on the depression that is between the base of the thumb and the other one which is called the heel.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After taking the dung of dry goats, heat it until it turns to charcoal, and place it on wool, letting it remain until it is extinguished; repeat this process again, without stopping until you think it has come up to the hips, and that the pain has ceased. This method of cauterization is called "goat dung cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	Of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or impact, or too much evacuation, or through exposure to cold matter, none of these conditions warrant cauterization, for it is akin to that which arises from an infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	After ensuring that the patient's body is free of foul pills or other similar symptoms, one should apply treatments to the back, at the site where the pain resides, three lines marked with a cross, and in each line up to five cauterizations depending on how much and how intensely the body can endure; perform the cauterization using the cauterization method known as "points"; and if you see fit, do three or four cauterizations halfway between the cauterization for the clavicle according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This illness often affects small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they seem pale when they stand up, and fear; you find it in the last spinal cord at the back and we see the appearance coming on other spinal cords.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and observe its treatment,
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If one uses a proper fire cautery for each segment of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see it, apply the fire cautery along the spine at the point where it pierces two lines or three, and have the points close together.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treatment until it is healed according to what we have said, and be cautious not to apply the fire cautery in locations that are near nerves.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain in joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain is due to moisture that spreads throughout the body, and when pain comes in the foot, they call it "gout" properly, and when it's caused by cold and cannot be cured with medicine, it should be treated using cauteries in this manner: make a fire cautery inside the joint of the foot, and let the cautery use olive oil according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need that you touch on the back of the foot, if it needs cautery across the whole cautery mark, which we claim as "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains extend up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, if you need to apply cautery on each knee for three or four cauterizations per part, all along the olive-shaped mark; and if you need more, do so as needed, but don't let your hand stray until the skin burns.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend as far as the knees and behind the back, then apply the cautery as we have described in our chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make points between the fingers two lines; and if there remains any pain on the arms, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to elbows or up to shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good care to the patient and administer medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if you treat him well and purge his humors, may he be cured with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	from the rupture in the kidney
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When rupture comes about in the lungs, and the bowels descend to the kidneys, this is newly happening. It's necessary that when you look at them being cured, they don't eat anything during that day; and they should use things that lighten the stomach, so that the wind descends from their belly. After have them sit up on their back between your hands, then command him to cut his arm until the intestines are repaired, and bring it back with your fingers, and feel for under the rupture upon the bone of the wrist, and do all at a sign as if it were half a circle above the chest; then heat the cautery that is described here:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	As long as it is white and discharges pus.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then remove the boils at their root; and instruct your attendants to pinch his hand so they don't turn around; and operate well on the thighs for the patient, and place one sponge and one surgeon on each thigh, and another under his buttocks that pinches his hands; then apply the cautery to every sign across your whole hand, and hold it straight until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, try again a few more times as long as you can reach the bone; and watch carefully so that the boil does not escape when you use the cautery; don't burn them; and by this means patients may die or suffer other ailments.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not reach up to the bone with the cautery, your efforts are worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cautery for children be delicate according to their size, and for large people also big in proportion to theirs; after three days cleanse the wound with butter until the scab is removed; afterwards apply other dressings until it heals properly, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days so that the wound heals well; and ensure these treatments last long enough so that pus does not leak when he wishes to move about in chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wishes to stand up, have a well-made bandage ready for him and keep it on for another forty days. And ensure good rest, that he works little and avoids overeating or drinking too much, and doesn't strain himself excessively; and if he follows this advice, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say after this chapter on the treatment of surgery.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	And when wounds occur in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, then I will do the cautery as much as needed according to its quantity, and let it be red hot at one-third of the rod; after treating it according to what we have said; and none of the old ones have said that one should cauterize with the cautery at three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But the first sign is the location of infection and draw a line across the width above the wound, and another below, and hold your hand with the entire rod on it.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterizations are lighter and more painful.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from ancient pain in no limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain occurs in any limb, or due to falling or being hit, and if this pain lasts long, and medicine does not cure it, then it should be cauterized with the cautery called "points", and the cauterizations should follow the length of the member and its smallness and weakness and its utility and its location of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If it is healed from the first cautery application, that's good; if not, apply another cautery to this one, because these tools are such that they should heat the limb that is nearby, so you must perform the cautery until the patient recovers.
de meselerie	In mixture
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The diseases are aided once by each application of the cautery and similarly, the sickness that comes from the putrefaction of blood and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Can't you see the cauterizer? Take care that the disease is at the beginning, and if it's cured according to what we've said in the division, and doesn't recur nor remain, then you doubt if corruption spreads throughout the body. So perform two cauterizations on the head: I heat the front of the head to the nose, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and II over the two horns, and I behind on the jawbone; and let your hand be so that the cauterizer goes until the bone, and as long as the scales come out so that the vapors of the thick fluids can escape; and cauterize the neck accordingly to what it appears.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the mixture is everywhere spread out and it's clearly apparent, then it's necessary that you cauterize with these cauteries that we've mentioned on the head and one cautery in the middle of the nose, and two cauteries on the spine from the neck to the back, and six on the spine from the shoulder blades down, and one large on the knee and another slightly smaller, and two on each shoulder blade; and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the foot, and one on each joint of hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and be careful not to burn any nerves that are under the back part of the heel, do not burn them. And never cauterize near the bone in the elbow, and another one near the bone of the stomach, and one near the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more often I apply the cautery, the greater help I provide and the more benefit it yields; and be aware that patients do not feel pain from the cautery as healthy individuals would, because their bodies are already thoroughly corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the size of the cautery be large or small according to the limbs and joints, as you will find in the methods of iron tools.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment, wash the area with flour mixed with honey and other treatments until it is clean.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When inflammation occurs in any limb and is treated with medicine, oils, and bandages but remains infected, then apply cautery to the limb according to its size or smallness; and let the cautery penetrate somewhat into the site of the sore; then treat it with ointments until it heals.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And no matter where you make a cautery and at the hand and on the foot and back, in the area of the nerve that makes the limb move, then this is when the swelling occurs; and always do not interfere with it unless one knows about limbs and the exits of moving nerves within the body.
de albaras	Of cauteries by fire, command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they pierce at their base, hold the eyes still so they do not move until they grow.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" has worsened, and medical remedies are of no use, then use a small cautery to cauterize, according to the size of the lesion, until the pus is removed and its color changes; then cleanse with flour mixed with lentils, rose oil, and plantain leaves, as well as blood from colognes and almond birds, each in their part. Mix all together, wrap it with a cloth, apply it to the affected area until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment of gangrene by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When gangrene begins, and you see it start to stop, if you apply the cautery at the spot that seems like a circle, all around the perimeter of the gangrene.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And still, some wise people say that one should apply the cautery in the middle of the gangrene; and yet this does not seem right to me, for fear it might lead to further erosion and corruption, which is something I have already decided not to do again. And a more appropriate approach would be to apply the cautery all around, at the spot that's referred to as 'circular', just like we have explained in another context about cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of the swelling that cannot die.
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has an illness that is called 'adubelati', and it prolongs death or causes it due to overactivity or the aging of the body when it becomes old (meaning too old), and there's little blood, or due to tension; and you see it hastening to die: then cauterize internally with several small cauteries by touching them; afterwards leave it like that.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For it will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced through with all of the cautery tool, if you heat up this form of the cautery that is described:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of the illness that is called 'adubelati' as long as the cauteries pierce the body, and make these cauteries such that the sick person feels them outwards in such a way that the process of decay is accelerated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After it heals as long as it has been completely cured.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure by fire using a iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another way of disease is called "corrodens", and it is nothing else but a member abscess, as it corrodes the limbs like dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in someone who can endure a fire cautery treatment, then apply small and large iron cauteries evenly, according to where the treatment is needed; after applying the cautery around all sides until you eradicate all the corruption, don't leave anything behind. Make sure that whatever has become corrupted is completely removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And leave it for three days, and apply a heated iron with oil on the treated areas until the burns from the fire heal completely, and all the corruption has disappeared.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After treating ointments that produce pus.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that the wound is not healing properly, this is good; and if it doesn't heal, reapply the cautery to the part that's been left over from the corruption of your limbs.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this remedy has been cured with the water medicine instead of a fire cautery in the past; but nevertheless, a fire cautery is more effective help. I have already discussed the treatment for water medicine elsewhere. Take what you need when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	From stones that come into joints
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Sometimes it happens that stones that emerge from the body cause a disease called "cyst" according to our understanding, and it's a large lump that causes pain in the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterizations for this disease can be done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This is to know fire cautery, and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	The fire cautery if you heat it, and the hot iron cautery is like a feather from a goose. Make it of good iron at the size that it can grasp nails in all directions, and ensure it has sharp margins; after this, place it fully heated on the nail, and turn your hand around entirely until the heat goes to the tip of the nail; then leave it like this for three days until pus begins to form; afterwards make a poultice from powdered wild garlic mixed with oil, and leave the poultice overnight. The nail will fall out and be removed from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the area with a thick ointment until it becomes clean.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are inverted through the belly of the body, and it happens many times in hands and feet, then you should bring this hot cautery to them; and do it thus: take a spider's leg or iron rod, or a goose feather pen, and place them on a nail and an apple, meaning for warts; and place the rod so that it burns everything around it completely. Then add a bit of hot water, hold your hand well, press your hand as the edge of the rod turns to the root of the nail, then find the path of hot water deeply until it reaches the root; and let the patient endure for an hour the burning sensation from the hot water; then leave them like this, and they will be eradicated from all their roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Continue in this manner with each one, until you have treated all those located on the body, then cleanse of any growths that produce flesh.
li cure dou trembler	the treatment for shaking
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone shakes from cold or nerves, or from intermittent fever or otherwise, it is necessary that you apply three or four hot water cauterizations on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra; and one near the elbow, and one under the stomach with an olive oil cautery. If this continues to cause shaking, then hasten their recovery from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	of the pus-filled sores
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	When it becomes visible through openings on the surface of the body, or pus-filled ulcers that come from large decomposed matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	When it becomes visible that one should apply a cautery to each head of the pustule: a fine wooden stick from myrtle wood with its tip held over fire or a long root of aristolochia plant, or use a lens-shaped cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And at no time should they cauterize until they become visible in this manner, and it cannot grow into further concerns, but the excess that causes it is eliminated, making them well; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery has been tied
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there have been great flows of blood from the artery that has been tied at the wound, or during an incision on an abscess, or during the cauterization of a limb, and similar incidents; it is very distressing to smell this.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And nonetheless, when this happens to any part of the body, if you rush to place your index finger on the wound of the vein, hold it there until the skin becomes calm under your finger and no more drop flows; then heat several olive oil cauteries, both large and small, until they are all red. Then take one (or according to the size), larger or smaller depending on the wound and where the artery is located, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, keep the cautery there until the skin becomes cool again.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cauteries are heated, take quickly one more of the cauteries that are hot.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing this one after another until the skin becomes cool; and watch that you don't burn the nerve underneath it, and that no harm comes to the patient; and know that when the skin is cut off from the artery, one can hardly properly cool it themselves when the artery is large, unless it's through one of the four methods we have mentioned: by cautery, or extraction if it wasn't treated yet, or with strong string application, or by applying medicine that has the power to cool blood; and tie and hold in place for future use.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer treatment by tightly binding with cloths or by placing burning objects thereupon, or other similar things, if it doesn't benefit then do not proceed.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone and they have no sight or medicine at hand, if they must apply their index finger onto the wound of the vein as we said earlier, stretch it well so that it remains stuck under the wound and under the vein; and do not move it, but moisten it with cold water often until it is very cold. And create gaps in front of those who need cautery and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book on treatments for wounds.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases where it is necessary to apply a fire cautery or medicine that is heated, and we discussed their uses, causes, instruments, and forms. We ended that chapter on the topic of burns until the skin, and I will continue with this chapter using the same approach for those who find them easier to understand and need them.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And as I begin this, it is fitting for you, dear apprentice, to understand that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first use of the cautery, and for this reason greater caution should be taken.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often blood evacuation when opening veins, and incisions on abscesses, and treatments for wounds, and extraction of arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar operations; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I advise you not to embark on foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many ways of people come to treatments.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come from those who were so afflicted by their illness that they died slightly due to the fearfulness they found in their sickness, and from the severity of their malady; and one must have fear about this.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these it gives its meaning, and says: "Wait, I am sick"; and the illness is vexing.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It would not be right for you to consent to those who come to you with this manner, but give more caution to your honor than to your covetousness, and do not open blindly but wisely to what you are certain of and can take and leave; and use prediction and guidance in treating the illnesses of whom health has been converted; and this will help you gain good reputation, glory, and long-lasting memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dear child, Our Lords give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to breathe the holy inspiration of their hand, Amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or let me have ordered this chapter in devising by chapters, according to which is before or the chapter of cauterizations, that I have devised from the head until the foot, so you will find it more easily when you need it.
dou chief plein d’aigue	The head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this disease comes about very often in infants at birth, and when the mother presses too hard on the baby's head; and sometimes it happens due to no other reason than we don't know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I never see this disease outside of infants, and among all those that I have seen their death hastened; and for this reason it seems to me worth abandoning the practice of such treatments.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw one child of this, where the shoulder was full of water, and their head swelled each day until it could no longer be supported; and because of so much moisture he died, and this moisture is assembled around the bone under the elbow, between the chest and the bone; and the treatments are such that if the moisture is within the chest and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you make a large cut across the head; and let it be as long as two hands, as long as the moisture runs; and see this form of spasm:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	When moisture accumulates more, and if the abscess is bigger, make two incisions in a manner like a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if moisture is under the bone, and you see the corners of the forehead opening on each side, and a sharp pain occurs when you press it from your hand internally, and this does not respond: then it must be that you cut through the center of the forehead with three cuts according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, remove all moisture completely outside.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After restraining the cuts from cloths and powders, and I place wine and oil, and leave it like this until the fifth day; then loosen it, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, and let the head remain restrained equally, and eventually have the patient consume dry meat of a little moist until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look at where the aperture of the abscess opens, and the assembly of the water; for it never stands in front; nor behind; nor to the right; and never to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	So cut the place where the abscess opens and the water filling it, make a cut according to your ability and watch that you do not cut the artery; look for a source of blood, so that the patient dies from the flow of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	regarding remedies
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it comes to any illness that is called "catarrh" either around the eyes or at the bottom of the nose, and this sickness is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the last resort treatment involves cauterization using what one would cut off their two main arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	So then, if you see fit, the patient must be freed after their head; after rubbing their face with a hard cloth until the arteries can be seen, then pull out the ears' necks to all the cloth; then look where the veins lie, and both sides are compared after the ears, and they have returned; then sign the sides with an incision, then cleanse each side with a sharp spatula of two parts, until the edge reaches the bone, and this is done considering the width under the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see this, hold the knife over the artery and cut above it, making the incision also as wide as two inches through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, make sure to pull the string continuously upwards from there.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open by touch, then you must measure the size of the space to be three fingers wide, and gently apply pressure until it reaches the bone; and what needs to come out through blood is six c/ (a unit of measurement), and in case a little more or less depending on how well the patient can endure it and fullness of the artery; then inspect the wound: if it remains over the bone near the sinus, and if an incision does not show when removing pus, then tighten the wound and bandage, and apply ointment treatment until it heals.
de emigrainne	Of grains
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the old age comes along and severe colds occur, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and elsewhere, as well as similar conditions. Medicine is treated through the methods of medicinal cures, but none of these help it much. Then we extract the veins in the temples and cauterize them, just like what we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method for their extraction is that one should lead the patient's hair from the temples to where the artery opens on them, as it opens well by its pulsation and responds only in those whose heads are overly cold; and if it does respond, hold the neck of the patient with some cloths, then rub the head with a rough cloth, and raise the head under hot water until the artery clearly appears; then take out the cautery tool that has this form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then lightly strip the skin until you feel the artery, then pinch it upwards with forceps, and remove well all the membranes that are under each part; and if the artery is delicate, then turn it at the tip of the nail, then clip off that part according to the size of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, neither does it jump all through all without pain.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And drain out the blood until the seventh day; and if the artery is large, it's necessary that you tie it with two strands of a sturdy silk thread, so that putrefaction doesn't occur before the healing of the wound, or during bleeding; then cut away any excess material between the two threads at this very moment. And when you see fit, apply cautery from the surgical knife until the bone, as long as the bones are cut. This is the main task, should the patient not have fever and their complexion be warm.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cauterizers are help to finish the moisture: because with them it is of greater help against moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	It is necessary for the extraction of arteries that you fill the whole with old cotton and place well-made tents above it; and when they are released, if you do a cure with dry medicines that generate pus and tents until it becomes clear; and if there's no artery bleeding then do as you work, quickly apply heat from the cauterizer, or use the whole of vitriol and squeeze it in your hand so that the blood becomes congealed; and if you don't have this on hand, fill the hand with alcohol until the blood is frozen, and dip the hand in cold water until the bleeding stops, then hold it as needed; and what is softer and more fluid during the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein from this cauterized trenching at .ij. parts, but the trenching should be well spaced to keep heat for a longer time.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too tense, they retain less of their heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the two knives half an inch, and then when you have decided to insert both of them, and you place the heated iron until it reaches the bone, and cut along two lines; and keep them far apart as this cautery does not fully adhere everywhere; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	Of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes are draining through the veins that are under the skin of the head and face, and no benefit comes from medicine being applied there, you'll see the skin turn red, and feel or notice heat on the forehead as if it were pulsating; and at such places they become damp and wet so that paper hairs fall off, and the papers get heated, and are burnt by the heat of the tears, in which case this treatment is needed.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And call the old "blister cure", and if you treat the patient with this disease, make them grow hairs on their head or forehead, then I make three cuts evenly across the forehead according to its length; let one cut be as long as two thirds of the front area moving forward to the nose tip and keep the rest at lengths equal to half of the front in both sides above the eyebrows. Be careful not to cut through the arteries located above the eyebrows; maintain distance from the continuation of the lower jaw bones, and each wound should be about three inches wide across. Have a piece of sponge and some cloths ready for wiping off blood, then start with the hot pincers from two sides as depicted here:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the cut that is behind the temple until the second cut; and remove all the flesh in between the two cuts up to the part on the bone, then continue with another cut from the middle cut until the other second one, and then remove this spit.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you use the tool called "cultellaire" in the first opening, and it is very sharp on one side, and blunt on the other, not sharp, and this shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And make the cut towards the fatty tissue under the skin, and the cut meets the bone at the corner, and the knife reaches to the middle of the slit.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the veins coming down from the head until you reach an opening at the corner, and then continue the incision halfway through the slit; and after that perform equal bleeding and express the wound from the blood taken; then place a piece of old cotton in each slit, and cover with wet cloths soaked in wine and oil and sage, making sure no pus comes out; and on the third day remove the bandages, and apply large amounts of water, then administer a cure with basil oil and rose oil, as well as other treatments used for wounds until they heal.
dou reume des eulz	from the inflammation
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When it comes to sudden fever and habituated coughing, and you see the eyes red and small, and weakening of vision, and burned paper; and hair falls out, and one sweats profusely, and the body aches with malaria-like pains, and the patient shivers; then know through these incidents that those matters and this fever come from many veins, and the treatment given, if it is such.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you must instruct the patient to rest their forehead, then make a large cut in the middle of the forehead, and another one below it that is about an inch wide.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	Start from the temple on the left to the temple on the right and make your incision until you reach the bone; keep your hand away from the temples' nerves that move during eating. When the bone is revealed, drain all the blood with a sponge and then clean between the two lips of the incision, place old cotton and linen strips. Then cover it with wet bandages in wine and oil. Avoid any pus. Once the bone is removed, you should rub the bone until cartilage begins to grow, then use desiccating substances that stimulate cartilage growth.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of colofoin, and make a poultice with them; then administer it to these wounds to promote the growth of flesh everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Regarding ear piercing or perforation.
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that chokes in the ears is one of four things: grains, or animal, or mine stone or similar thing like iron; or seed, like beans, peas; or flowing substance like water and oil and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When there is an issue with the ear hole or any other matter that doesn't fit for the ear or does not grow in the ear, place the ear under the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see a stone, if it distills no purple oil or nut oil, then proceed with extraction; and have them sneeze out the fumes of common sense, and obstruct their noses when the sneezing comes, and insert pieces of cloth or wool inside the ear; and hold the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times, healing comes through this treatment; and if it does not come through force, then it is to be treated with subtle needlework, which is what follows:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out with the hooks, that's good; if not, proceed with extraction using a thin and delicate tool of small curvature; and if it doesn't jump out this way, make an araneae stick and hold the tip of the stick or the edge of the ear very firmly, plug the wax hole inside the stick as tightly as possible so that nothing can enter with the stick; then pull forcefully, for often this brings relief as we have said; and if it doesn't bring relief in such a way, take out the wax and hold any tool ready to do this work, put a little cotton in there; then press the wax or whatever is there onto the stone, and pull with force.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she cannot heal from all these things that we have said, hurry to cut the ear in such a way that pus and phlegm escape, along with spasms; and the method of cutting is as follows: first you make an incision near the auricular muscle, draining blood according to its capacity. Then place the ear between your hands and turn the ear upwards, making a small cut at the base of the ear in the fatty part hanging down; let the cut be like a crescent moon until you reach the bone, then extract the bone with force and suck it quickly into your mouth; perform the cure while it's still clean.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if they are grains and it inflates, administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, perform this type of puncturing in such a way:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	And perform an incision on that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not perform this when you think that the grains are moist due to ear moisture, until you have done many pieces; then remove them with subtle needlework and suction, as we have said, so that the extractions go smoothly.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the water, then, when the child is in the ear, it's important that the patient use initial coughing motions. And widen the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And be situated right on that ear itself or where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps up through the air, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If it doesn't jump through the sky, take several stones according to their length and gently, heat them slightly on fire; and place one or two of these by her ear and let her jump off with her feet from another side, and strike with another stone onto the stone that is in the ear; and never cease this from stone to stone until all the water comes out completely, and thus jumps it completely; and if you see, take a reed, and insert one of these pieces into the ear, and let the other piece be on fire until the hardest part of the reed is burnt; then redo this with more reeds until all the water comes out, as we have said about stones.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the beast, if it is small like a flea and similar thing, treat it as we have said in division; but if there's something noticeable that one can feel, then perform the extraction with forceps; this is the lighter thing to remove in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of the twisted worms in the ears, if you're treating it as we have said in division and about distillation therapies, and if the treatment doesn't benefit, then you should examine the ear to the sun: if there is no worm visible, then treat with small forceps; and if nothing's visible, take the shape of this:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And take out the most delicate wax in the ear according to the amount of suffering it causes, then pour some more into all the canal; do this often until all the fluid comes out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not wish to come out, plug the canal of cotton as I have said in the stone; and if they do not expel themselves as we have said, give them distillations that the old ones have proven effective in worm removal, and you will find instructions on distillations elsewhere; and distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, as shown here:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And use either silver or arsenic in a small tube below for distillation and to press within the distillation with one well-made tool of arsenic suitable for this task. And place a piece of cotton wrapped around the end extension near the raseur. Then pour your oil or juice into the tube, and observe what you see from your medicines within the wick, and have the wick in the ear; then fill the raseur completely with all the cotton, press your hand gently until the oil is fully distilled or until it has reached the ear canal; and listen to the symptoms within, and ensure that one portion of distillation is heated over fire just like you do when distilling it into the ear; and make sure it's not too cold because the medicine would not be as effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Regarding ear piercing or perforation.
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without any missing parts in their ears; and this same thing happens to people when there's injury or birth in the ear, and these injuries come into the ear sometimes unseen if one can't see them; and never does one have more than one hole for the ear, and one sees it very well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes unseen, if one can't see it, is of healing in multiple positions, and in that situation where one sees that you should place the ear to the sun; and look inside: if you see the apparent thickening, if the work has become this pus-like substance from which the following description is related:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be so and cut in front and behind all flatly, so that it doesn't hurt the ear; if the thickening is from a birth or a part of the ear, if you have fine pincers, and gently scrape, until that flesh is entirely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the wicks go all the way into the ear, take a delicate thin thread and light it on fire, then place it inside the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you sense the irritation that makes your ears feel itchy when listening, gently poke at this sensation, and ensure not to press on the nerves of the ear; then place a bandage in the ear according to its curvature near the entrance, and fill it with an Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Continue doing this every day until the wound heals, or take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and powder it with ground vitriol. And if you see swelling in the ear, it is necessary that you replace the tent and insert another moistened one made from roset oil and wax, until the swelling subsides; then treat it until it has fully recovered.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, dip an sponge and wring it out in cold water, then place it on the ear, and apply other treatments that stop bleeding, which include methods for dealing with distillations.
de la char des papieres	Of the ashes of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	When dealing with hairs in papers that are wet and dry, it is necessary to spread them out using tweezers and forceps. And take the root of a fumigant from its leaves; then place sulfur in its place.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if you don't remove the bark, sear it with a small lens cautery, and after the incision, the cautery is useful for movement; and many times they return, so that no part remains from their roots. And when they are cauterized by fire, those roots burn and do not come back.
de la gresle	Of the gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times in papers you find things that seem to harden by their shape and consistency, and because of this, it is called the disease 'granules', and it's a collection of large moisture in the paper above and below; the procedures are like this: watch if the granule moves from one side to another, and this is a small thing to know; so do as follows by making them wide, then slightly burn each part, then take hold with tweezers, and then scrape.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cover it without piercing a little bit of the paper, so as to not harm the patient; and if there is a large tear, then stitch it up with one thread, and treat it until it heals; and if it is small, do not apply too much force, for the ointment will heal it quickly and promote new growth.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the granulation descends inside the ear towards the upper part, invert the paper and have the granulation at some forceps points, then scrape and press from one side to the other; and if the paper is pushed away by the incision, this does not harm; and when the granulation is scraped off, wash out with salty water, and treat the wound until it heals as long as the patient is well.
de la graisse des eulz	of the grease of the warts
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a grease that forms on the sheets of papers above it, this happens more often in children than adults and doesn't harm their eyes. They experience weeping at dawn and cannot look at the sunlight because tears quickly gather in their eyes; thus they lie down with their faces and sleep on them, making the paper near their eyelids moist where Exinach has spread and created a visible layer over it that opens in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press on his arm with your fingers and feel the pulsation between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the way of treating is that the patient's head goes to your health; and then take one linen cloth, and set up a tent in such a manner as a circle according to the quantity that contains extraction from each part, then place it on them; and press with your thumbs on both sides so that the extraction comes together inside the circle; then make a cut in the middle of the moisture using a sharp trenchant tool for width, and not more than the wound when you are making an incision for opening a vein; and make the leather fit perfectly until you see the extraction coming from the cut, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Remove then all in one piece of linen cloth between your thumbs on the outside, and turn your hand to right and left until it is dispersed; and make sure you do not fill up the cut until you reach all the trenchant tool up to the eye, without hurting it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the incision does not open at the beginning of the wound, increase it slightly gently until it opens; then treat it as we have said, then moisten it with cloths in water and oil, and place it on the wound, and apply bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are such people who grind flax and put it out to corrupt that moisture which has remained.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then the treatment continues while it remains sound.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is an abscess on the arm, so the treatment with plastering substances continues until it remains sound.
des poilz des papieres	The phrase "des poilz des papieres" translates to "the hairs of paper". This could refer to thin or lightweight material that resembles hair, possibly used in various crafts or as a decorative element.
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs grow in unnatural places on the body, and they become thick, they can harm the eyes and cause issues leading to diseases like frequent tearing of the eye and inflammation or swelling of the paper-like layers under the skin as well as albugine (a condition affecting the eye). All this happens due to damage to the eyes. The cure for such conditions involves three methods: using a cautery device combined with fire, applying an ague medicine according to what is described in the section about cauteries, or performing incisions and suturing, depending on how I explain later.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You should place the eye's head in its natural position and then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it turns, that is good. If not, take one needle through all half an inch from the edge of each hair; and do this either within the margin of the paper where hairs are growing or above the hairs themselves, taking one thread across the entire sheet of paper and then turning to the rasp after that.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if there's a part that needs to be handled with great skill when dealing with large amounts of paper according to how the paper is softened; then place all the pus fluid onto the two lines you have marked and start from the large end moving towards smaller; until you find natural breaks in the hair, then carefully fold the inch into one of the two corners near the nose, then peel it all off; after that, join both edges together using a small needle with only one thread of fine wool, and let the blood drain out. Clean any excess threads on both sides of these lines as you go, if this is how you do it; but if not, don't worry about it. Then leave the wound open for up to three or four days before cleaning the injury without stitching it shut. The paper heals with this direct contact from the injury and its joining process, but the stitches will decay (as per the old sayings), and this is work that does not involve fear; and there's another way: you draw a shape of paper similar to a bay leaf when you mark three inches according to the form shown here.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then cover that which is on top with small force evenly according to the shape which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the forceps, and they are not equal, take a needle or have thread, place it across your fingers; then place the other thread over the large artery, and the second thread over the small one. Then pull your hand equally, lifting all the skin above where you pricked it as we explained, then stitch together both sides of the wound with equal threads. Do this while the cut is still clean; if pus comes to your incision site, ease it with grease or similar soothing ointment; and every time the paper hair turns, use what we have instructed about cutting. But stitching on either side is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of cuts follows this pattern: and it is that you should transform the paper (material) and make an incision according to what I have said, then create two stitches by skill, and two fine threads each as long as the paper and as wide as the distance between the edges; and place two ends of .ij. cuts at .ij. parts where you hold the threads; then join both of them carefully on top of the paper part of the eye, stretching those two stitches from the two sides forming; and leave it like this for a few days, and the skin that is stretched will dry and harden until it tears out by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it lags behind, if the wound has strength, then heal it as long as it is clean. And when the wound has healed and the paper lifts, and no longer will shed hair; this is the form of the two threads that you should do according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work procedures involve taking a delicate needle and tying two pieces of fine silk thread onto it. Then, you join the joints together carefully, making sure both are fastened nicely. Make sure each piece of the thread is roughly the length of one palm in length. Proceed to weave another thread through the joints briefly, knotting it firmly at each end. Place the sick part into its healthy position and allow sunlight to shine onto this operation, as it involves subtle and small procedures. Then, insert the needle all the way back into the hair follicle where it's attached, piercing the paper quickly while pulling upwards from natural hair; then pull out the hair up until it reaches the middle of the weave in the paper, knotting that hair in place if there are one or two, three or more, or even more hairs present. Once done with this step, remove your hand until all hairs stick out evenly across the paper, still adhering to natural hair length.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the procedure on the weave and hair is completed without them coming out with it, then pull the weave off to the side with all the thread that you've ordered, until the weave sticks out past the end and you can see through it by your eye; therefore, once you pull the weave and the thread, cover your eye and leave it covered for two days or three, until the hair hardens in its place and a new flesh grows up; and if the hair is small, accompany one long hair from a natural calf, raise it with that or let it alone, until it stretches then lift.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the corruption of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this illness is called 'Aleacrati' or 'putrefaction' comes in the eye, if there are two ways to handle it: one naturally, and the other unnaturally.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And occurs suddenly from injury or from surgery, or from similar actions.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the method of treating it involves cutting that seam, opening the lips, and placing linen cloths inside, then leave them until they heal; and you should not use in its treatment things that dry out and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	But if you do this, the illness will return worse than before; however, use substances that soften things, like fenugreek; and apply water or distilled and linseed oil, and buttered onions in any of the oils, and then wrap a tent, and treat it with these.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your treatment are that you must beware not to heal it according to its original shape; and these treatments that we have mentioned do not go beyond addressing this illness, so that it does not recur in the same form it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the matter coming into the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease which truly is called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accidents come from wounds and slits and cauterizations and similar things; and the way in which one should do this is that you take a needle, with a double thread on it, and pierce the skin. You insert the needle to the left corner of the flesh until it hits bone so that the threads enter both sides of the flesh; then the flesh covers all over the needle and the hole widens at the exit.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the paper figure comes back according to what should be done, it's good; and if not, take a piece of linen and place it in the slit, then turn the paper so that two slits are made inside the paper. And let there be two cuts at the corners of the incision, making angles such that when they are assembled together, the figure resembles one of a letter 'I'. Then remove this flesh according to how many edges and thicknesses it has compared to where it was cut out from under the paper; then attach the two missing parts using threads, sewing with thread. After that, treat him as we have said about mollifying medicines and poultices until he is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a tear or a stitch or a cautery, it is necessary that you cut an incision filled with hairs of papers, and according to what was mentioned before; then pierce between the two hands of a tent, as I have said; and must perform the operation according to the shape of the disease, for she varies greatly in form. And the surgeons must prepare equipment for all situations so that they know how to restore the figure to its natural state; and even the patients themselves, according to what they need from operations and instruments in various positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	immediately of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this seam happens between human hands in such a way that the paper above is glued with the egg white of oil, and cannot move or do its natural operations, then it is necessary that you pierce the edge of a razor under the paper, and lift it up; and stretch it to pins, until you catch what is protruding at the subtle spatumile (a surgical instrument), which should not be too sharp nor too narrow, so as not to allow the patient to suffer from overly sharp spatumile and burn their eyes; and make your incision, where you remove that gathered together with ease, such that the paper regrows according to its natural form; and the whole thing is cleansed, and do not salt water in the eye again, and leave it with fresh water and lard; then place a linen tent between the paper and the eye, and cover the eye with wet wool; and after three days use a colander and other surgical tools until it has healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	From the edge of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	You should know that the edge of the eye can be in two ways: it is nerve-like and resembles a hard piece of wood, and another which isn't nerve-like but seems like icy moisture. If you touch it with iron and try to hold it using tongs, it can't move; both resemble towards the large tear duct, and grow slowly and slowly until they cover all vision and light and the movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of incision is such that the patient puts their head in its healthy position, then exposes the eyelashes; lift the paper with your hand, then place the edge of the eye with tongs slightly bent, and place it above; then take a needle, and put one horsehair or cowhair or buffalo hair, along with a strong thread; and double the needle's tip a little bit and insert it into the edge of the eye, piercing all the way through with the needle, and attach the edge of the eye to a thread and place it above; then shave off all the hair on the side of the eye that touches the cornea and the silk-like skin up until the root, leaving only natural tears in the patient's tear duct, so as not to let the body's usual tear flow through the incision; and every single time, the edge of the eye is placed at the edge of the nail alone, and with the thread, just as we have said; then shave off all the thin hair from what has been mentioned above, thus forming:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And see that the cautery doesn't touch the fatty tissue and doesn't break it, nor should the rod pierce; after incision pour a bit of oil in the eye socket, and make a collar from silver and let it stay until the next day. Then treat as necessary when they are healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not made of bone, and you can't push in the needle, and the nail grooves cannot enter, this false nail is treated many times with medicinal remedies; grow exactly as I described in the division, and if it looks like a real nail, the eye sees the illness, take the cautery lightly with somewhat sharp point according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Pull the nail upwards slightly, and if you see that it doesn't diminish at all and the reason presses on it, then distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of silver and red paste and oil, and apply to the eye until the next day; then start another procedure according to this same work as long as there is any bone left.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing opposes your view, such as a boil on the skin, then proceed, and begin by treating the boil until it is drained. Once the boil has been treated, then continue with the work as before, until it heals.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh from the armpit seems to harm your eye through great disturbance, suspend it by the navel, and remove a part not all at once, so that no tears come; then distill into your eye the red bandage made of stannic oxide.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	Of the flesh that arises on the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Hair of some people does not turn red when they are born, and covers the eyelid, restraining upon papers and turning outwardwards, and appears like a rose of ivory; and the veins so that the patient puts their head into your healthy place, then operate on the eyes, and thus all that flesh should be cut into suitable lengths for this purpose, and hold it up by force; then remove the first flesh piece, and shave it all down to the end with a razor, and ensure you do not hurt the eye during this operation; and make sure the incision is as smooth as we said in cutting nails and small operations on what one removes from under nails, just like the illustration after this chapter shows; and when the incision has been completed and all flesh removed, apply oil of brimstone or distill it with red powder into a bandage-like substance, and place cotton with egg white outside the eye to ensure a warm place for pus formation; and if nothing remains, and you see pus without any healing, then let the eye be and treat the pus formation from substances soothing to pus; then return to your operation when it is healthy again, and thus make several flesh pieces fit into the eye by this manner.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But still, it is necessary that you manage the treatment of each weak oil in its natural way; and by accident in its way; in iron work. And do not thrust your hand into any of these works until you see that this member bears that work.
des voines des eulz	of veins and eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	When the veins become red and cover over at their openings, and tolerate their work on the eye, weakening it for several days.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Therefore, when you first look at the eye, and where the symptoms are, there is nothing else but the symptoms; then treat it in this manner: instruct the patient to place their head near your health, then suspend all veins according to its wisdom until one half of the veins double in accordance with this shape.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two inches by degree, for one side, according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then perform this operation carefully on the veins, and allow the blood to drain out for an hour or two after, as long as you can see those veins receding from the eye; and be careful not to puncture the eye with the needles, and carry out this procedure at noon in front of the sun, and be very meticulous in your work so that you do not allow any force other than those veins. And when you have completed this task, apply a collar of green and red vinegar to the eye to eliminate what remains of the sebel.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you do not have the power to handle all of this in that hour, then create a poultice from things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for several days until the pain is soothed and sufficiently free from pus formation, then begin again using this method as described before until they are healed; and this is the way to use force.
de la fistule de l’oil	Of the duct of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The remedy known as "arissati" fistula: when you cure it with a cautery and by using hot water medicine according to what I have mentioned earlier, and if it does not heal, then there is a place where you open up on the abscess, at the point that should die off, and remove all the moisture that is there, until the bone becomes visible.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is discovered, and you will see the corruption and the darkness, if you take all the tool of what is shaped here; and call it "hard head", and make it from a single piece of metal for one-inch length, and make its tip pointed like a file as it is in this current form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place on it the part of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that this corruption has stopped; and do this several times, then restore the part with drying medicinal applications.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	When the nerves are fused, and flesh begins to grow, and the vessel of the bow is fused as well, and remains like this for 40 days, without renewal or becoming abscessed, and no bad events occur, be assured that it has healed. If not, there is only another means, that being to bring back the fistula to the joint near the knuckle in accordance with this shape: and then you will uncover the bone again using iron and medicines. And when it is uncovered, take the furrow according to this shape, and have the iron branch at three angles, and the rod be thin until it reaches the joint as shown here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Then place it on the corner of the bone at the nose, and hold your hand near but not too close to the eye socket, then move to fully press until it pierces the bone and you feel the pain in the patient as long as you keep your hand on their nose; and afterwards restore the limb with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the heat has grown and hardened the limbs, take the matter out of the nose; if something lighter is felt by the patient it's better for them.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes open completely and there is no dislocation in the neck or narrowing, it is necessary to tie the patient's eyelid; then heal them, then place a suction cup or a blister without piercing to allow exudation, then place over the eye. I.e., make a plaster of myrrh and aloe and incense and sarcocolle, and then strain the eye, and plaster it with strips and bandages; and the manner of the bandages is that you take bandages that are quite soft, and double each at four, and then place one on top of another according to the amount needed by the eyes; then strain it from above with a hard bandage formed, and continue using suction cups without piercing; then remove the suction cups and allow the eye to be strained day and night, and if the ligatures loosen, it is necessary that you strain more; then remove the ligature after day and night, and if you see the eye heal, it's good; if not; then repeat the plastering and bandaging and the ligature and suction cups until they are healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	At the bursting of an oviductal membrane
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions come in the oviductal membrane, then opening appears and comes out pieces of paper like a seed of resin, and it is observable; therefore if you see this covering, the condition is such that you insert an awl at the root of the part below up until slightly above, then insert another awl or with one thread double from the part near the eye; and do piercing, leaving the first awl according to the placement; then cover the other side of the thread double and tie a portion inside the oviduct tightly, then pull it well, then remove the awl and place wet wool cloth on the eye; and leave this until the thread breaks with the oviduct, then heal the eye with restorative things until the wound heals; and no time the wound is held back by the ruptured part of a circle of cloth, until she is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes have a substantial appearance, then pierce through the thin lid that comes forward from the eye, and drain out the watery humor and descend beneath the eyes, and enter immediately; then pull until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	By the stream of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called 'alcunnati' only affects the substance gathered in the eye socket, resembling descending sharp pains; it is not actually pain. As for the appearance of this work's process, you should have the patient sit upright and straight, then hold their head between your two hands from both sides, and move them until you see the discharge come up above your eyes; then leave it in place, don't let it go down or remove the light, observe everything like before. If it doesn't descend immediately, know that this is pain, and if the descent of the discharge is not orderly as we have described,
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you make the patient sit between your hands, then take the delicate spatula and operate on the corneal membrane through the connection with the corneal membrane and the crown until the tear comes out; and when it has come out, pour in a hot, sharp water mixed with honey, or hot water that has been boiled with fenugreek, or after that apply other treatments until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	From the tears of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have the appearances of the fluids in the division, and what needs to be pierced; so we operate according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary for you to make the patient sit cross-legged outside in the sunlight, and tie the healthy eye tightly; then place the paper of the eye on your left hand where his eyes are close together, or on your right hand if they are far apart. Then take with your right hand (if his eyes are close together) the tool called "almagda," or with your left hand (if they are far apart). Place the tip of the tool below the cornea through a thickness of about one hair's breadth in that part of the eye where the lower eyelid meets, then push the tool called "almagda" vigorously, and turn your hand until it pierces inside the eye, feeling when almagda reaches the empty place. The measure of the path of almagda should correspond to the space measured from the corner of the eye up to the end of the darkness; this is the cornea of the eye; if you see bone in that piece of paper due to the transparency of the corneal tissue, then place the tool until it touches or reaches the fluid or water, and remove it by pulling out through another channel after each pull.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	Let the patient feel it now, so they can see their own wound before them and the instrument in their mind.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After I rest for a little, and if the patient feels it climbing up the second vein, apply force with the instrument. And when it's firmly in place and no longer climbs upwards, gently extract the clump using circular motions; then, after that, place just a pinch of coarse salt back into the eye socket and remove the excess out from within.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then place the eye with oil-soaked bandage or wet wool in a container filled with oil and plenty of eggs, and secure it with healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Now, for those that have our strength, place them on a common comb with plenty of eggs.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are some individuals whose eyes are too hard, you should take the tool called "alberit", which has this form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And pierce only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deep, but make it subtle; then extract the clump, as we have said; and upon completion of this work, attend to your patient's rest in a dark room where he lies on his back; be careful with all movements, and prefer light meats, and avoid moving his head either to the right or left. Secure him according to his position until mid-day; then remove the bandage in that same dark room, let him see if anything is wrong, and then reapply the bandage up until seven days. It should not be done during the cure period or after an incision now, but it's necessary to proceed with this, because the wound may heal quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	Letting an abscess drain, you release the eye before the seventh day, and administer the treatment of one who alleviates the abscess; when it has calmed down, then release the vision and set a patch on her forehead for one day, and stay in that gloomy house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then leave the house slowly and slowly, and adapt to her surroundings; know that no students should intervene in such a situation.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	A man from Yrach came to us who told us that they were using a pierced amalgam tool there, in which the water would be drained out, but still, I never saw any like it in our land, nor have I ever read about it in old books; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the descriptions of the forms of mercury, for those who do not know them can see them; and they are properly of lead:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And let its head be made from this same subtlety, and the tail in three angular sections.
de la char sor le neis	from the nose hair
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	No birth or conception of various mixed creatures occurs; some resemble scorpions with the feet of pigeons. And if there are such cases where a creature is colored red due to blood, and if it has a good-colored body.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	For the treatment of creatures that have smooth skin but no redness, you must place the patient between your hands against the sun; work on their nostrils and apply honey to those creatures, then remove them. Proceed by holding the subtle sharp point of a spathile at one side until you know that the creature is fully ossified.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains anything that we cannot cope with, should you open the wound completely using two fine and light instruments, ensuring nothing stays inside. And if it is without obstacle or abscess, if it needs to be cleaned as it should; and if it's an evil abscess, if you act quickly and use heat until all pus has drained out and all bones are clean. Then let the water or wine flow freely out of it.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	In his work, and due to moisture it reaches up to the throat, know that it is bleeding; and if moisture does not penetrate like it should, know there's new flesh in the bone above, by which its instruments cannot cut: then you must understand that you need to sew a thread of linen somewhat thick, and tie it with your hands, and have space between each knot about one inch or less; and place the linen thread on the neck where the head is coming out through the nose, and pull it gently until it goes inside the nose; many times do this for the child in schools, and it's a simple thing for someone who wants to perform. Hold the head that comes out by the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes out by the mouth with the other hand, and distinguish them from each other while you are guided by us who have the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Perform this procedure while you know that the new flesh has corrupted old flesh, then pull out the filth, bleed it, moisten the filth with Egyptian salve, and immediately put it back at its original place as before; do this for three days or longer, until the salves have corroded all of the remained old flesh; and then put a slice of turpentine under the nose for several days while it heals. If there is need for dried medicines, use them too; this is how to form the tool for purging the head, on which one distills oils and medicines or alcohol.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it should be made of silver or lead, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and guide it that way; and if you see fit, make a closed cane, and have the instruments filled to purge the head; and hold one end of the head when heating oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	from the nose hair
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times the head under the nose experiences a sickness called "telul", it grows and becomes large to the point of being visible; because this requires that you start by cutting at its beginning, then remove all bone, after which place your cautery or burning medicine in it; and if you delay cutting until it is large, if it becomes hard, changes color, loses sensation: don't touch it with iron as there's an abscess inside, for when one cuts it once, it can cause great harm to the patient; and if the abscess was due to hot touch, not just change of color, and you see that all can be cut away, then empty the patient and treat the area with drying and restraining substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nose is cut and sewn.
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when the solutions of continuation come into one of these venous circuits, it profits little because in some people.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, if this happens to none of them, then check if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then adjust the two lips onto a stitch, and treat it until it heals. And if the lips are yellowed on both sides, you should burn every part of their flesh until they heal, then join the two lips with a stitch, and tighten them. Apply dragon's blood powder and incense to each other, and place a piece of plaster over these powders, either from strong plaster or another soldering plaster. Leave it until it discharges by itself, then treat it with ointment until it heals.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of sewing is such that you join the seam: either with needles, as we have said in the abdominal stitch; or with thread, which I have made known to you.
des apostemes des levres	of the abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the hands of a surgeon inside a wound abscessed hard, resembling grains sometimes large and small; therefore it is necessary that you re-open the lips, cut into each nodule, and take them with tweezers in each part; then after the vitriol incision, let the wound bleed until the pus is exhausted; and then drain gently, and cure the wound of dry things until it is clean.
de la char des gencives	from the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times, a connective tissue forms on the gums, which the old would call "albulus"; it is necessary to hold this with forceps, cut it at its root and allow blood or blood to flow out. Then place it under the vitriol burn, or other drying and desiccating powders; if that flesh returns after the incision and repeatedly appears, cut it again secondly and cauterize it: if it doesn't return even after being burnt with a cautery; these are the methods for cutting out this tissue.
des sordens	From the sounds
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Some times they are gathered at the top of the teeth roots, inside the mouth between the gums, those that are ugly and rough; and sometimes the tooth turns black and yellow and worms, until corruption reaches the gum, and the tooth becomes stinky; then it is necessary to make the patient sit with their hands on yours, and the head should be in your palm, and pull out any teeth or roughness as long as nothing remains; and so you deal with darkness and greenness, yellowness, and other tones, until they are all gone; if what comes off at the first attempt is correct, it's good; if not, start again from the second day and third onwards, until you have everything removed; and know that teeth require various types of instruments to be pulled, according to what their craft demonstrates, for the rasp used to remove teeth above them has other forms than those used in between them; and these forms and others should be with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When you treat a tooth for its pain, it is necessary that you wait as long as possible to pull the root out, because one should not do this too hastily; indeed, the process should be conducted slowly. This is due to the fact that if done too quickly, one might make an improper cut, and thus no excuse exists for hastily removing a tooth.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore, when the patient is constrained to bleed, it is necessary for you to know where to prick.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Often, the pain is experienced by the patient during bleeding, so be sure that it's either from a holy tooth or ensure proper bleeding. And don't leave any of the pain until the disease has been extracted, because we have already wanted to do this for these soldiers; and when you are certain about which tooth to prick, you should cauterize in between the tooth and gum for several inches very strongly to prevent infection from all sides; then move your hand or use fine forceps at a small pinch and pinch until it's properly extracted, but ensure the forceps are well fastened; and have the patient hold their jaw with pain in their holy tooth between their knees, and keep your grip steady so that it doesn't move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After removing the right tooth without breaking it, if it doesn't fall out, take none of these instruments and gently push them inside each part from both sides. And move them just like you did initially.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is broken and fractured, you should fill in with lint at the place where it is lost; and when squeezing them softly with tweezers, make sure not to break it during squeezing; and you must carefully open under the gum to extract the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And see to it that you do not break it well, and leave a part of it, and inform the patient about the greater pains caused by the root's mischief after the initial pain.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And be aware that you should not do it like the ignorant surgeons do, who break everything by their haste and boldness, and don't follow our advice; but instead, they often cause more pain from this great disease due to the roots remaining or because of the bone they break, as we have often said. And when the tooth has been pulled, wash the wound with wine or brandy and vinegar; and if bleeding occurs (which is common), apply vinegar to the wound; and if that doesn't work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the tools, to which one binds their teeth first, should be with long points and thick handles, so they do not double when you pull the tooth; and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them have large parts that do not bend while being pulled, and be made of well-crafted iron, and have teeth for holding things in place.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root stays during bleeding, it is necessary that you place cotton soaked in greasy butter under the wound for a day or two.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	As long as the legs are softened, take and hold the tongs known as "algiefri", which make the surgeon's cut seem like a beak; and they should be done inside in such a way that it resembles a file, this is its form.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these clamps, then it is necessary that you uncover the entire flesh right up to the root, and place the tool called 'althali', which is known as a palainche, as follows:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be strong and thick so that it doesn't break at all, and if the root jumps over this, it's good; if not, use all your tools, as those mentioned next will come into play:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you assist with the tool having two points, as described here:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools located in front according to their place, and from this tool that seems like a pair of large tongs, as depicted here:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And be this one of your tools so that it may not break, and know that there are many types of dense tools; also other tools, which are not counted among the rest; and the wise masters themselves discover their own tool by themselves, according to what their work and disease reveal to them. For there are certain diseases where the old did not teach a tool because of the diversity in these ones, and if it breaks due to wear or from other bones, or if it decays, when they seek out the tools that suit them, that I have told you about, and aid with gestures, as what follows is their form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be large and well held to hold the bone, so that it doesn't escape, but can be held and removed; and then restore him to the place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is decay in the bone, and it is small, if you use all this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to its natural form, and its shape is ugly, especially even in virgins, you must know if this tooth was born after another tooth, and it isn't placed straight, and one can neither file nor saw it: so you should remove it; and if it's next to a tooth, take this instrument that has the following form, and resembles two small beaks, and it is made of hard iron.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the dentist holds the molar tooth gently and very firmly with their hands for its hardness of the tooth surface, and because you do not move the others, and if it is visible that one can shave it off, then he shaves it with half of a file in this way:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And also like the file used to make needles; and he files the tooth gently in his hands softly, so that it does not move until it grinds; then makes the flat part at the end using all kinds of raspers, and if its edge is too sharp and hurts the tongue, then you must file down the roughness until it is even, so as not to hurt the tongue or impair speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth rots
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth before the cavity, or by percussion or impact, and when the patient cannot press on what they eat that they do not defecate, and you have cured them with medicines that restrict it; and this does not work; then it is necessary to restrain them with a gold thread, for silver threads turn green and rot, but gold never changes; and choose threads neither too thin nor too thick, according to the size of the space between the teeth; and if you see to straighten the teeth, take the thread and the double pinch between two healthy teeth, then place the cuttings between the diseased teeth, as long as you can do so until you reach a healthy tooth from another side; then repeat the covering up to the part where you stopped, and gently pull your hand, until it does not move at all; and tie your knot at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then take the teeth with thread on tweezers, and join them together, setting them between a healthy tooth and its socket; then place it so that it does not irritate the tongue; and leave it like this as narrow as possible, should it move or come loose, in which case use another thread to secure it. This keeps it usable for all of its time, forming the shape of the teeth and the placement of the two healthy second molars, just as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth aches, you put it back in its place, step by step, as we have said; and don't interfere with anything that isn't appropriate or tolerable, and never form the shape of an ox's bone tooth, and put it in the place where there is a defect, and hold it just like we've said, and remains and serves for so long.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	covering the tongue wound
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	No time should the thread come from under the tongue or nature, for that is how we are born; or through accidental welding in a wound; and the operations are such that you work on the mouth around the disease, having its head in your healthy place, and lift the tongue; then take out this nervous thread as wide as possible while the tongue is detached from its place. If there's hardness or clotting, which might be due to sudden injury, if you break the hook and cut it wider instead. And remember that the incision should not be too far off-center since there is an artery underneath; when done, lift your head with a rose-colored mildness or cold water, then place a linen tent under the tongue each night so the teeth cannot weld.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if bleeding should come about, place sulfur on the wound; and if it doesn't stop bleeding, apply the slow-acting cautery; this is good for that sort of thing. Then treat with other remedies until healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see that the ailment has turned to red or black or hard so that the patient doesn't feel it, do not touch it because it's gangrene; and should it turn from yellow to green and there be moisture, then pinch the hook and drain a thin pus, and cleanse from both sides; and if the wound discharges when you don't apply anything, pour vinegar on top until it is cleaned out, then return to your work until all strength has been applied; after that place the head in cool water and steam, and proceed with other treatments until they have healed fully.
des apostemes de la gorge	From throat abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	No infection enters the throat cavities which are called 'godath', and they are properly named the II almonds. When you treat them as we have said in the division, and if they are not healed, then take care: If these are hard abscesses with a small sense of touch and a reddish color, do not even touch them with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if they are red and the root is large, do not touch them with iron for blood leakage; but leave it until it is reduced, then you will remove it or it would break on its own. And if it's of a white color and the root is fine, prepare your instrument to cover, but first check if the abscess has cooled down and calmed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	So make the sick person sit in front of the sun, and have them hold their hands out to you healthy. Let them open their mouth and have your assistant grasp their wrists between their hands, pressing the tongue down completely onto every instrument; this is how it should be done; also use finely made silver or small sharp tools like knives for this task.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can't you press the tongue with all this tool, and see if there's pus? Take the onion and the point of the almond, pull it up more than you can; and don't remove anything from the threads with it. Then scoop it out with the tool; this is how it looks like a force; and every spot that was affected, one place then another, they're very sharp, and made of iron or brass:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you don't have this tool now, take the scissors; this is how it looks like:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And make an incision on one side and the other; and when you have completed one of the almonds, complete the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with hot, cold water, or cold and gentle water. If bleeding occurs during this process, then continue to gargle with hot water, or use cooked currant fruits, or rosemary leaves, or similar substances until the wound is healed; then complete the cure when it is healthy; and if any other abscesses form in the throat besides the two almonds, you should remove them accordingly like the two almonds equally.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was inside her throat, which is known as the small abscess; and had blocked off almost the entire throat very well, so that the woman could not breathe due to the blocked passage, and could not eat or drink, and died if she had continued in this state for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscesses were so high that they had to be drained twice, once through each nostril of the nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I acted quickly then, inserting one into the anus. The other was pulled out, and a large amount of feces came with it. Then I did another operation on the remaining part near the nose, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards, inserted the onion into the abscesses, took away some parts, only a little blood came out; in this way, the throat was removed from the woman, she began to drink water and then wine immediately after that; I did not stop cutting the abscess for a long time; the abscesses grew back right away, filling up the place I had emptied, as much as it could be filled until it became quite large; then I fastened it and cauterized inside her throat: in this way, she stopped growing. Then I moved on to these parts, and God did something good for her after me.
de l’uve	Regarding the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the sperm descends to the uterus, and it inflates and becomes lengthy, it is called 'perpendicular'. And if it is off-side large and spherical, it is called 'ovum'.
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the cure doesn't help, and you notice that the extraction wound has calmed down, and it is subtle; so you should take it. And the one which is round gathered and isn't lengthy; and it is bloody or of a reddish color or black, so you should avoid making an incision on it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	So, when you see it, according to the method that I have said, of its smell and length, you should make the patient stand in front of the sun, and press their tongue with the tool that we described before; then insert the spoon into the ovum, pull it outwards, and take it using the two instruments I mentioned during the incision of the two almond-shaped organs.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And it is necessary that you do not cut beyond the natural limit of excess; for if you cut more than this, damage will occur to the voice and speech. And after making an incision, use what we have advised about incisions in two amonds, and treat until healing has occurred.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patients have fear about cutting, it is necessary that you use something from the cautery for the sense of pain.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the way of the cautery is like boiling water.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And let the patients direct their head towards your health, and then press the tongue with the tool we said or chapter of cautery, rubbing vigorously with hot water, ensuring it is neither too thick nor too clear; and use the movement of this tool, as follows:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put our head with some hair on which we apply the medicine, just like the movements of a spoon, and place the tool over all the medicine on the eye; and let the patient lie on their side so that saliva and mucus go from their mouth inside to the medicine, ensuring it doesn't descend into the throat or the stomach; then hold your hand with the medicine and press onto the eye for half an hour's quantity until you see its numbness and the medicine's impacts have calmed; if you notice, take cotton and wrap it in any tool, soak it with medicine, insert that tool inside the cotton all the way to the string, until the cotton dries on the eye; repeat this often, until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and close afterwards for 4 days or 5. If you need to restart the medicine's cautery, do so, and after the cautery cleanse around the eye with gauze soaked in butter, clean up what is inside of the medicine; rinse from cold water, and wash with gargling until it heals fully.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision, or with the cautery; if it is treated by fumigation in this manner, take camomile and hyssop and rosemary and rue and calendula and parsley and similar herbs, and gather all of them or some of them into one pot, then place it there, and bring to a boil; and ensure that the pot is well filled with strong earth, and within the pot there be two sticks as this method dictates:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And whether it be made of silver or arsenic, and whether one places the other shoulder in the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the eye through the nose, until the eye is dead; after that you often repeat this process, until the eye dries out, and make sure you do not perform this at the beginning of the coming of pus, because many things occur; also do not perform this when the pus is receding.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a piece of wood and place an eggshell in the patient's mouth, so that the hotness does not burn too much the maimed; because the eggshell does not let the vapor damage the mouth, and it is a good cure together with health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times there is air in the throat bone or spine of fish, without any issue; therefore, it's necessary that you remove what you can see, and press the tongue at noon to all the tool, so that you can see if something moves; and if this doesn't reveal anything and remains in the throat, it's fitting that you make the patient vomit until the illness is expelled; by chance if the illness is pushed out through vomiting. Or if the illness swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or one chunk of dry bread; and tie the sponge with a thread, and then swallow it again; and when she comes to the head, if she is expelled by air, and then pull out forcefully; and if this doesn't work as described, take one tool of a plonc according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And prepare the instruments so that they may enter more easily into the throat, and have the head raised in the air; be careful not to touch the epiglottis, that nothing gets inside it or push bone inward; guide them well as the patient pushes out the instrument, because they will push if they move or if the thing is pressed; if it's pushed down by mouth, or it pulls forcefully on all of the instrument equally until she can pull it.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the lumen of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Never is the vein treated by the medicine alone, as I have said in the division, through medication treatment; and if this does not help, then look into the throat of the maimed person towards the sun, then press their tongue with the instrument that I told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the vein, guide it with all precision in small inches, or with delicate forceps that are worth for this task.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if that's not the case, take a thread of hair and guide it in the throat of the patient, then push or pull until you feel the tension of the thread. Then repeat this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if you bathe the patient with water throughout the day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full cup of cold water and apply it in the mouth, then pour it inside without letting them swallow, and move it often with their hand. And as soon as the vein feels the water, they will vomit.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if she doesn't vomit as we have said, then subfumigate the patient with Asafetida, using the tool I mentioned for the incision of the eye. Do this many times, because it will purge without causing harm.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the way of fumigation is as follows: you take a pot where there are charcoal flames, and place it covered with a perforated lid in the middle, and in this part place the shoulder joint of the instrument; then pour your fumigation into it, and make the patient put the tip of the rod into their mouth, close the mouth so that no smoke escapes but goes to the lungs; and now the saliva will begin to come out, if not, repeat the fumigation several times; and allow the patient thirst, consume salty things and such, do not drink water; then it is necessary for her to go out forcibly through this method.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the shape of the tool used to expel saliva is such that when it can be seen, it resembles curved scissors meant to enter the throat; and has the appearance of a doctor's snout, and it has a grinding quality like a rasp, so whatever she takes, she cannot leave it; and here is the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Scabs at the incision site are akin to what memory suggests from one and another in this book, varying by perforation and size; and it's in two ways, of which one is exactly as they appear, and because of how he handles moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for when they are within the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses in the head are different from those in the foundation, and the abscesses in the chest cavity are different from those that come into joints, and each has its judgment in operation.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And for abscesses, one should not pierce them until the bowel has died according to its completion; and for those that require piercing when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, such as abscesses that are within joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come within joints, and it remains until they are rotten internally, by chance if the ligament and nerve of the joint have been corrupted, which causes a contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	The extraction of the abscess is from within a limb's main part, and if you delay the puncturing until it is dead, it will harm the main limb. Or if it's extracted from near the foundation, piercing or delaying until it is dead causes harm; and it is not right to puncture an abscess before digestion completion, except for one located under the foundation where pus could spread fully and remain within, causing a tunnel; and cannot heal properly for long duration.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it must be that you know the time of the perforation of a discharge which is dead according to its completion, and this is when the pain has eased, and the departure of fever, and the diminution of pain and redness, and from agitation and sharpening of the head of the discharge, and other signs; and it must be that you place the perforation at or higher than the location of the discharge, and where it opens outwards; and have the perforation along the length of the body, and if the discharge is on hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and everywhere equal where there is no wrinkle.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases, it bends according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the fatty part of the body, it is better to wait until the puncturing is confirmed by completion of digestion as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	But if you pierce it before this stage, the body will be filled with the venom from within and full of maggots; and by chance, it hardens the skin and underlayers beneath him.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if at any abscesses they puncture across the broad part of the body, according to what the limb needs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary that you introduce small incisions, small pricks; and in large abscesses, large pricks, and many cuts according to the likeness of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses or where it's appropriate to have a key, and cover; when they become as thick as cloth, and are softened, then you must do this similarly to how one does with smallpox: and if there are those that split into three angles, and if there are those which need to be cut like the leaf of myrtle, as abscesses from angles; and if there are those where a circular cutting is made, and other cuts and seeming of a cutter.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who lack a head, such as an abscess superficially present, it is necessary to puncture them completely; and when the abscesses are large, and have gathered considerable pus, and you puncture them, if not drain all the pus in that moment, but drain part of it; then incise through the abscess until the other side, then do nothing from there forward; perform this repeatedly with increasing sizes, until the pus is drained entirely; similarly, if the patient has weak strength or are pregnant women, or small children, or elderly and decrepit individuals.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For when the pus trembles each time with its release, perhaps killing the patient, and you are unaware of it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	So when you avoid this chapter with great caution, and upon draining your abscess, if a wound appears, and you check that the wound from the abscess is small; and if it's a simple cut, then apply lint or old cotton bandages; and for large abscesses, and there are much pus, then one should put a tent on each so they stick against each other; and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin, and sewn it together internally, then fill it with old cotton or linens without moisture, and bind it until the third day; then apply the bone, and treat with ointment until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if blood flow is disrupted in your body, cool it down with cold and ease, and keep the wound moistened, and place it on its correct position by being adjusted many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is persistent blood loss in your body, then take control and treatment measures, and use the powders that I have mentioned in this book. If it's affecting your veins or causing an abscess, and your wound or the affected area is very nervous, you should apply wet cloths soaked in wine and oil on it; if it affects your health, and your body area is inflamed, then you should apply moistened cloths with water, oil, or cold wine and oil for three days, as we have said. Then remove and clean the wound, treating it accordingly until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this must be known universally in treatments of abscesses: now I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and here begins the chapter.
des soros	of the womb
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	For small pus-filled spots come from the head, and they are like things for us that are in cloths, as with the belly of a goose, and many have similar appearances.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fat and others in the same condition as lumps; and there are some that are hard like stones when cut, and there is no doubt that they belong to the artery or otherwise oppose it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the methods of cutting are that you must try with all the tool which is called "the entromissor", from which the form comes next, something it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, then you cut through long above.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is drained, then burn without leaving anything behind on the skin that contained this moisture, because it returns immediately if you leave nothing behind; then dip a cotton in Egyptian ointment, if available; if not, in water and wine, and apply to the wound, letting it stay until the next day; and those who are staying through the night will heal.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then begin anew with the cotton, just as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know for sure that it doesn't stick overnight. Then treat the wound with ointment to your satisfaction, while it remains clean.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess sticks to the nout until it's not soft anymore, cut according to this form, long. And extract your needles, and scrape everywhere, and apply all your treatment force onto the spot where it lies; and if it resists, then do as I told you after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And similarly treat the abscess if it's stone-like, and cut and cure as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And when it comes to cutting the stone-like abscess and moisture, it is lighter because there is less blood involved.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if in any of these abscesses or chief where there is no moisture, and among the new abscesses that I treated or from an old woman's body; and found the abscess to be like a soft stone, rough and white, and unable to break; and even if we had punctured none, it would have been treated as well as a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming out from or near the head, it was that those which come from the children's heads and the roots of ears, let the opening remain open as long as possible depending on the individual, so that the pus may go out; and treat them as they should be treated.
des scrophules	Regarding the treatment of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times this abscess comes from the throat, and behind the ears, and near the neck, and in no other places or on other parts of the body; they are white and stick together.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scab is properly within its coat, as the nut and abscess on the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scabs are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and others that are malevolent and do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In such cases where you see good arrangement in the wound bed, and it resembles the color of the skin, it is silent on all sides and is neither deep to the neck nor near the artery or conduit, and is not too deep; then you should cover it from above, and burn each part of it, and raise both lips over the incision if necessary, as we have mentioned for abscesses on the head; and proceed slowly and carefully, making sure that you do not cut through the nerve or vein, and avoid excessive bleeding, so that you do not remove more than what is needed.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you sever the vein or artery, and it does not allow cutting, then place vitriol or any powders that draw out blood in the wound, and hold the wound; and leave it until the abscesses are calmed, and the wound becomes soft, and begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound has healed, return to your work until you complete it; then follow your skill's indication if there remain any small scabs, if you remove and cleanse them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein under the scab at its root, it is not appropriate to cut that scab from its root. Instead, tie it with a double strong thread and let it detach by itself without harm; then dress the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, followed by treatment.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you have treated the entire scrophula (possibly referring to a skin disease or tumor), then it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound, and stitch them now. Then there should be no excess left because of the size of the scrophula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	And it is necessary that you treat the root of it, and drain pus, and stitch it up as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For those scrophules that have excess, pierce them where they open and drain pus; and pierce it in the same way as before, hanging downwards, then apply poultices with ointment and similar things, so that it rots whatever is trapped by the rot; and when the wound has been well cleaned, apply ointment to flesh until it is healthy.
de squinance	The text "de squinance" refers to issues related to or conditions caused by malalignment or misplacement, which is a common theme in medieval medical texts dealing with anatomy and orthopedics. It could refer to deformities, dislocations, or other types of misalignments that affect parts of the body such as joints or bones.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old ones spoke of the surgery to alter the throat; but I never saw anyone do it in our land, and that is written from their speech.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have squinting vision, it is necessary that the incision of the throat called 'epiglottis' be avoided; and one should not take help from this, because all the veins and the heart are at risk for those who have a foreign body in their mouth, or in the throat or between two gums.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is within the channel of the heart, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the loss that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It follows, when we wish to incise the epiglottis, that we make an incision through three or four small cuts across it, between the two circles, or by the quantity of the cut within them, not in the cartilage. And this is advantageous for sectioning the epiglottis as there is no meat, and the vessel is long from beginning to end.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, it is necessary that he extends the throat skin to almost all of it, then incise the keur until it reaches the thymus; and avoid blood vessels, if you see anything at all, and then cut through the syphuncle as we have said; this has been demonstrated by the jump of the flow from the thymus due to the breakdown of the organ, and by the loss of voice; leave the wound open for a bit.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the time has passed since one doubts strangulation, gather the two edges of the wound neatly, and all along the skin until the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow, as long as it is healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim asserts that one should not perform this until the throat is entirely swollen, and the patient's organs are judged dead, and the defect has been made.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	So care must be taken with the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe properly and is breathing through their wound. This prevents them from dying and this is what the ancient healers advised: to keep the wound open as long as the disease's harmful effects have passed, and they have indeed passed after three days or four. And then they were instructed to stitch up the wound and treat it until it was healed; and I will tell you what I observed.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I witnessed that a maiden took the knife and stabbed herself in her neck, cutting some of the veins near the heart; and I was summoned to treat her, and found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound and found the blood that was issuing from it, and I saw well that there had been no opened vein or outlet but rather the windpipe, and the veins flowed through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I rushed, dressed the wound, and treated her until she was healed; she only suffered from hoarseness and returned to her usual self afterwards; for this reason, I say that when tailoring (cutting) the epiglottis, there should be no fear.
de la grosse gorge	From the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	The text refers to the removal of abscesses, often called "throat hernia", which is a large abscess with color like a raisin, and is very common among women. There are two kinds: natural or accidental; natural does not have any cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And accidents occur in two ways, with one seeming like fatness and the other resembling an abscess coming from our arteries. There is fear, it doesn't allow to make fire outside until it's small, and one must thoroughly examine all parts: if you find it alike to what we're used to, if it cannot reach any vein, then cut it out, just like you'd cut fat tissue, pull it out with all its covering, if there is any; and search well around it, treat it accordingly until it's completely cured.
des nous	from the mouse
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many ways exist for us, so I will mention all similarities; now it is necessary that I explain the entire difference between us and the outcome.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that dislocation is marked by heat and fever until the boiling has passed and decay been completed; thus the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the new, there is no heat or fever or pain, and contains pus, which is its own sac and lies within the body's color, starts off like a lump, and becomes large; and they are according to two similarities, oily or moist, and most colors are as I have described in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of a new wound, that you first test and inquire about every tool which is called 'entrainer', according to its shape or chapter that comes after.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the method of inquiring about pus in us is that you squeeze it more moist than you find inside the abscess, and twist your thumbs little by little, until you know that the instruments have penetrated deeply, then according to the size of the abscess; then remove the pus, and be careful not to jump force.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If moisture corrodes the wound, no matter what color it is, if it cuts as I said about other abscesses; and if after the incision there's still no moisture, you know it's fatty, then cut straight across, and take hold of it with tweezers, and gently scrape each side and keep the bandage where the wound lies that you pull out the cloth soundly with the stitch. And if you can't pull it out soundly, remove in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if nothing remains, the illness returns by many times; and if some does remain, but it doesn't bother you, fill the wound with corrosive water-based powders, hold the wound in place, and apply warm abscess-soothing things, and treat other treatments until it's clean; and if the illness is large, cut both sides of the wound, and treat the one that festers pus.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein is too large or goes against the grain and rushes you, tie off the wound, and use the lead of vitriol in small portions, and let it sit for two days or three, as long as the wound heals from within, then rest with a bloodletting; afterwards return to your usual treatment.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of embolae instruments and they exist in three ways: large, medium, and small. And there are three types that are called 'albaret', one is called 'breb'. There are also three sizes for these: large, medium, and small, to encompass abscesses from fistulas. They resemble sewing needles which surgeons use on wounds, made of amethyst, iron, or silver. Yellow ones are considered valuable and those with black cork are better suited for enclosing the turns in fistulas. There are three forms: large, medium, and small according to the width of the cuts needed.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The shapes of the forceps resemble these, as you see here: large, medium, and small. There are also forceps with two turns in three different ways; there are those with three turns and they too come in three forms; some have two turns each, and there are single-turn forceps, all coming in three forms; all of this is necessary by their type.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The head of this person is sharpened for surgery, and there are those who do not cut by force from one side only; they sear the skin because with them one does not sever the vein or nerve. And these penetrators have their blades in cuffs, so that the patient does not notice during abscess opening; and there are three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see; and none of them cuts by force only in meaty parts such as legs, arms, nipples, ribs, and similar areas; and on no occasion is another small instrument used, resembling gynecological scalpels according to this form, with which one stops bleeding.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And it is placed only once at its natural location in the body, near veins and arteries, and never according to this large shape:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	None of the male breasts swell up when they begin to be corrupted, resembling female breasts; and they remain ugly and swollen, and those who wish to cure them should do so according to this form from this line .b. until .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Then scrape off the fat, and apply medicine to the wound. Then join the two sides of the wound together with stitches, performing a cure until it heals completely; if there is an excess on the nipple when it hangs downwards due to its size like in women, cut it into two parts above it, by two similar slashes; from where one is attached to the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, up to the line .b. until to the line .g.; then scrape off the skin between the two sides and remove the fat, and apply as we have instructed about stitches and powders, and what is necessary in the cure, until it heals completely; if it has not healed or if the incision is not fully done, because the patient doesn't want to rest or due to bleeding, you must fill the wound with moist cotton wool in a corrosive ointment; then leave it until it begins to heal and replaces both the cloth and fat. Then cure it until it fully heals.
des apostemes des asselles	removing abscesses from the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Abscesses that occur in the armpits are methods of hard scrofula or those with knots, and if there are any containing moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture should have their limbs cut according to this shape, from the line .b. up to the line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus in the abscess is drained, fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and treat with ointment as long as it is clean.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses resemble scrophula sores, cut them as we have said in cuts for scrophula sores, and if the wound is full of pus, apply a cautery as we have said previously.
de la routure de l’artere	regarding the rupture of an artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is cut and the skin sewn above it, many times there are discharges; and this also happens with veins and abscesses. And if one knows that it's because of the artery, then these discharges tend to be long and full; and when you feel constriction with your fingers, you sense this tension; and when it is about a vein, it becomes obvious in its cut surface; and this is foolishness to treat this discharge like so, and likewise if it occurs on sides and angles, and around the neck, or in other various places, and being very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is therefore necessary to avoid iron treatment, and one should also avoid it on the head. For the one inflated by artery, make cuts above the skin as long as possible; then work along the inches, cut out the artery from the tissues until it is fully exposed; then insert a tool underneath, and pierce up to the other side, and bind the artery with double thread according to what I have taught you in extracting two arteries that are in temples. Then remove the tissue between the two links of an introducer until liquid comes out completely, and relieve the discharge; then apply treatment that stops bleeding, until the link bleeds; and treat this with ointment as long as it is clean. And if the discharge comes through the artery, you should dye your hand where you touch the discharge to the whole skin, then insert a needle under the tissue that you hold in your hand, and pierce it, and have double thread, so that you pull from the other side; then tie the discharge as I have told you, or tie one part of two from both sides with thread; and if you doubt whether the thread will pass, then reinsert another needle under all the discharge at the first incision site, and bind the threads in four. Then cut off the excess until it bleeds out, then cut off this extra skin according to your technique and leave what is tied. Then apply a damp pad of wine and oil, then continue treatments with bandages and ointments as long as it heals.
des apostemes des ners	from abscesses of nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Also, as with abscesses in the artery and vein, there are nerve abscesses when they are inflamed, or due to too much work, and similar conditions.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more often in the shoulders and elbows and everywhere there are joints. This is the state of an abscess, and its color resembles the color of flesh, and can be seen in various positions with no pain; and when it's compressed, the patient feels pain, but not within the body, but beneath the skin; and moves all over the place, neither advancing nor retreating, neither upwards nor downwards, and the one who is suffering from joint issues should never cover them with iron: by chance, there might be a contraction; and the one who has it on the head or forehead, makes the scalp taut.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscesses are small, take them out with your tweezers by pinching them at their base; and if they're large, hold onto them near the elbow, cut them open, then peel away some skin, expose the bone, and stitch up the wound. Continue the treatment until it heals properly.
des grosses boces pendans	of large breasts hanging down
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Never occurs in the womb or anywhere else, and it is a disease called "fungus" by its appearance, and has a subtle root, and large heads; and there are small ones as well as many very big ones. I have seen two people with bellies that resemble fungi more than anything else, and there was no difference between them, they were white, had small roots, were split down the middle, and corroded inside due to moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I weighed them and found that one was eighteen ounces in weight, and the other six. The operations during incision are such that when you look at it, the disease appears moist, and the color of the inner body is white and moist with a subtle root; if you catch it under the large spot, and see the fire cautery being held before your eyes.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For when surgeons come, there are often too many bloodlettings, and if they fail, then you should quickly use a cautery; and if you see that the patient is frightened by the incision from the iron, then take a well-made cotton thread, tie it at the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days; and then hold it, not stopping to tighten the cotton thread until it touches the joint, doing everything without effort; and if the roots are large, they feel fearful when touching their own stomachs, but you can only properly touch half of them, then cauterize so that they do not swell again; then treat the wound, and ensure that you do not touch the thread which has a red color, little feeling, and is milky.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess, and I will come to the treatment of gangrene after.
quant li boude ist fuer	When it comes to the eye,
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	When it comes to the buboes it arises from the wound cautery or the tear of the syphilis, and is on the belly and there are some of the glands, as it happens in other ulcers, or blood that leaks from veins or arteries according to what was mentioned previously, or due to windiness; and if this is through the syphilis tear and the exit of the pus, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the flesh, and there is little feeling, no pain, and opens up from various exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it's due to the output of the intestine, then it's more varied. When you press it with your fingers, it goes back up and then comes down again. Sometimes it gets stuck and swells significantly when entering hot water and due to hard work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it's a simple matter, and opens well when you press with your hand, not restraining at all; and if it's due to blood, it opens by these signs large and hard abscesses, implanted according to quantity; and if it's due to winds, it stings in the finger, and the veins such that when you look its appearance is for the blood of the artery, or vein, or winds.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	It is necessary that you let the treatment proceed.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear about it, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if it appears to be due to the intestine or the bile duct, it is necessary that you command the patient to bleed his bile, and have it extended completely straight, then pinch all around the bile duct; then order treatment with caution between your hands, then proceed inside the body as you indicated for the abscesses, both artery and vein. Then treat with rest in both the stomach area, then place half of the abscess above the main curve; then tie it firmly with a strong thread or a thick silk string, and secure it tightly to avoid loosening; then lay out half of the abscess on top of the string, and bend your index finger, examining the intestine. If you find that it has been caught by the string, gently untie it, and pull the intestine forward towards the stomach; and if you find the bile duct, take hold of its curve and remove any excess; and if the artery causes obstruction or the vein, push them deeply into the body, then return to your work and take two needles, then tie two thread strings firmly onto this 'X' where you pierced before; then pull out the abscess for three times through the needles, and if needed remove the needles, let it heal as long as necessary, and allow the dead tissue to decompose by itself; or cut when it is subtle and cooked, then treat with what is appropriate, removing any excess blood or moisture you find, then heal your work, and cure the body in accordance.
dou chancre	and gangrene
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have discussed in the division the appearances of gangrene and how to treat it with medicines, and how to avoid iron treatment. We will say that gangrene can occur anywhere in the body where it is possible to excise it, such as gangrene occurring around the breasts, in cooking, and in similar locations. You should remove all of it when it first appears; however, if a gangrenous lesion becomes large and old, it should not be treated near it because I have never known anyone to recover from it before me; no one has ever recovered from such lesions in front of me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the operation is within you where it can be excised as we have said, such that you cleanse the patient of black bile; then let the surgeon operate if there's evident swelling, then cut open the diseased area. That means a clean place to make an incision for the operation; then wash off your clamps or gangrene, and hair everywhere, and bone everywhere without leaving anything; and let all bleeding be stopped properly, and thoroughly dry the wound with your hand or any substance, and if it bleeds after healing in opposition to the incision of an artery or vein, cauterize until the wound is fully healed; then treat again until it becomes healthy.
de ydropisie	Of cautery by fire, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have mentioned the signs of erysipelas in division, and how the assembly of the cold is made, and the symptoms of each sign, and the treatment that is done with medicines, and that which is treated with a metal rod: these are clearly stated; and there should not be touching of metal on these two signs: to know is, empyema and erysipelas, for this is deadly; thus when you medicate this sign of erysipelas known as 'eclites' through medicines, and the treatment does not benefit, then check if the patient's condition is weak, or has another disease other than erysipelas, like abdominal fluid or similar conditions; if no metal should be used in contact, because there is doubt; and when you see that the patient has a very strong color change, and has only erysipelas and not any other disease, and is neither too young nor too old, then do this: lift up the part of concern directly to your hands, and have helpers press on the belly while applying the hot water from the lowest part towards the back, then take the spasmolytic needle according to this form.
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let there be a division of two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	A wound, and yet it should not be so deep that it might come up to the intestines when you insert it in, and you cannot cauterize it; then look if there is dropsy spreading towards the intestines: if it needs to cut into this area above the stomach three fingers wide from the belly button; and if there is dropsy due to liver disease, let your cut be on the left side of the stomach three fingers wide; and if it's due to lymph nodes, let it be on the right, and it should not happen that the patient lies over the incision where excesses might run into this weak area; then pierce all the skin with the tool, pull, and remove your hand from all the pus between the skin and stomach as you would scorch an animal to a length of a fingernail or about one inch; then pierce the stomach until the pus goes up to the level of the belly button, and that is the place of water, then cut deeply, and it pulls this tool which has been described here.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it resembles a thin silver rod, and is like an iron or a nail in agility, and at the lower part there are small cuts; and on one side, three cuts; and two on another side, and one on another; and the shoulder is cut so as to resemble a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that the writers cut the feather into:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top is the alymeline, so that when the instruments reach the water, they now proceed upwards on the instrument. Empty it then about half or one-third; for if you remove too much fluid at this time, by chance, he might die due to the dispersion of his spirit from the weapon's force, or he might become paralyzed, or approach death; but empty according to the quantity of its strength, and according to what the indications of that strength in the patient signify, and their pulse. Then take the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now for the cure which dulls the cut on the syphilitic side, about which I spoke, that you pierce in this manner; then resume the instrument another day, if you see the patient suffering from this one, and draw out a small quantity of water. Do this every day, and abstain from using it until it no longer remains but just a little water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the disease, and leave some water on it, should there be burning from sepulcher or sand, and through much sweat or bath and under the sun, and if it discolors by drinking; and treat with drying medicines until it is clear, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the removal of water, as I said previously.
de l’estopement de la verge	Regarding the constriction of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born without defects in the penis, or if the defects are small, or if it does not occupy its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it suits to pierce him immediately that he doesn't have to withstand much pus very finely according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then place or if necessary the very fine hole of the penis and secure it like this for three to four days. And when he wants to urinate, remove the stopper from the hole so that he can urinate, and then put him back. But if by chance there's no need, because the urine that comes out does not leave the opening closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	The limbs of whom are thin, if there is a remedy for the heart of the stone, as we have said, if it expands.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who lack the foreskin in their body are blind, for no one is born with foreskin at the tip of their penis, thus they cannot urinate before lifting their penis upwards; and they cannot have children due to this, as the matter cannot reach the sperm, it's a harmful disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method of the operation is such that the patient lies on his back, and the head of the penis and its surroundings are placed similarly to a feather's size, so that the hairs lie in the middle, as it should be; and beware of bleeding which happens many times during this procedure, and if it occurs, stop it with someone who can control bleeding, and treat the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	The blisters of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times scabs appear on the penis, and there is an ugly appearance; among them are harmful and non-harmful. It is necessary that you weigh them at a quarter ounce each, remove and clean them all, then apply Egyptian ointment on cotton wadding; then treat with diafinicon ointment until it heals.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the bath is malignant, of pus and discharge, it's necessary that you apply the cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have performed it, and if the bath is within the penis, and has part inside the skin and part outside, it's necessary that you remove the bath that is inside first; and when it is healed, then you treat externally.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat them together, it is not sufficient to ensure the head of the penis does not get pierced, and leads to decay and infection in the penis and anus; therefore, it is necessary to remove everything that is black and corrupted. Then apply on top of a poultice made of honey and flour which has been prepared with almond bark and herbs, then treat with other treatments until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if there is bleeding during this, one should apply the lunar cautery in accordance with this shape:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cauterizations should assist in two positions: that is to say, during bleeding and corruption; and if the head of the penis has become corrupted and been removed, it is necessary to stick or guide the penis with a splint made from thyme, let the patient urinate amongst this, and when the hair is brushed back over the head of the penis which matches those who have not undergone circumcision, or due to an injury or abscess, then it must be burned using a heated tool until all ties are released, and remove the head of the penis from all sides; and if it's difficult to discuss this matter, then it is necessary to burn the prepuce slightly below the head of the penis and behind the skin; then cut neatly in between two, and place a thin linen band soaked in cold water on top so that it does not brush against the tip.
de la circoncision	of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not just about cutting off continuation like other wounds; nevertheless, when we perform this work of our own will and for infants, it's necessary that we do the best job, and cause the least harm for their health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the old ones did not mention circumcision of their children, for they do not use it in their laws, and we have only what we have gained through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have wanted the majority of masters and surgeons who performed circumcision before the age of one year, and at strength, and for all a new cut; if it went wrong because there are two layers, and by chance one might get this above and the other below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or they receive two copies, and the pain is doubled, and at circumcision which happens around one year old it is not properly sure the point of the limb; and in the formation of nails by chance the iron escapes from the cut and runs through the work, resulting in many times being born like that needing no circumcision, and I have wanted this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the formation that is done by strength to all the length of the thread I have found the value of experience, for the strengths cut exactly as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you press your hand down, if cut exactly like an 'I' all inside; but let the threads be well tangled in the skin; and let it resemble the first operation method, making one think of the child, if it hears, that you only tie the thread around the penis and make him stand in various ways you can. Then place him straight between your hands, hold forces between your hands or on the floor so he cannot see or any instruments; then bring your hand onto the penis and blow or cur, pull it up until the head of the penis is inside; then clean well from the dirt that has gathered, tie it with a double thread, then tie further down step by step. Hold this tightly for about two days in front pocket and index finger of right hand, fold between the two threads, then remove the bandage immediately after and pull out the head of the penis; then let blood drip slowly as it's the cure. Apply powder over and above it with a little vinegar on a beaten egg cooked in rose water, mixed with fresh and well-roasted oil. Leave it for another day until it heals properly, then perform further cures until he is healthy.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of forces at creation thus is this: the two shoulders should be held and should pierce, and the shoulders should also be as large as the elbows evenly.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of creation thus lies in when the knuckles within move during incision; therefore it is necessary for you to extend up to your nail, so that the fingers make an abscess; and cut evenly, and if you cannot hold up to your nail, then use tweezers, and then cut.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they penetrate for three days, and the one near the penis is swollen, let it be until the abscesses are somewhat relieved, and lightly scrape; cut as you can move, and avoid the part of the penis, it will not harm him at all.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the left side of the things around the wound with powder, as we have said or treated about powders, and if you cut too deep into the knuckle and it goes beyond, it will not harm; then treat it accordingly, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	Regarding the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine can be due to stone formation, blood clotting, bladder inflammation, birth injury, or similar conditions as we have described in the section on division. If urine is not released and you observe it being retained due to a stone blocking either the ureter or the neck of the bladder, then it should be recommended that the patient perform knee bends; and their feet should be placed under the back, spread out their abdomen from the upper back area, and restrain them so they bend slightly. Then force is applied on the necks of the bladder to express the stone above; thus urine can flow freely. If it doesn't come out as described, if the patient feels severe pain, then it should be prescribed extraction with an entire instrument known as 'syringe', which has this form: made from fine and light hair like a bird's feather; its handle is long and half a palm in length and is fine at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the method for the release of urine is as follows: take a double thread and tie it at the top end of some wool or cotton yarn, and insert the yarn's top inside the syringe; then trim excess yarn to fit up to the top of the syringe, after which you smear the syringe with oil or butter and beaten egg yolk, place the patient on their seat, and make them urinate by rubbing oil and olive oil onto their skin. After that, gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root, then wrap around the top of the penis towards the urethral opening; then press down the syringe slightly in front of the bladder, and feel the patient's urine reaching to the voided state, this is not done as such because when it was guided, she did have a twist. Then slowly pull off the thread from all the wool piece by piece, and the urine follows the thread; then strain the urine, and process it; and repeat this until the bladder is emptied, then properly dispose of the patient's urine, and continue to use the syringe until the bladder is completely empty and ensure the cleanliness of the process.
des maladies de la vessie	Illnesses of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When burns or blood come into the bladder, or putrefaction is assembled, and you see distilled waters and medicines there, then make for all the instrument which is called 'clepsydra', and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed and if there are three parts: two from one side and one from the other, as you can see; and the legs come through in such a way that medicine should be such that it numbs well the penis without addition, if only moisture can be treated, and drive out when necessary; and when you see your medicines flowing into the bladder, put the head of the needle into the moisture, and guide to the one who is pulling; if pull out the moisture at the needle, and then re-bone strongly the one being pulled afterwards; so that moisture enters in this way, comes to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it; and this is the form of a subtle cyst where you catheterize the bladder: and here it goes:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is made of silver or iron, and the shoulder is higher up; and just above the first breast or where the nipples are. Then take a sheep bladder and put in the moisture that you want to catheterize the bladder with, then place this piece between the two breasts forming a good double thread, and heat one end of the thread on fire; then put the head of the catheter in the penis, then pull your hand over the bladder until all the moisture is gone, so that the patient feels it has arrived at the bladder. And if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle, and poke a hole through it neatly; then tie this piece firmly into these three parts with thread, then assemble the circle as you would assemble a doughnut, and put inside what you see from urine, moisture, and water, and bind in the tool. Do this as if you were making a bladder, pressing with your hand until all the moisture goes to the bladder.
de la piere	from the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have discussed the methods for stone division and extraction together with medicine; and we explained the differences between stones in the kidneys and all their signs, and when to operate on a kidney stone; and also about the bladder and the penis; and I will clearly and briefly explain this to you.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I state that stones that occur in the bladder often happen to children, and this is a sign that there is an obstruction of the bladder similar to the obstruction found within it; one should open the bladder canal and cleanse the patient's penis several times, then apply a bandage; and after many of these obstructions they find their way down. And it takes gentle healing for infants until they are around four years old, it causes much distress in the elderly, and occurs moderately among those in middle age, between childhood and old age; and it is easier to treat those with larger stones than those with smaller ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with purging, in order to remove all the bile that is within the body.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it often clogs when trying to cut into the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the ribs, and lift them up and move them backward, so that the stone descends to the front of the bladder, and does not come out from his upper body; then make him sit between your hands prepared for operation, and let his hands be under his thighs, so that the bladder is fully sloped downwards; then press and touch inside; if you feel the stone in space, now hurry to cut on the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if she doesn't poop at the toucher all around, moisten your index finger of your left hand with oil from the palm of your hand, if the patient is young or your middle finger, if the patient is a young adult; and press it on his back, and feel for the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, lift it to the neck of the bladder; then press at your finger, and cut behind where you see cutting.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the surgeon to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand upwards above the genitals, and have his left hand hold the skin that is over the genitals in the part where the cut is made; then he pulls out the urethra smoothly, which looks like this:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And place the one who is between the shoulders and the foundation, not midway but at the side of the left snow; make it straight on the stone, and let your hands touch or rest on the foundation, and have its size through the middle so that it may be broad outwardly and narrow inwardly, according to the size of the stone, not too large; if by chance there is a press against the hand which rests on the foundation, it might jump out without effort; and know that there are parts of the stone with angles and edges: it gets hurt when trying to emerge; and if in some part it is beneath, resembling a nut, and round, where its exit is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	Then at the part which has angles and edges, make the size bigger; and if it does not jump out, you must tighten with the tongs that are as sharp as a file to force the stone so that it doesn't escape; or you push down on this small, curved fine tool; and if you can't work like this, you widen it a bit more than the tip of your thumb, and if you remove it smoothly, then force with vitriol; and if there are several stones, first break the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cut upwards, then pull strongly, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if she is very large, then she needs to be removed, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For there are two things that happen to the patient: or they die, or their urine begins coming out immediately when their legs cannot be sewn together; but all the same try to drain or fragment with tweezers as long as you can remove it piece by piece. And once you have completed your work, fill the wound with incense and aloes and dragon's blood, then compress it, and place oil and wine or oil and rose water and cold water on top of the cloth to soothe the inflamed area; then bandage the patient around their neck and do not untie the tie until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you untie it, make sure to dry and clean the area very well, then apply an ointment of laudanum and a balsamic ointment until it heals properly.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses fester in the wound and corrosion occurs, or blood clots in the bladder, causing retention of urine as it would without urination: then you must clean the wound and remove that blood, because if it remains, it will decay the bladder and cause damage. Then cleanse the wound with water and vinegar and salt, and help him in every way you can until he recovers; and you should bind his two thighs together, and place medicines on his legs whenever you treat him.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it comes from where the penis goes in, and is stuck there, so urine cannot come out; when you treat this as I say, that you cut many times, and let part of the cutting go for this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already gained this experience like this.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron tree according to this shape and have it pierced with three pegs on one prong.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the penis near the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder. Then cut in the penis gently until you reach the stone; and push the needle in the penis slightly, until you reach the stone; and turn the needle in your hand in the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side; if urine starts coming soon, then press your hand on what is stuck of the stone which is inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is suddenly broken, and there's a rush with the urine, and the skin scratches the patient; and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie one thread over the stone and the other above, then make the passage between the two threads through the stone, pull forcefully, remove the thread, cleanse the clot of blood that is in the wound; and treat until it becomes clean.
de la piere des femmes	From the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It happens that a stone becomes enmeshed in women, and if it occurs once, then the treatment is difficult, and forbidden for three reasons: one is perhaps that the woman is virginal; and the second reason is that we cannot find a woman who knows how to protect herself from looking at men, even when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third method is that by chance one cannot find a woman who well understands this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone in a woman's body is more centrally placed than the stone in a man, so it requires deeper surgery, which causes much fear. And if necessity forces you to do this, you should seek out an experienced person and place their finger where yours would be, and if you cannot find one, choose some other tool; and present her with good knowledge of the female anatomy, or a woman who understands part of this art, and command that she follow your instructions for extracting the stone; and examine very carefully if the woman is a virgin: then you must press her elbow or foundation point and search for the stone; and when she finds it, force her to press on her elbow or beneath the skin with her left hand tightly, and squeeze her hand against her stomach firmly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, she must move it steadily from the entrance of the bladder until below, while it comes to the root of the thigh; then cut on the bone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the knee, where small bones emerge and you feel the bone in that area; and do not move her hand above or below the bone, keep your fingers very close; first make a small incision; then force out the kidney through this incision as long as it can come out forcefully, knowing many types of stones exist: these are that they are small and large, hard and soft, sharp and smooth, long and round, with some having grooves.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you understand the symptoms to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if it doesn't harm him, put sulfur on the wound for an hour until the pain subsides. Then return to your work until the stone is hard and use the tools I've told you about in extracting stones so they can help you with your task; and if the pain doesn't subside, and what's cut off is an artery, apply powder to the wound and pressure dressings and bandages, and don't repeat this process again. Leave the stone alone and don't remove it for fear that the patient might die from it. Then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of blood has been calmed, and the wounds have healed, then return to your task, as long as the stone remains intact.
de hernie carnouse	regarding fatty hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Glandular watery substance is nothing other than a gathering of moisture or white pus, which is found within the skin of the testicles that contains an egg; and it's called "pus", and it's never properly in the membrane of the egg if one thinks there could be another kind; and this is the skin under the testicle where we have said the white pus lies; and this doesn't have a pore.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the production of such glandular matter is due to weakness that affects the testicles, and this substance spreads.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And never does such come from percussion on the kidneys, and this moisture takes many colors: or it becomes a declining yellow color, or there is without redness, or black, or aqueous white, and this happens more; and these are signs to recognize this condition, because if it is or white pale as we have said, then pus forms, I do not mean as long as the figure of an egg, and does not open up the kidneys, for there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if he has moisture in the proper membrane, then pus forms with part of the egg, and because this is believed to be another egg; and if there is moisture between the skin of the kidney and the pale white, you perceive it well; therefore when you know the color of the moisture, you test everything within the square, as shown before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	So according to what comes after penetration, judge on this one that is inside.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary that the patient be healed according to our strength and the replenishment of his body; then sit on his back, at one place somewhat high, and set cloth underneath him. Then sit on his left side, and command the assistant to sit on the right, stretch out the leg to one of his two ribs near where the knee is; then take the iron rod, cut through the skin among it long until under the knife, make sure the cut is all straight going diagonally up from cutting the skin until reaching white flesh, and gently scrape off subtly according to our strength; then pierce the white flesh fully with water until quite deep, extract all the water, and then put in your stitches, stretching out that area upwards; do not touch the ribs, but only let the white flesh alone. Cut everything or piece by piece carefully along his side where it's delicate, if you don't cut it properly it will return to being wet; and if an egg starts jumping during your work, reset it into its place when you have completed the work at that spot; then stitch together the two flaps near the ribs onto one seam, then treat as other wounds until he is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the fetus corrupted by another disease, it's necessary that you tie the suspenders of the veins, while being cautious of blood flow; then cut all over the suspensory area and extract the fetus, then treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the knife is assembled into two parts together, know that these are two branches; then handle the other part as you did with the first equally, afterward evacuate the blood, and place wetted wool in the wound drenched in rose oil; and place another layer of damp wool in vinegar and oil, and place this on both sides, and cover it with double cloths, and secure it all around following this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take II cloths and fold them into wool rags according to this pattern and sew them together in the waistband of trousers, and one of the shoulder blades hangs down to the belly until the back, and the other is on the part below the elbow; and another pair of chief above both joints, and everything must be assembled with the tightening of the garter; and each time you treat this branch of cautery with a metal rod instead of a metal tool, and that you take the second small cautery tool subtilly, then cut the skin around the joints, and heat it as we have said until the white substance in the water is exposed; then take the cautery according to this shape, and puncture the pus sac through the oncines, and burn it with this sharp cautery chaut:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the cut in all ways that you can, until you have cut everything; and remember to keep fire from touching the egg; know that this operation is more safe; and be careful of the bleeding's stopping and watch out for what makes you go against your will. If there is any obstacle or an abscess or bleeding issues or anything else that goes against you, treat whatever causes it according to what was said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the symptoms are frightening and can't wait for this operation due to its horror, then perform a puncture, as I instructed, and know that once you're sure by the explanations we've given that the aqueous part is there, place the patient on their elevated seat. Then pierce the abscess in the lowest part of it over a large area, making the incision long along its back; and make the wound wide enough so all pus can come out; then place cotton on the back and bind it, letting the water flow until the wound heals; and treat any remaining infection until the wound is fully healed. And if the white cloth doesn't allow water to escape from the mouth of the wound, you should apply a feather or tool used for treating dropsy (like an insecticidal water tool mentioned before), forming it as described earlier; then widen the cut further, knowing that the water will return and assemble together after 6 months or more, and when it has assembled as previously, then this will be the end of the disease.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the pus of the glands
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in this part of the branch there is fear for several arrangements, so I believe it's better to leave it as it is; and I will tell you about the work and appearances of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	So I say that many emissions come from veins or arteries, and even from semen; and this happens through a variety of circumstances.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is to know about acidity and fever, which spreads among the cows or from percussion; and the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; there's no pain found, it's a pus-filled abscess; and by chance an abscess filled with pus and stones, and in a reddish color, and never comes from a vein or inflamed artery.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it's due to an artery, one can recognize by the warmness of pus upon pressing with your fingers; and you should not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Those who have swollen veins can be recognized by their appearance at the point of vein pulsation when touched with fingers, and one can very well make measurements based on this resemblance, and on other patterns; and you should take the pulse at the neck, then the egg is higher up, and the main artery near the white spot is found, and release the suspensory ligament from all sides of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already bound by these veins and tissues, then you should remove the egg and take it; and if it's towards the white spot or inside the vessels, then you should release all that tension, and take it in a rounded manner.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birthplace of the string is at the back or front, then you should cut the egg entirely, and remove the egg, just as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your tasks are completed, if you dress the wound with wet wool in oil and wine, then continue other treatments until it heals.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the pus of the glands
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is a gape-like abscess wrapped in an appearance resembling a collar, with the softening of veins; and when it moves, the patient experiences pain; and the treatment for this disease must be done as carefully as before, although we will still tell you about it according to what the old ones did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	You must have the patient sit on an elevated seat, then pull the anus up with the buttocks suspenders down below the anus, to every vein that is near the penis, and pinch it tightly together by its masters, and extend all in a straight form; then cut deeply across the veins as they are exposed, and then cauterize each side separately, just like when we have described in the extraction of arteries from temples; then insert an awl with double thread, and tie it to the first place where the thread came out, and then tie it tightly around the other end; then cut directly down the middle in a straight line according to the length of the body, and remove all corrupted moisture; then treat the wound as for any others that are clamped off, so that no veins squeeze together or grow from under either of its sides; because this will not cause harm, and if all veins come out during cutting, it is necessary to cut the sides open on all veins; so that the bowels do not lose their growth due to the incision in veins, dry up, and are unable to heal.
de la routure dou syfac	from the rupture in the kidney
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	Events of this branch occur through the section that comes from backhandedness or the extension on the belly in the part of the ribs, because the intestines descend into this route to one of the kidneys; and this route is where backhandedness occurs, or from the extension of it, and come these two ways of mutton causes: through percussion, or jump, or braying, or lifting of griefs, and by similar things; and the signs when it's due to the extension from backhandedness, if they occur little by little, over a long time, and do not come suddenly; and the abscesses are equal until towards the front, because the backhandedness presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is due to intestinal section, causing sudden pain at the beginning, and various abscesses appearing, near the skin area, and this is due to the exit of the intestines and body at the rear of the intestine.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And there are times when the loops separate with the intestine, and are retained in place, causing great pain for the patient to endure, even when they are pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments involving fear, it is advised to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the way of this operation is that you instruct the assistant to have the sick person remove their intestine through the wound in their belly, if it can fit back inside; then cover his throat with your hands and lift his buttocks. Then place the stomach above, and remove all the skin around the kidneys along its length. Then push the intestines inward as far as necessary according to what you are able to open the wound with, so that they may pass out easily; then remove the backhandedness until it is bare on all sides, because the backhandedness presses on the intestines. Afterward place your index finger where the kidney is, between the white backhandedness underneath the egg skin and between the second backhandedness, and remove what is behind the egg and between the second backhandedness; then move your hand within the stomach area of the kidneys to pull out white backhandedness on top with your left hand, and lift the egg in front of all the backhandedness towards the waist. Command the minister to extend the egg upwards, and untie whatever is behind the ligament; and check with your fingers if there is any looped intestines or white backhandedness that is hard, and if you do not find anything, leave it in your belly region; then take a needle and thread made of ten threads, and insert the needle into the rear part of the backhandedness, which comes after the skin of the kidneys. After the egg, remove any intestines that appear with the threads until there are four threads; then join them together like an X shape, and bind the backhandedness as we've mentioned previously, underneath the egg skin from two parts; then cover up the intestines with the threads, binding them tightly in two parts so that none of the loops can enter into them, preventing the formation of abscesses; and sew together this second binding along the length of the first binding for two fingers of your hand, and after these two bindings leave a large area of backhandedness near the kidney region of about one finger's width; then adjust according to the shape of the egg in all other areas. Lastly apply moistened wool as oil, put it on the wounds, and administer the binding that we've mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And once the white flesh that we have said is cauterized, after the incision, due to fear of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens many times, and leave the bandage until it bleeds from him; and if he delays in bleeding, if it be heated with hot water, then put on what we have said, until it bleeds; then treat the wound with another treatment, until it heals perfectly.
de hernie carnouse	regarding fatty hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch I never see anyone daring to do the iron treatment.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the old ones said it is made like a branch bound together with a twist, in such a way that you tie the vessels, after lightly cutting them near the heart; then start from the middle and treat the abscess from which one works, until the vessels bleed. And treat it as we have said, until it heals completely.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	No time comes rupture in anger, as we have said, and open the veins; and let no feces come out of his sides during labor, if any do, it's little, and heal every hour; and at all times, if he stays too long at this point, then there will be an opening or abscess on the wound, until the intestines come out; and this happens because of the extension due to the syphac that is in the womb, as we have said, for it is extended, then the veins are softened and swelled by the sides and opened; and he treats it with cautery as previously stated; and never treat it with iron in this way: and let the patient lie on his back between your hands, then start from the swollen area of the rupture outward according to the size of three fingers; and then remove the syphac under the skin that follows, take hold of the edge and put it over the visible part of the syphac; and press it straight down towards the belly, then sew the two visible parts of the syphac above the ring of the edge, and stitch both sides; then remove the ring from the edge, do not cover the syphac or extend the egg or any other thing, as I have informed you about treating the branch of the intestines; then heal it with wound treatment.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you handle the wounds, if you cleanse and treat the wound until it heals.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The surgeon is constrained, lacking any appearance in the operation, and the cautery is heated in this place, closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin around the buttocks
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin around men's buttocks becomes soft due to the softening of the substances inside them and it is visible. When one wishes to treat this, one must make the patient relieve themselves on their back and loosen the soft skin over natural skin; then join the two edges together for a seam, and if you see fit, stitch the excess of the soft skin at three seams or four tightly thereafter; then suture between the seams, treat it like any other wound until it heals, and cut out the thread.
dou chastrement	of sexual restraint
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	You know that punishments are included in our law, and because of this I would prefer not to mention them in this book; yet they are necessary for two reasons: one is so someone can answer when asked about it, and knows how to treat it; the other, because we often need punishment for some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cattle and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	So I say that punishments are done in two ways: by attraction or through a wound.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the case of punishment by attraction, we place the animal in hot water until their horns soften and they remain; then take them with your hand until they recover and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	For the treatment of tail mutilation: you should brand the animal. Press the flank skin with your left hand and tie up the castrating cord. Then operate on each testicle individually while they're scorched; ensure no small holes remain, especially those that are deep in the scrotum cavities; this method of branding is more effective than one done by attraction because during attraction, there may be remnants from the glands making the animal crave lust; then treat the wound until it heals.
des hermofrodites	Regarding Hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermafroditism occurs in two ways in humans: one way is that between the two genitals they open like a woman's figure, having hair, and sometimes there is urination.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other way occurs in women, and it has something like a penis at the navel instead of two genitals.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment of burns and scalds is such that you treat all the burnt areas just like other wounds; in the second way, for men whose urine jumps through the skin of their legs, there is no specific treatment.
de la tentigene	From the pustule
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	A tenting needle is an oddly positioned needle in the natural part, as long as it's too ugly to be seen; and some women have it as large as a hand, this is what needs treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary for you to remove the excess of the tenting needle with your hand or fingers, and do it gently; don't press too hard in order not to cause bleeding afterward, then treat with another method until it heals properly; and there's also a new tenting needle that appears at the mouth of the vagina, and in the anus, by chance it jumps outwards like a kowe, for which they used to call this old disease "kowee sickness".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it's necessary for you to do this, as we have said about the skin condition and treatment until it is healed.
de erratique	Regarding the erratic one
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic is the case when the nature of the woman isn't fully understood, or if there are minor defects; and it's natural due to birth, or accidents caused by sickness that has occurred; or it's through physical weakness, or subtle or coarse hair, and it's produced uniformly across her body, on her back, stomach, or legs, and so forth; and to comprehend this, one must consider the appearance of the female. The knowledge of this requires observing the signs during pregnancy, childbirth, and possibly the flowers for conception; and understanding these matters comes through observing the pregnant woman.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the blows are close and visible, then you should direct your hands towards them or towards the ribs.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is due to a subtle factor, and it's close to the two lungs, hurry and do this: place your two thumbs together, and have the woman on her back, spread out her legs; then form the two lungs until the subtle matter is contained and covers the injuries; then take thread, smear with grease, and put it on the lung, and let the woman rest each day in such a way that she cannot weld them.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the matter is hard and abundant, it's necessary that you prepare with the poultice resembling a bay leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the injuries are from raw meat, suspend them in the navel and apply poultices; have remedies that stop bleeding, such as myrrh, dragon's blood, incense, all mixed with a large amount of egg; then prepare a bandage wide enough so that the wound cannot heal, and do this for an extended period, and then cover it with a linen tent; continue other treatments until healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when a new-born child comes with an abscess, if it needs to be treated according to this manner, should there not be any embedded abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an internally-abscessed abscess within the womb, one should not touch it with fire.
des emorroides	Of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Emmorroydes are openings of veins that require special care. When emmorroydes become old, they turn into throbbing ones; and we have already discussed the symptoms similar to these in division, and their signs, and I will now explain those that indicate healing.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I state that emmorroydes and throbbing sensations, when they occur within the womb, are not noticeable except for their healing through iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those that are at the mouth of the womb can be felt and are those that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	So you should place the woman in a cold house, then set up the altar with tweezers, and have her hold it under her armpits, then apply powders of medicines that restrict blood flow, such as juniper and dragon's blood and incense, among other things; then soak her feet in cold water for an hour, then place her in cold water; if bleeding persists, you should have her drink a decoction made from sumac bark and rind from red apples and galls and similar things, then take barley flour and mix it with honey and almond paste, then create the plaster to apply on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops bleeding, that's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	But if it does not stop, have her apply suction cups to the back and breasts without causing injury; then take wool or apply its moisture in a decoction of plantain juice or agrimony with old wine, and apply it to her.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess rests, then treat it with oil until it is cleansed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a hard head, if you should cover it as I have mentioned in this place; and then continue to treat until it is cleansed.
des apostemes de la marris	of the abscesses of the anus
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscess come about in the body, such as ulcers, pustular abscesses, blisters, and fistulas, as well as hemorrhoids and inflamed glands, and various other diseases that I have mentioned in the section.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	Therefore, I must explain about the hot abscess that occurs in the body, which is not one that hardens. And if you wish to understand the work of a surgeon, then observe when this abscess begins, it is full of heat and fever, and if it turns red as you see it developing.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	So do not hurry to pierce, but let him die until the pain subsides; and then have the patient sit on a chair, and place two small stools under where his knees would naturally be, supporting his back and his feet to the front of the leg; and spread out her arms, putting them over her knees, tie them firmly with a good girdle; then turn him so that he leans toward his right side, bringing the tool being used on the mouth of the molar towards you; this follows in the form afterwards; it is necessary when you see the tool being brought into position to make sure it does not go too deep inside the gum without going against its natural depth, so that what enters through the tool does not penetrate more deeply than it should, and does not hurt the patient; and if the tools are larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the gum with cloths, so that the tools do not bother him; you must place the bell of the tool above him, and cut the tool.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess opens, and one does it with gentle hand, if it is necessary to cover at head, on the tongue of milk; and when the bowel is emptied, then it must be that you put in the wound wicks soaked in rose oil, or in green desiccated oil; and place the wick length of the plague at the edge of the maris, and put by back of it under the maris and under the needle clean wick moistened in water or vinegar until they are cooked; then treat after two days of ointment corresponding to this one, as long as it is clean; and each time raise the maris and the wound through a catheter of water and honey, and then of water where roots of thistle and aristologist long are cooked; then revive with the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound has healed in the maris, then you should avoid cooking with iron, but treat it as we have said when dividing.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Profession comes first in understanding the form of natural birth, and the signs are like this: when you see a woman advance in labor and feel an urge to smell something specific: then the baby is about to come out quickly; that means the birth follows its natural figure, and it emerges from its head, followed by the second part with it; and when you notice these signs, it's appropriate to gently press her belly, so the baby comes out right away; for when he descends through his head, the second part accompanies him and is freed of his excesses through proper delivery; anything else does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it always comes from his feet, and moves to the torso or shoulder, and hands, or it moves to his belly, or pubis, and is transformed by chance through his neck, and by other harmful figures; it's necessary for a midwife that she be wise and subtle in these matters, and wary of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures on how one should assist.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	When the baby comes under its head by natural issue, and the woman labors heavily, and her strength is weak, she should sit on a stool, or have women hold her; then let her return to her nature where fenugreek has been cooked, and then place the midwife between her hands with this small spatula which has the form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	And cut the second one, and remove up to his moisture which is inside until it's all gone; and keep pressing on the woman's abdomen as her child descends; if not, then treat the woman with a suppository of fennel seed oil; afterwards make her drink and sneeze with cumin, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now let the child come forth.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands go out completely, then you should gently and slowly reinsert them; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on her seat and lift up her legs; then pull the seat to the ground, shave the woman so she doesn't defecate during delivery; and if the hands still can't enter and the child has died, then cut open her hands with a knife that was placed earlier, extract the child, and reinsert them evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	From the birth of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child is born on its feet, it should be lifted up straight; and then gently twist it back and forth until it becomes even; afterwards hold the feet and gently stretch them back and forth.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps up to its thighs, then command it to take hold and make it snort from consideration; if it jumps further, may God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it doesn't jump as we have said, if it twists little by little, as long as it follows the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then he becomes slightly easier.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not jump as we have done, say take a piece of altitude, and oil of sesame, and powdered gum, and grind all in the mortar; and apply this ointment inside and outside her, then make her sit in hot water until under her ribs; and when she is moistened under, let her wear turpentine necklaces, and put them on her, and leave it for an hour; then make her sit on a seat, then make her snort and restrain her mouth and nose, and gently massage her stomach, because the child jumps now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From the birth of the child on his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, if you place their hands little by little; then support it on its neck, and let it hang downwards from its head; and have them lying on the bed; and bend their arms little by little, and then take their hands onto their belly, and remove their knees backwards until she is ready downwards; and if the child doesn't jump, grab their feet firmly, then push their head upwards, then you place your hands; and guide the child gently; and command the woman to pray until the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the birth issue of a child who comes forth with one hand hanging down
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It's necessary to engineer in order to bring back the hand: if you can't bring it back, then lift up the woman and go; if she cannot stand, make her lie on the bed, and push out her legs strongly; then apply the massage technique that I have described; and if there is no birth, have her sit on a chair, then attempt to guide in bringing back the hand; and pull the child according to their natural form, and have her sneeze, and command her to pray until the child is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the baby's exit from its neck, and spread its hands, and its buttocks turned towards its mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is necessary for the surgeon to clean his hand, then gently and gradually turn it over a small flame, and rub it lightly. And when it is ready, place it on the natural warmth of oil, as we have said before, then command that she move slowly; and once you have done this, make her sit on the bench, and command that she pray. Then make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same manner for the rest of the second part.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it proceeds in this manner to the end of the second stage, if the second stage reaches her up to her nail, until the moisture is drained; and if she feels pressure both on her face and neck, have her push from her mouth, so that no part of the baby is held back, causing harm or death to it; then pull out the child inside, as long as you place him properly according to what is necessary and when you command the woman to pray once: thus she will be gently stroked.
de l’issue des gemelz	From the emergence of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins often are born, and in some instances three or four; and this is not an uncommon occurrence, and there's nothing unusual about it.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two things are extracted and do not live, if you ask me. I know this, that they multiply, and they are drained by the syphilitic disease which devises them, which is bound to the tongue; and none of them come out naturally like all others under them, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they come out painfully, as we have said in treatment, and the cure involves the subtle matter, act quickly and lightly as it instructs. And proceed in this manner according to what is best for salvation.
de plusors enfans	of several children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	They are not formed in the Marsyas I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, nor more than fifteen up to XV, and they are all shaped like a child by the measurement of a wise person, and it is necessary for the practitioner to know everything that could happen; if something similar occurs, act according to what is appropriate.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman who has had a dead child or miscarriage, as I explained in division, and if it doesn't come out, forcing manual operations; then you must know whether the woman is healthy and hasn't experienced any accidents, nor feared death; she needs to be still on her back, with her shoulders inclined downwards, and legs lifted. The surgeon should apply ointment of two parts for every part she's bound to bed in case she's not treated during childbirth; then rub her mouth of the pregnant woman with moist olive oil mixed with sweet anise and fenugreek seeds and flaxseed; next grease her hands with these oils and mixtures, then slightly set them back. After that, take care if the baby is going to descend onto his head; if it descends in his belly or under the chin or in his mouth or behind his tongue or around beard or at the neck collar, and if it descends on feet, place a knife and midline between ribs; you must pinch the thimble with your right hand and put the loop of her finger through her left hand's fingers, then gently apply force to all parts of your hand and insert the thimble into none of these areas that we've discussed until it reaches the empty space; this is how the thimble should be.
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then find another outer bone, or the third one if necessary, so that extractions are equal; and then move it equally from side to side, for things to come out, and let the bones be sharp enough to hold during extraction, as this is how it should be done.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if there remains a part, if grease invades any of its toes from that side, and keep it in this part, and pull the other part; and if nothing remains, then place this bone or even higher up, do as such until all has been taken out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be brought back by squeezing, it is necessary that you wrap around this fold until everything comes out; then cut in the joint of the sole or at the ankle, and similarly do so in the other hand, and for both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the head of the child is large and it has a sharp issue at the end, or it has a sharp point assembled with its head, then you must push in the thorn-shaped pus ball between your fingers, and bend the head and extract the sharp; or you can use an instrument called "almidach" which comes along with the tools or chapter that follows this one; and so do the same on any large head naturally; and then pull out the bones using the tongs, and if it jumps up and resists due to its strength when you pull them, cut off such parts as long as moisture or pus issues; and if it does not issue out, cut it piece by piece according to your ability; and if it swells in the belly or under the ribs, then pierce where ever the moisture or pus flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if it is located on its feet, it has a slight attraction, and the connection to the mouth of the wound is also slight.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is dislocated in the abdomen or the breasts, then it must be reduced by pulling on the inner fold enveloping the hand; and keep the abdomen or breasts tight as long as the moisture present there. And if another limb is osteitis and the shoulder remains, then he should grip his thumb completely covered with oil, and pull until it reaches the opening of the oil; then he pulls off the rib or two, and pulls forcefully. And if the mouth of the oil has narrowed due to pus that came in, there must be no running water, but moist and greasy things should be administered; and administer plasters, soaking them in waters of mollifying and moistening agents.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is on its side and you can make it level, then administer what we have said about live childbirth; and if there's no way, then pull it out piece by piece, and don't leave anything of the second stage.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, have the patient undertake what we have advised about in the case of abscesses that occur after marriage; and if bleeding occurs, then place it under cold water restraining it, and apply other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose child had died in the womb, then she was pregnant again with another one, and this second one also died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long period of time, there came an abscess in the abdomen, and it swelled so much that it opened, and started causing intense pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat, I thought for a long time, and could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I placed on plaster of great strength, and out came a bone, and after some days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was greatly amazed, for that belly does not have any bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If I thought they were bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I examined the wound, and guided her hands with the bones, until the woman was in the best position; and I got the woman to stay long like this, and it would be almost a bit of blood from under her for a while; and I remember having written about this chapter only because when the masters find an unfamiliar thing, they should know how to give help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To return the arm to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Following this comes the form of pressure, which is described in the books; and at two turns for each of two shoulders for each joint.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	In any case, the tines should be more delicate than a retractor and made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth should be from the stem up to one hand's length, and the edge of the leaves at least half a palm long, and in total one and a half palms; and in the middle of them there should be two joints of this same stem, they must hold firmly in one place and another, about half a palm long or slightly more; and these two joints are fitted into the mouth of the maris to open when turning the two tines.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, is made of ebony or boxwood according to the pattern of tongs; it includes two heads attached by two joints each, as you can see, one palm long and two fingers wide; when you notice the mouth opening fully with the tool, place the woman on her side, feet hanging down and legs spread apart, then hold the two joints together inside the mouth and keep the head of the tool between her cheeks. Then use your hand all over the tool equally as you would a pair of tongs, according to the size you see opening the mouth of the sheath, until the tongue performs what it desires.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is entirely set up, and has many duplicates of its kind; and when you have the preparations ready for it, your work becomes faster, and your position higher in relation to their size.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not breathe out the instrument that you have prepared, because your need is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the second part is retained during childbirth, it's necessary that you instruct the mother to retain her urine, and then make her sneeze by holding different positions. You should hold both hands on her mouth and nose; if she jumps due to this, everything will be well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If it's not this way, then take I pot or cover, and place a lid on top, and put in herbs that can open the mouth of the maggot, such as wormwood, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia and lavender; all these herbs, or any of them, should be cooked or steeped in water over fire. Then place a stick or cover inside the mouth of the maggot, and the other end in the maggot's mouth, and let it seep until the vapors come inside the maggot; then make it sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second dose is taken quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this treatment and there is no improvement, command the patient to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or lavender essence, then place the bottle in nature, and seek the second one; and when she finds it, hold and extend it slowly straighter, so that the maggot does not move during extraction. But you should gently move it from right to left, then pull; if this comes about and dislodges.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the opening of the nostril is tightly constricted, we have discussed the treatment of sneezing and herb fumigation; and if she does not respond to all that we have discussed, then be cautious not to touch her in squeezing out (blood or other contents); but it should be that whoever is by the nostril opening of the mare, you tie them to the belly woman's pot, then apply a tetrastrophic ointment enema; if she passes and returns healthy; but overall, when she does pass, if it brings bad smell to the stomach and head, and irritates the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore, suitable fumigations are necessary for this: none of the old remedies have proven effective with fumigation using sow thistle and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument used to fumigate a woman during labor is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it's like seeing a reed, and you place the head gently into nature, and the shoulders broadly on the fire; and apply the fumigations above the coals, and the pungency until it is spent, and then start another one.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Born are many children who lack the foresight foundation, instead they have a subtle weakness: hence in the dance it would be fitting for her to pierce that weakness according to its place, and not let her hurt through sharp pain, and guard the placement so she doesn't touch it; then lay upon dampened wool in wine and oil, then apply balm treatment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it won't recur, then apply or introduce a dose of opium, and let the patient rest, and have it removed when the child wishes to move around in rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And there should never be sudden healings of a wound or an abscess; if you need to handle this suddenly, then treat it: if you apply the cure as we have said with the dose of opium.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the fistula from its base
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that originate from the foundation are nodules, and those that come from beneath the foundation or in the space of the two parts, either for one fistula or multiple; and when that nodule is old, if it moves, and often produces moisture that appears white or subtle bowel movements, and these kinds of fistulas are internal; they can be recognized by whether there's passage or windiness when the patient expels something, and sometimes there might be a movement in one direction.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And for those fistulas that pierce up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis; and extend up to the knee joint, and up to the base of the testicle.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows if the fistula is present at the foundation, and not present: and it is that you bend your index finger or foundation, and insert a subtle needle like an arachnid's leg or iron into the fistula when there is no winding.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has winding passages, should you insert a subtle spider tentacle or a horse hair, as long as you feel the tentacle or hair at your finger; and if you don't feel it, and there's no discharge of pus, windiness, or worms, as we have said: know that it doesn't penetrate; so hasten to treat.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula extends up to the bladder or up to where urine is conducted, if it jumps with urine, and cannot be sealed by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it penetrates up to the joint of the foot, then the tentacle goes as far as the knee; if there's no winding and the pain is within the limb, then it's already located deep inside, and doesn't benefit from medicine or quick healing through ointment; and in these penetrating fistulas, only labor, and the vain efforts of foolish people who interfere, serve any purpose.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In that which is neither Persian nor old, there is an expectation of recovery through iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back; and raise their legs up to their thighs, and incline their thighs towards their belly; then place a spider web tent, or if twisted put a snail's shell instead, until you know where the tent comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient senses something beneath their foundation, then it is necessary for you to place your index finger on it, and if you then sense that there's a tent or a cord, understand that she is Persian; and know that if there's no trace of it, one cannot heal her.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One must nonetheless know that some can indeed be healed properly, but this happens very rarely; and with the aid one uses, if you ignite the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was mentioned previously; and keep it hot inside the fistula until it reaches beneath the foundation; and do this twice or three times, until you know that these cords have been burned, which resemble a bird's feather; and then treat the damp tents with butter, until those cords come out, then treat with ointment around the cord and suture.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he's like this healthy, it's well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If so healthy, cannot be otherwise sane; and if you try it between, and does not pierce up to the root which is or foundation, and inside your skin and under the tent a thick layer of flesh or fat, and you see the fistula on him where the cover begins below the wound; when the pus starts forming around the fistula, push deep in before the tent, then apply the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the tip of the tent; and will release the tent, and discharge; then remove those layers that seem like a feathered bird's wing, and leave nothing behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if you can't see it, cut between yourself and the wound, then apply either a fire cautery or an ointment in its place.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cauteries combine two good things: that is to say, burning of those wet layers with grease or in ground substances, until they are cooked inside; and then treat the wet wounds with bleeding and drying of moisture; later cure the tent wounds with thick hard flesh, and these dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it has been restored, if it is healed, and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes up just to the bottom edge, and is far from the body, then you should press your finger or the bottom part of it, and inquire about this.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the urge and there's II within the bandage or gauze where bleeding might start, if it's just blood flowing out only, through veins and arteries, ready to pierce, but nothing else escapes except for a way of healing and hope, use one of these three methods: or cauterize it as we said earlier, or cut till you reach the bone, or if possible let it heal with first aid; don't overdo it in your process because you might pierce what holds the foundation down, resulting in involuntary bleeding. Then proceed to clean it, like as we said earlier; by chance if it heals, or remove that covering and wash thoroughly after cutting close to the base, or using another tool punctured; then cleanse the wound's mess, as much as possible; afterwards study how to restore the wound, and keep the fistula out of the deeper parts: this is an easier thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And always use this way for fistulas: and when you puncture the tent in the fistula, and it is where the foundation lies beneath the skin above, if take a tent pierced through the head according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And tie two twisted threads together, and keep the thread taut within the duct until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	And if it's Persian at the margin of the foundation inside, then extract that thread from this cut, just as you puncture through the bottom or basis; and pull out the head with the thread, and join the two ends together, and stick one to the other, and leave them for a day or two; and hold back every time until the threads bind those solids between the two, and they coagulate; then treat the wound until it is healed and sanitized.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If a fistula does not puncture, make it puncture in all the ways that you can, provided it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is not proper to make a covering for it when it is too deep, and then treat it as we have said, until it is clean.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The shape of the spikey spathum you use to make a fistula is very specific, on one hand and cutting; and on another hand no, because you should neither create nor avoid creating those elements as seen here:
des emorroydes	of embolisms
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Medicinal disorders occur in two ways: either they are within the foundation, like resin grains, and there may be small or large ones, and within them blood accumulates, and if there is one or more, they extend beyond the foundation and near its edge; but those that extend out have little moisture, and may still contain a bit of yellow water or a bit of blood, and their color resembles that of flesh; and when treating those that are within the foundation, you instruct the patient to expel them by urine in chambers, until the foundations pass away, and they become visible as threads; if you rush, use tongs, or hold it with your nail, then scrape under its roots; and if a single fragment cannot be held due to its moisture, then take it from underneath the skin, or cloth, or a piece of leather; extract them with your hands, then cut them off, and apply hot powders that replace the cautery tool; you should cauterize as is said in the chapter on cautery instructions, but treat other treatments until they are healed; and if the foundations cannot pass away, induce sweating by rubbing harshly with a purgative for washing what's within the foundation so it can pass openly; when the patients feel their illness subsiding, and their threads have passed beyond the foundation, then treatment is light; and you take them with your nail or tweezers, cut them off, then treat as we've said until they are healed and fear of incision by metal.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you stitch according to this manner: take a twisted thread and tie it onto an awl, then lead the thread upwards and make the awl pierce through from another side. Then loop two ends of thread around the awl as tightly as possible; now secure the thread neatly, afterwards knot the thread, and remove the awl, repeating this for all others, leaving one to handle excess blood flow. Then place on the bottom layer an oil-soaked bandage or a poultice, place it over the wound, instructing the patient to rest; then allow them until they have defecated, once they are settled, take care with ointment and other remedies, until they recover.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	do the drying by fire or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there has been drying from ashes in the intestines, and due to the nature's compulsion, and when the disease is old and medicine no longer helps.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you shave at the tip of a spathile or over your nail, not allowing any moisture; then treat until they are hardened as it should be; and if it cannot harden properly, go on to shave more forcefully than before, until it fully heals, being scraped clean; then treat until healed.
dou fremit	A tremor
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	A little tremor precedes the body, and goes everywhere; and when you feel the true sign under your hand, and also sense it like a death shudder, coming throughout the body, more in hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the treatment is that you take a rod from an goose feather, or a strong vultul feather, and place that rod over the shudder until the purple circles completely surround the shudder. Then turn your hand with all the rod until you cover everything around the shudder, and put it everywhere, uprooting the shudder from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see something like this on an arachnid or iron in this form, and make it slender from underneath and draw it upwards:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Don't pierce it though, but hold it at the two ends and squeeze it. And if you see something like this, cauterize the tremble in front or chapter of the cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the shape of a bladder
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	No silver paste or copper paste is ever made, or melted spider or wax; and no small or large instrument is ever made according to the one it's being applied to.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, when dealing with the treatment of children and those who are weak and in pain, they need small things.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the small or large paste is like this, or the stomachs are bound in this way:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and if the belly is tied and pierced in the middle, as you see, and the head is completely pierced; and there are two holes on one side and one on the other; and fill the belly with medicine from a beast's bladder or parchment, and pierce it all around with small holes. There should be an inch of space between each hole, then insert in these holes a strong thread twisted into a braid for ten inches or so, and sew up the belly like a goat. And when the medicine is inside, tie it before with a strong thread, then catheterize; this is the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine neither be too hot nor too cold, and smear the head with oil or yolk of egg balm, or similar thing, then gently put it out. Then the surgeons guide their two hands together until all is visible; then remove the cyst, and lift up the patient's legs to the bed, and if the medicine is meant to come out, pull it out as much as you can; and if he sleeps through a whole night, this provides more significant help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you administer castor oil for the ailment of belly evacuation, and the medicine is meant to quickly come out, then repeat it until he feels better.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the bleeding is from a vessel or an ulcer, then even if the cyst is as delicate as for a child; and this is the shape of the delicate cyst where the skin is compressed:
des plaies	Of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have discussed the treatment of wounds in the section on healing; now we will discuss hand care and medicine according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are varied depending on how they are made, and where they are made in the body, and why they were caused.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The causes of wounds are by penetration of bone, size of a sword or knife edge, or spear or bow shaft or ax, or similar objects; or those made according to the parts of the body, such as a bite on the neck, head, stomach, or belly, or liver and other bodily members; and I will tell you how to treat each wound, starting with simple head wounds, because the memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I state that when a simple wound or head injury occurs and the bone is not broken, you must be careful whether it is caused by stone or similar things. Even though the skin has been completely torn apart and the wound is large, if you slightly doubt there being pus, do this: if there's a small amount of blood coming from the wound, then immediately cleanse with the surgical technique for the head in the same manner; and if not, instead clean it against the removed part. Make the patient intoxicated with wine and rich meats afterwards to help replenish their body.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it doesn't want to be treated with surgery, reduce its meat intake, don't drink wine and avoid eating any meat. Apply a substance on the wound, should pus appear, use cotton soaked in oil or rose water; and if there's no pus present, apply on the fresh bloodied wound, as long as it hasn't been disturbed by air, use a powder I will mention shortly; and if it has become disturbed by air, apply some remedies until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like that of a tailor's cut and similar injuries, and the lips cannot be joined together by stitching, then join them through sewing, as I will say for wounds in the belly, with stitches.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound exposes the bone, it heals only for a little while if held; then treat the wound with medicine and restore hard flesh instead of skin. Instruct the patient to consume large meats like testicles and cooked wheat or corn, as well as things alike.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find or discover a rotten skin and it does not reach the bone, then cut out the rot completely, let it bleed, and then treat it. And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, where it is torn off, and it cannot be stopped with medicine, then pull out the artery, and if you find that it's dislocated, hold it in place with a thread; and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and you put this powder which seals in such a way that when the fire touches it, it stops moving.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the method for the powder is as follows: take one part of incense; two parts of dragon's blood; three parts of fresh charcoal, and finely powdered. Apply this to the wound, pack it firmly until it dries well and joins with all its blood; then bind it tightly, leave it undisturbed if it does not swell; for you do not remove the medicine until it has healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And never do this with charcoal alone, when one doesn't have the incense or the dragon's blood oil, but only that the surgeon has treated the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the heart has healed the wound, equally in state, then do not put this powder there at all; but apply some digested ointments, or oats flour soaked in water and honey, as long as it produces exudation. Then continue with other treatments until it is well.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the bone breakage comes with the wound and it is small, then use delicate tweezers to extract it; and I will tell you about bone breaks in the head later.
de la plaie dou col	from the wound in the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	This wound occurs in the neck and is simple, if there's no difference between this and those of the head, but if it affects the throat or the artery, then that makes a difference.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it's the nerves, just leave the treatment alone and don't put anything restrictive on them because it harms the nerves and causes them to withdraw; don't place anything cold on the wound either, as nerve substance is cold and it continues with the head which is one of the highest body parts; but use a mild medicine like watered-down soap or mixed with rose oil, and watered-down cucumber, and other minerals done this way, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, sew it with bandages as long as it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and filled with blood, then you should penetrate or go further down than usual. And if there's an artery cut, and bleeding ensues from that, you must open it up, repair it, and cauterize as needed; and if the phlegm of the throat is cut, or the windpipe, and the guiding pathway kept, where food travels, you should place the windpipe above the base of the throat without touching it but adjust according to its natural shape; then restrain for some days after that, let it heal from drying out until it's well; and if the wound made an impression in the bone, you should remove it; and if there are pieces of bone, you must take them all out thoroughly or leave any that can't be removed, allowing the wound to heal completely and be discharged by its own means; and if the wound is fresh, apply powder as I have mentioned on top of the powder.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there are bones in the wound and it has an abscess, treat it as I have said in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	from the wound of a spear or a knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it's from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, if you look at how the air jumps in the wound against the body: then know that the wound is fatal. And if it's not deep, and it's fresh up to its blood, don't put any powder there on the first hour, nor tie anything there due to the blood not flowing out fully and returning to the heart, and making the patient idle; but instead apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day. And if you have no ointment, then insert old cotton in the wound for absorbing moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days or four or more; if there are no convulsions nor tremors from the heart, then it won't strain anymore against itself. But when you see good conditions, and know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat it therefore with various remedies and other treatments as long as the wound is clean. And if she cannot heal or work, realize that there may be a fistula; do treat it accordingly.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision and it's simple or worse on the back, the treatment should depend on whether the person who is in charge performs it. If it's large, treat with stitches; and if it's small, use powder. If it's deep into the bone and has pieces of bones that need to be removed, determine how to treat the wound based on that. If they are not exposed, let the wound heal by itself or ease out the extractions; and for other wounds on other parts of the body, make judgments as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	from the rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The abdominal operations are large, medium-sized, and small. Large wounds may cause the intestines or parts of the intestines to protrude due to the introduction of foreign objects; and stitching is more difficult. None of the small wounds are worse than larger ones because when we put back the intestines several times through the hole if they were not replaced gradually, as it's common with large wounds, since the intestines swell soon upon feeling cold if they don't go in properly. Therefore, a smaller wound is better; for this reason, you should reinsert the intestine to its normal position as we'll discuss each method and explain further.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and no part of the intestine is involved, or if there's a need to remove something damaged, this can be done through one of two methods: either by taking advantage of the size of the wound as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it's cold, heat the patient in this manner: soak a sponge or a piece of cloth in water alone, or cook it with boiling water and vinegar and thyme, then raise the intestines until the swelling is drained; and do not let the drink settle to help reduce inflammation.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestines with water or broth that has been cooked well, for this helps to reduce the entrance of little things; and if it doesn't enter, make a small cut in the wound near where stitches are removed. And the first cure should be done until the cut is healed before any further cutting is made unless there's great necessity; and these are the tools for making cuts: you cut inside around the curve and outward not, and this is how it looks:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines are expelled, if you can set it back according to its natural form in its proper place, do so, because that's what matters.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is extensive, and it's located in the abdominal area, you should make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head; and if it's below the abdomen, place the head and buttocks higher than the abdominal parts; similarly, when there is a rupture in the abdomen, if it's in one of the two halves, you should position yourself so that the affected part is higher than the other. And thus, how I have said to manage large and medium wounds should be followed.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, use what you have at hand. Then take the holy scalpel and cut through all parts of the wound with it; stitch together the edges; this is a common way to suture, and when using needles, choose ones that are neither too fine nor too thick. Start by leaving two finger-widths from the edge of the wound and insert a needle or multiple needles depending on the width of the wound, then leave one finger-width at the beginning of the wound and insert the needle with strong thread; pierce both parts of the skin through the layers of fat until you reach the layer under the skin. Tie together the two ends of the fat tissue in three groups; then stitch tightly by threading the threads back and forth between these parts, leaving one finger-width apart for each stitch and inserting another needle. Sew as you did with the first needle following your need for needles, until all the wound is stitched up. Use needles that are neither too fine nor too thick since thin needles cut through the flesh well while thick ones may not fit properly; do not push the needles too far into the flesh or skin risk of further tearing in front of the stitches; and when you have finished suturing, tie off the ends of the needles to prevent them from irritating the patient during sleep. Place a bandage over the needle points for insulation until the wound has healed; this stitching technique is more suitable for small wounds because it involves using one needle twice before performing the second stitch which is common and includes sewing together both parts of the skin and fat tissue in one needle with medium thread. After making these four stitches, draw the needle back to where you started as if you were sewing a cloth. Leave an inch between each stitch for width; this method heals effectively and I successfully sutured a wound on someone who had been stabbed through the abdomen, which was torn open by a knife, with the wound being over a palm wide and containing intestines thick like two palms, and it was a wound in the middle of the abdomen.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned the intestine to its place then let it rest for 24 hours, and the wound healed up until the 15th day. I treated it, and it was healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And when the sight told them he was going to die, it became a miracle; and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in the region where no such thing could be found, nor any medicine; instead, I laid cotton bandages on his wound twice a day, washing it with honey water until he recovered.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	I will tell you the two proper methods of stitching: take the needle and place it from the outside part up to the inside; when it has pierced the body straight in and out, then hold the needle at the opening or where you have stitched, and make another hole from the inside part up to the outside. And the idea behind this stitching is that you stitch as a squirrel would sew fur, leaving an incision on one side, and take it up again on the other, until the entire stitching is complete.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of stitching, which Galen properly described, is as follows: no one does it like this. They join the two parts together naturally and apply one needle's point to the other part's point. Here is how it should be done: thread a needle or needle's point from nearby, pierce only that side, then leave both parts of the stitch alone; next turn the needle and make it pierce from the outside just up until where there are stitches on each side; then pierce one and the other from the outside all the way to the inside, using two more needles' points which are at another part. This is the usual and most correct method of stitching.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen said these words and no one attests to them: that we should stitch the belly with two needles, or have thread in each; and must one sew a needle from one side and another from the other, like those who stitch corroies; and know that when the tear is within the belly, this stitching is more painful than the others' around their belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgments concerning the wound are such as those for other wounds: and that when you find the fresh wound full of blood, just like when the surgeon has cleaned it out, you replace the intestine and skin. Then apply some absorbing powder on top; and if the surgeon has done this cleaning, apply no ointment until the wound heals; continue treating until the wound closes. Sew up any torn threads, ensure proper stitches for the suture, and care for the suture site; then treat the wound like others, until it is healed. And should you lack medicines, as soon as it begins to heal properly, use old cotton, and agitate this twice a day until it heals completely.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For if you need no other medicine for simple wounds; and should there be doubt that the wound is spreading to main limbs, it's proper to apply a thin layer of oiled linen or linseed oil, or in boiled heat oil, on all joints, and inside at the elbow creases; and when there feels to be pain or gangrene developing several times, it's appropriate to perform an enema with black wine, and similarly if gangrene reaches as far as the intestines; then pierce internally, and know that when this refers to large intestine, it heals more easily than small intestine.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine which is called 'young' cannot heal when it is injured, and this is due to the thinness of the veins that are there, and due to the subtlety of the entire body, and its approach towards the nerves in its nature.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the hair leaps out of the wound, then put it back in the same way as the intestine when it is fresh. And if it is old and turned to brown or black, then you should tie up what is black so that no blood flows, for there are veins and arteries; then cut out what is between the tie, and hang both ends under part of the wound up to beyond it in order to facilitate extraction when the hair falls out, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is torn and there's a small wound, one can attempt to restore it in various ways. I observed that once someone was pierced by a spear or sword, and there was a wound on the right side of the stomach; it became inflamed and turned into a fistula where food waste and gas could escape. I treated it according to my understanding and persisted with refinement until it was healed, then sewed up the edges.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it fused together, I wondered if the patient might have pain in their abdomen; there was no harm but stayed better off, ate and drank; and many experimentors said that when they have a small injury in the intestine, it should be tied in this way: take large fir cones, then join the edges of the wound, and once the fir cone has opened its mouth, place it between the two edges, if she presses her mouth against them; then press down on the cone, making sure it cannot slip off, then place another fir cone in the same manner as before until the entire wound is covered; by this method, the wound heals.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	In the case where something clogs in the intestine and causes no harm to the patient, it can be tied with a delicate thread cut from an animal's intestine, done like this: take the tip of the intestine thread that is well deshucked, then wind it around the tip of this intestinal thread along with some thin linen thread, tie them together into a needle, sew the intestine using this method, and pull back in the seam; this way of sewing thorns follows the path of faith and hope. And if the wound is large and wide, especially when located on one of the colon's regions, it will not cause obstruction or harm because of its delicacy.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	regarding a fistula or if it be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that every wound or abscess, as it matures, is universally called a "fistula", and even when it is hairy and turns red.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is according to the true nodulation firm and white, where no pain is felt, and it is also hairy like feathers of a bird; and sometimes with clear redness, and other times thick; sometimes small, and other times sufficiently so; and I have spoken about this in the division of wounds, that every unhealed wound, as long as there's no pus, can only discharge externally through one of the eight causes: namely, due to slight bleeding or ulcers; or because it is malicious; or because there is hard pus within and on the membranes, which does not allow pus to be produced; or there is too much pus; or the veins are swollen, and the material has a bad quality; or the medicine used in treatment was ineffective; or because of how pestilence spreads; or because digestion is slow in that region, causing delayed recovery, and pushed by nature; or if there are vessels or bones involved: and I have already shown these causes, along with their signs, and treatments for medicines in this division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	It is necessary that I inform you about the treatment of fistulas which is performed by manual labor.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that fistulas exist in all body parts; because there are fistulas that come from the large veins, and arteries, and nerves, either at the heart or within the intestines, or bladder, or certain areas of the back, or on any joint of hands or feet; and if it happens to affect the function of the main body part, and affects their semblance.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas that are this way are painful in healing, and there is nothing else but labor and ignorance; and if any fistula doesn't come up to where I have mentioned, and you've completed its treatment, and recognize it, then take an arachnid web or a metal wire, if the fistula is straight, follow it; and if the fistula is bent, seek out a subtle needle tool, for the ants bend their body along the tortuous path; and if the fistula has missing parts and you can't properly search by tools, then flush it through one of its missing parts, as moisture travels from one part to another and cleans. Then search it carefully with your strength, so you understand whether there is bone or nerve inside, and that it's full filled throughout; ask well the patient about their pain when pressed with your hand, and where they feel it; and once you truly know where it is, and if it isn't near a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or vein, or any of the parts I mentioned, then cut according to what I've said, remove the pus-filled parts inside; and treat until it's healed. If the fistula was deeply cut straight, so must you cut until properly reaching there, then place wet cloths in medicine as a cure, and apply them up to the tip of the fistula, until the medicine eats away the excess that's remained at the bottom; then apply fresh healthy flesh for healing, until it is healed. If it isn't healed by this means, cauterize if we have said so before, and if the bone has been corrupted by the fistula, cut it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If the vein or nerves are not blocked or main limbs suffer thus as we have said; and if bones are exposed, and there is decay and darkness, cure until all decay has been removed, then cleanse the affected flesh until it heals naturally; and if it does not heal naturally, follow the same procedure as before. Realize you have not yet reached completion: continue to expose and clean until you reach the bottom, removing every bit of decay; then restore the limb; and if it is thus healed, it's correct.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, realize that the decay is too advanced for removal. Let nature handle it if there's no other option. If there are small corrupted bones, you can pull them with forceps if possible or use a suitable tool and extract each one, without leaving any behind. And if moisture hinders this process, causing no fear or danger, work on the bone structure along with the moisture and release the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place something stimulating for putrefaction on the wound, and leave it until the hairs inside are completely rotten in relation to the bone. Then they will come off more easily; and if it's a large bone like from the leg or thigh, only let the corruption go as long as the black part is entirely removed, then repair the wound; and if there's a significant portion of corruption going up to the bone, you should remove and cover all until the corruption ends, then treat until it heals; and I will tell you about an occurrence in a person's leg that involved this.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was a young man around thirty years old who had pain in his leg due to something originating inside the body that spread until it reached the leg. A large abscess formed and there was no reason for opening; but doctors operated on him extensively, resulting in the abscesses being opened and causing them to eat away at much tissue, forming a fistula, and it led to great loss of bodily fluids and moisture from the body; and many doctors treated this for two years without any knowledge in medical practice until I was called, saw his leg and the medicines used to treat him, and the corrosion through the losses with significant internal damage; and the body would become red like youth again, and had a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent on one of these bumps, and then searched all the bumps, finding that some came against each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I then hurriedly worked on one of the bumps and found a part of the bone within it. I discovered that the corruption had penetrated through to the inside of the bone, appearing like it was coming from the bone itself; this part of the corrupted bone stood out to me, and I assumed there were no other signs of corruption beyond what I saw, for it matched what I observed; thus I started applying medicine to heal the wound over a long period, but could not stitch it closed. Then I began again, uncovering the bone as before, only to find that the corruption had continued within the bone itself. This appeared to be a different part of the same corruption and I removed it, then attempted to sew up the exposed bone; however, my efforts stopped when I covered about half the bone's surface area with stitches, and let it heal completely by itself through medicine. It healed quickly and without any complications. There was no need to repeat the procedure besides due to the patient's weakness from sickness, which could not bear it, and because of my fear of death that I had concerning this case.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For often, during bloodletting, it was completely healed. In the place of the bone came a hard flesh, and it had good quality without causing harm or opposition from all sides, neither inside nor outside.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, should be treated as follows: take hold of it, and stretch at the end of the bone that opens up, commanding to stretch it upwards; then tie another thicker thread than the first one, and tie it over the flesh that's inside the bone, stretching the edge so that you can pull out the rotten flesh from below, revealing the clean flesh on the wound where you want to heal. Make sure not to harm or touch the clean flesh. Place a poker or a board under the bone to cover the rotten flesh; and treat as much as one can see and feel the corruption, then treat again if necessary.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted and doesn't open, and the corruption lies in middle or a part, then reveal all flesh; afterwards place a hot rod thereupon, and then let heat travel from one part to another of the corruption, and let the heat last as long as necessary on any part, just as we have said; and if the corruption is within the joint, then cut into the corrupted joint and heat the bone where it lies elsewhere; and if the corruption lies in the continuity of two joints, then there's no angle other than to cut across them; and if the corruption lies under a finger of the hand or foot, this thing will be very strong indeed but still, you should inquire how this corrosion appears to you; and clean everything out using all the methods that are useful, but without harming either the vein or nerve; know that the incision blade and instruments for operating on bones vary according to the nature of the bone, appearance of its surface, size, fineness, length and smallness, hardness; and thus it suits you to equip yourself with every kind of tool for each kind of work based upon your knowledge in this art, and testimony from various diseases; so consider what instrument you need as suited according to its nature.
dou feu	with fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The joints swell either from within or from outside; and when you have tried to heal this corrosion through medicine treatment, but it doesn't improve, then one must cover that limb up until the point of corrosion comes, so that the disease escapes by the body dying, or by malevolence, which is greater than the fault in the limb; and the signs are that the limbs turn black, as if they have been burned with fire, and after the blackness, because the corruption spreads from member to member, taking over the whole body; so you must hurry to cover it, and if it's caused by the beating of certain poisonous beasts, such as sea scorpion and snake etc., then if the corrosion is in the head of the spine, then treat it, and don't give it space to come up until the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes up to the hand, when you treat the joint, so that the corrosion doesn't go up to the elbow; and if it goes to the elbow, when you cut in at the wrist; and if it passes the wrist, then it's death, and there's no cure beyond the quantity of its virtue; and do this way whenever the corrosion comes or if it has spread: If it comes in the first joint, when you treat after the other joint; and if it spreads, then treat throughout the area where it has spread; and if it goes up to the leg, then treat at the joint of the knee; and if it gets above the knee, there's no other way than to let the patient die; and the method of treating or securing the limb is that you bind over and under, stretching one pair of bandages down from below and another pair going up from above, and you cut out the flesh between the two bands as wide as possible until bone is exposed; then treat or secure it, and place a linen wrap on each side so that the wrap doesn't touch the healthy part, causing further injury to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if blood comes when you operate, quickly cauterize the wound or put some stopping powders. Then resume your medicine as long as it's being performed. Afterward tie the limb with an adequate bandage and continue treatment until it heals. And I'll tell you what happened to a person at his foot: he had a blackness that seemed like fire burning, and this corrosion first came in his right foot, covering all of it; when he saw the corrosion, he hurriedly wanted to cut off his foot, then healed. Afterwards, several times later, the corrosion returned on the second finger of his hand, came to me, and I placed things that resonate after purifying the body, but could not stop the corrosion; and he urged me to cut off his hand, but I refused until I was sure I could transfer the matter; also doubted if cutting off his hand would kill him as the strength of his body was weak; he despaired completely and returned home, hurriedly wanted to cut off his hand again, then healed. And this is all for someone else's account, in case we need to do something similar.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	No time comes to the surgical wound in the animal's flesh, and remains so long as it forms a large mass of blood; and then bursts and opens, with blood spilling out, causing the joints to dislocate and leave the body, like vessels; and the skin above is just as delicate as fine cloth and doesn't reach all the way to bone or nerve, and this kind of ailment is also called "simple", it's not called "fistula"; but if it extends so far that it reaches through the bone from within, then it is termed a 'fistula'; and the skin is such that you can cut out the whole piece of skin and even when it's delicate, like fine cloth; and doesn't split due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you have chosen for the skin to dry out, and the corruption is not at its end, and the skin is full of flesh, then cleanse it with a cathartic like this: first observe that the breasts are large, and the bowel inside them has an unpleasant smell, then mix Egyptian medicine as follows: take oil, wine, and ointment, equally, and cook all in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and thickens like honey; then use it according to your need, mixing with water or honey to cathartically cleanse the breast, and restrain the urine; and let the medicine remain there for two hours, then drain out afterwards. Do this multiple times, until the breasts are completely cleansed and all pus is expelled. And if you can't cathartic with water from ashes when that medicine isn't present, take ash of vine wood, add water over it, then allow to drain, and use as a cathartic until you know that the breasts have been sufficiently cleaned out. If the patient cannot tolerate this or cannot bear Egyptian medicine or ash-water mixtures, then cathartically use water and honey mixed with some, knowing that honey has the property of cleaning and washing; and wine makes it heat up. And when you've done these things and chosen that the breasts are well cleansed, cathartically cleanse them using something that produces flesh inside, and take plaster made from Egyptian ointment or basilico oil, and mix with roset oil and wine; or cathartically use certain medicines and lotions whose properties were discussed on treatments for lotions. If the anus of the breast is small and the catheter cannot enter it, then widen it slightly using iron and insert a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilico lotion until it can fit inside. And if the wound is too wide, make sure to leave only the length where the catheter can enter, and if pus is above in the bowels, then remove it or do so lower than its position.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bowe is in perfect condition, there should be no letting of blood; and if you cannot cover the breast adequately as seen, you must arrange it so that the bowe goes to the lowest point of its normal location, for when the bowe is in perfect condition, there should be no letting of blood and if you cannot cover the breast adequately as seen, you must arrange it such a way: that the bowe goes lightly downwards, and leave nothing from the bowe; and take consolidating medicines to put under the skin around, and apply it on the linen covering all the healthy area; then apply at the most disturbed part below the breast slightly wider than the first, place ointment of sulfur on the other sheet according to the amount of disturbance, and apply it under the disturbed area of health for to ease the bowe, and do not leave out the large linen sheets except after several days once; and that which is under the disturbed part of the breast, remove often to remove the bowe, and know what comes from the bowe, whether it's poison or pus or enough, or digested, or undigested; and take care if the patient feels pain or no sensation, and if there are abscesses or not, and when your medicine has spread in such a manner that you see the nature that jumps up on the disturbed part of health, know that the breasts are already healing, and approaches the health; and then remove the wound in the morning, or on the third day, and when you relieve the wound, change the other linen and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if after many days the stomach is still giving off undigested matter, know that the stomach does not digest properly.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle veins cut after a long time, do not despair of health, for health is approaching.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are individuals who take longer to heal in their wounds and those that do the opposite. And if a person becomes indigestible jumping within after many days, know that the breasts aren't healing; and if the breasts delay in becoming erect and are far away, adjust medicines of dry and moist substances, such as ointment diafinit, for there is much part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine; take ointment diafinit, and make it with rose oil, and pour old, equal wine upon it; then simmer it and use it. And similarly, use cooked honey to thicken, when ointment diafinit isn't available, or you can take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them together, and add this powder to the honey that is on fire; and then coat it in a cloth and place it on the breast, and do not administer an aristologist longe, and lily roots which are also like vinegar and geranium; and use simple or compounded medicines: grind these, make them into a powder, put them onto the honey that I said, and use it. And if the cure lasts for a long time and is not cured by this treatment, then know that corruption has spread through inside, making an impression in the bone, or within hard members, or with substances; if you treat the fistula of the wound as we previously mentioned.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the incision of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that originates under the nail of the thumb or the toe, or by chance emerges in other fingers; and when it ages and one does not take care, if it breaks out into pus, runs and spreads to many places as long as it reaches the root of the nail, and by chance reaches it completely; then comes corrosion up to the bone, as long as there is stinging pain, causing inflammation in both sides of the finger, and changes color.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have instructed in the division, and if the treatment is not effective, then it is necessary to remove all excess that has remained under the nail. Then, after that, cauterize the wound.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The fire cautery is very helpful when the bone is healthy and the nail is healthy. If the nail presses against the flesh, starts to prick, and becomes inflamed, it's necessary to place the wire under the nail where the flesh sticks out, and put it at the top, then cut that thin and gently, and lay on top of the flesh-releasing medicine which is hot and corrosive in order to remove everything. Then treat with ointments until they are healthy.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, you must cut and apply force, because however corrupted the bone is, it cannot heal. And when you see that the bone has decayed, you must cut and treat as previously described. Then continue to treat until the corruption is healed; and if it is hardened, pitted, and causes great pain, then you should first purify it. Afterward, file down the nail with an oblique cut in your knife's direction, and be cautious that the cut does not go through to the flesh under the nail, as this would cause too much pain for the patient; and if this occurs, apply something soothing over it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain originated from the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	I must adjust what is born in the hands of some men by chance and are heavily fleshed out, and by chance there may be parts with bones, and none of them have nails, and none of these things are born at the root of the joint, or the birth place is in no part of our body.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those born in any new month do not move, and those born at the joint of the month may, by chance, move; the size of the one who is robust is so light, in such a manner: cut it from its root with a single broad scalpel.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	Those born at the root of the joint have pain to cure: if you hold onto copper.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the one who is born or destined for late months, it is necessary that you first cut the soft tissue up to the bone. Then carve out the bone with a tool suitable for this task. Continue treating until it's clean.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The fusions that occur at the joints come about through birth, or through the healing of wounds, or through the welding with fire, or through similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	It is necessary that you cut this seam [suture], if it needs to be repaired according to its natural forms; then place between two moist cloths or pieces of oiled cloth so they do not stick together. Alternatively, place between two fine pieces of paste until the seams adhere properly, as required.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If joining occurs with neither of these methods using the palm, then fix this healing in accordance with what is right.
des vils	Of the wretched
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	Vices are large veins swollen and filled with melancholic superfluities, which come from various parts of the body. More occur in the legs of those who walk on their feet and work and carry things, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must then administer one purging of collyrium to it, and afterwards heal it with basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment of iron injuries can be done in two ways: one is to cut and drain the black blood, and the other way is to open the vein and pull it out with force.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The amputation process is as follows: first raise the injured leg with hot water for a long time until the thick vein becomes thin. Then hold the leg against the injury above the calf until it reaches near the knee joint. After that, cut the vein at one of three positions according to the situation, using a wide cut. Drain and extract the black blood from your hand as much as possible until only what can be tolerated by the body comes out; then close the wound and instruct for meat to be boiled with this black liquid; and repeat the evacuation and cleaning when the veins are full and it harms the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The method of bleeding: elevate the leg at the vein, if there is hair, then immerse it in water. And raise the leg in hot water until it turns red and the veins swell. If you don't have water, heat it on a fire instead. Then place it along the length from the knee to the ankle, or across from above to below at the ankle; then peel the skin around twice, and scrape the vein bit by bit until one feels its presence; when it appears red and black, and seems like a white thread upon touching; then cut through the hair right next to the vein, up to as long as possible with respect to the flesh; and then proceed to peel away along the vein until it's visible, then elevate it on the handle. Do this another two times from the third finger. Then scrape off the skin above the vein until you can see it, then lift the blood with the handle as previously done, and do so again with another notch; then keep scraping around the vein until you can see that it's all out; and if you can't scrape or elevate, sew a thread onto each end of heavy double string, stitch and pull on them. Then hold through the needle hole, moving your hand from side to side until done; and make sure not to stick it in too deep, for if you do so, you may not be able to pull it out or elevate it, which would harm the patient; and when you have completed all pulling, then place moist wool on the wound immersed in wine and rose oil. And treat with it until it heals.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the face is squeezed and twisted together into a bundle, and it isn't straight, as we have said, then you must break it forcibly but don't cut it; handle it in the way that was previously described.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape of the iron with which you remove the tooth is curved, and does not cut, so it doesn't pierce the gum; and it's thickly curved because if it were sharp, it would cut the gum but being thick as we have said, and this is the form:
de la voinne civile	from the civil gum
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is formed in legs, in hot areas where no herbs or trees can grow, and on earth where there's no moisture; it might also form elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens due to corruption that comes from under the skin, similar to what happens inside the body with snakes and worms, forming between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein show themselves such that there is a very great inflammation in the leg, then change your limbs, and the vein begins to emerge outside, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	And when the shoulder joint opens, it must be covered with a piece of linen from two thirds to three-quarters and up to ten pieces. You wrap and tie it around the limb, leaving the linen hanging down to the leg, and each time if there is any remaining, you cover again inside the linen, tying it; and if it's too long, cut off some part and wrap again, ensuring not to cover its root until it's fully out; otherwise, if you cover it, it gets inside the muscle, brings pus or decay at the site, causing bad disease. Since this thing must be treated little by little up to there, leave nothing behind in the process, and only once this vein is treated to a length of five palm widths or ten palms, and slightly more than twenty days when it comes out from ten palm widths long, then when you cover it, it's necessary for you to have left over one inch or two inches and pierce till bottom, so that everything goes out; let the inner matter be emptied, apply purging medicine once a day until it heals as with pus.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never at this vein by manual pressure, and even when it opens in the joint of the foot, or at the foot, there is a lot of loss, and it hurts to touch; so then treat it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	worms that are born between the skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This illness is called in our land "cattle disease", because it affects cattle, and there are small worms that grow between the skin and flesh, and travel throughout the body going up and down. One can feel discomfort as the disease progresses from part to part of the body until it reaches the skin where it causes an irritation or outbreak; and it is accompanied by pus from various bodily fluids, such as coming towards and resembling snakes, worms and roundworms or those in the stomach; there's doubt about its severity because when it travels through the body and goes up to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance it enters and destroys the eye; this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it being treated and drained, one can only say when it is going: hence you must then tie the arm up above and below with a very tight firm string, then pull upwards and drain it outwards, and if it is moving within the flesh, and you do not find it, then you burn it with fire until it stops; and the greater nuisances that it causes, if they go towards the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming or its head near to the eye, then firmly tie over it the eyelid folds, then pull upwards, and drain it outwards; and you must use the aid of purification through remedies' bodily fluids for the maladies produced by humors, and be cautious with raw meat causing putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes to any limbs, and then moves from one limb to another; and I have seen what I am telling you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was summoned to tend a patient with a malady, and upon examining her arms, I noticed a small swelling in the veins of one arm. Soon after, I observed it ascend even like a worm on the shoulder, faster than anything else, just as liquid silver when cut from one place to another; the pain left that place and settled into the shoulder, then shortly afterward spread throughout the entire body until it reached the other arm; then she would tell me that it was moving internally within her body, just like I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled much at how she moved from member to member in this manner, for I had never seen this disease like this before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	In all cases, I desired to move the pain from one place to another, but it did not happen like this for me, just as what I observed in that woman; and I thought that it was because she had a dry body, with exposed veins, and due to this restriction of air pressure; they cannot be seen according to this reasoning in those who are delicious (i.e., those who have moist bodies and their vessels replete).
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see treat this illness, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens up as we have said, then press on it quickly from above downwards, and then hold for as long as that windiness is constrained in its place; and apply a cautery to it; and if you do not see it at your eyes, treat the one who deboutes the windiness, as with fetid pills, pill of serapin, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are various, depending on their shape and where they pierce the body.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The variety lies in this that there are those with large points, and small ones, and tailed ones, and soldered ones; and those with two angles, and those which have tongues, and those where it has pieces; and the one that excretes in no member as it excretes in any manner: or in a primary limb, such as head, heart, liver, spleen, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar organs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it is dislocated then in no part of these limbs, and the sign of death which I will tell you later on becomes apparent: you should proceed with the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterward in various conditions; and when that bad sign does not become apparent, or the arrow has not been fully removed, then you should remove it, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when the arrow penetrates through to bone and jumps over the head which is on top of the brain, it's when blindness and deafness occur together with vertigo, reddening and heat in eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and confusion, vomiting of bile; and sometimes loss of strength in the nostrils or ears; and sometimes loss of speech and voice; and a wet white rash around the wound that looks like pus, and also as if burned; and when this sign becomes apparent, then you should take it seriously and remove the arrow if it's there.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of pregnancy when she is at ease or in her heart, indicates that she is near the left breast and feels as if something has been driven into a hard thing, not empty; and by chance the ovum also stops like the pulse, and black blood comes out, and coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: then know without doubt that death will follow.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that never comes out is when there's no foam escaping from the wound, and the throat swells up, and the patient has a changed complexion, and breathes loudly and feels cold.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow exits through the armpit area, it is located beneath the ribs; and there's copious bleeding and intense pain, with labored breathing; and all limbs move freely from the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if an arrow or stomach is stuck, by chance something from the undigested meat comes out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow or stomach is stuck in the chest or abdomen, and nothing comes out through the intestines, there's no hope for treatment, nor in extracting the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow or stomach penetrates into the bladder, and urine comes out in spurts and exits, causing great pain to the patient: you should know that this wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other parts of the body, such as the limbs (including arms and legs), neck, throat, shoulder blades, shoulders, shoulder girdle, back spine, ribs, and buttocks, along with any similar limb, are safe according to various dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When an arrow is in the muscle or artery, and it isn't poisonous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because you did this other thing.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to one man that an arrow hit him in the thigh at the root of his nose: I tested it and pulled it out from the other side through the fat behind the ear, it came out cleanly without much trouble.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	I pulled out an arrow for a game that had hit in the fat behind the eye close to the paper, and the arrow was retracted, yet only its tip could be reached towards the shaft, and the arrow was big as a Turkish bow, all the iron was clean without any ears; the player was fine, and he did not experience any bad accidents.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And pull out an arrow from the neck of a Christian, and it was an Arabian arrow in the ears: I pulled it as far as possible while holding my breath, and made sure to remove all parts of it, leaving no trace on the Christian.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And pulled out an arrow from the home, that was stuck in either chest or abdomen, and thought he would die; but after having passed 30 days, his condition did not change at all; I cut into the arrow, pried it free, and pulled it out, with no bad incident occurring.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see a home with an arrow that has fallen onto or into it, and the wound is healed inside; and the arrow remains within, not altering its natural disposition, nor causing harm in any of its natural actions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And observe this other man, who was hit in the face by an arrow and had his wound sewn up; and he endured suffering from great pain afterwards; and many were similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And one arrow hit the king's home of princes, piercing his nose and causing him to tilt slightly towards the right side; and the arrow was completely stuck. I was called for treatment after it had pierced for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound to be very constricted.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I tried to remove it with all my skill, but could not feel it; and he felt pain and discomfort in his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it might be the tip of the arrow. I placed an adhesive and digestive plaster on his nose because his ears were not swelling up; and I saw the arrow's tip in his ear.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the plaster for several days and resolved the wound immediately. Then I let the patient remain in pain for a long time, until he felt the arrow inside his nose on the third day; and I told him this.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I placed corrosive ague medicine on the wound for several days until it was opened and then tried it. I felt the tip of the arrow which was near the bone; then adjusted within the wound opening with that corrosive medicine until the head of the arrow became visibly apparent. It took about four months well into the termination, and then I freed the wound so that the healing was obvious from both sides, but could not remove it entirely; thus continued refining and engineering ways to make instruments until on the third day I grasped it with well-made forceps as shown in the final part of this chapter, then pulled it out and allowed the wound to heal.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the doctors decide that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored: I will do so then, and after sealing the wound, the patient would be completely well.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or I've told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so please apply your skills to what I don't explain here; as books can't capture everything. But wise colleagues compare well for a bit of significant knowledge, and for the current situation and its shortcomings, find nine new works, and nine new tools, in the elimination of occurrences that happen within this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I state that arrows enter the limbs where they are inserted based on two ways: either through the body or where they penetrate, or from another side; and when it enters or penetrates there, this is an arrow entering into the flesh, and now never happens.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it doesn't jump now, let it until the ulcer is completely healed internally, and the discharge has stopped; and similarly, if it's embedded in bone and can't come out, leave it like that for a few days, removing some each day; then it will jump. If it doesn't jump, puncture inside all through the fine hole as long as the flesh internally is broadened, and then remove it afterwards.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if an arrow is embedded in the bone of the head, and goes as far as one of the glands under the brain, or any other accidents I have mentioned to the patient: do not remove it immediately, but let it until it becomes even after a few days; for when the arrow reaches this far, it's death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is merely embedded in the bone and doesn't reach up to the sinuses, and remains with no ill effect for several days without a bad occurrence, then use the tool for removal.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply stuck like that and cannot come out, if you administer trepanation inside, as I have told you; then treat the head until it becomes healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is placed back in its original position inside your body where you can't see it, and you try to pull it out with all your might; and if you feel it, trying to pull it using any suitable tool; and if you cannot do so because of the constriction around the wound or due to the depth of the arrow, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein inside, then cut as large as possible through the wound; pull out the arrow when you can, and if it has ears attached at the point it holds onto, remove any flesh stuck in two parts that will move, and then bend or break the ears off the arrow as much as you can while trying to pull it. Be sure not to damage the arrow during this process, so you could extract it more painfully.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you can't do it in one go, let the shaft be broken up to where its fletching is, then try again, for the extraction should be done quickly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the bleeding deters you from what we have advised about treatment in this chapter, then heed our instructions; and guard against cutting the nerve and vein, and do it cautiously as you can draw out the arrow without risk, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and position the patient according to their original shape when they had been struck by the arrow, for that is the best guide, if you cannot follow this, then position them according to what the symptoms show.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from the other side, or if there is an opening in it, or if the skin is swollen at the spot so you can see or feel it obviously: then cut above, as long as the forceps might grasp, and then press: if it jumps now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand around as long as it enters the bone, and enlarge the bone, then pull it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, let her stay and start extracting again until she does come out; and if the arrow's tip is there, hold all of it; and if it's a piece from the arrow, when you see how to handle it correctly, then provide it with a tool that has hair, so that the arrow's point goes into the tool's hair; and then push forcefully, and if the arrow is caught, when you apply force to the tool at the tip going in, making extraction easier.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow touches the body, you must remove all tissue around where I come in, if possible, then treat the wound as it should be treated.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow hits or pierces the body or abdomen or bladder or ribcage, and it is nearby, you may cover up, if possible; and be careful not to cover the vein and nerve. Then remove it, then stitch the wound, should that need occur; and treat as long as it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the tongs used to remove arrows resemble an animal's beak, and here is the form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And they come in different sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the arrowhead is also like the feathers of a bird, so it sticks out at the tip of the arrow, as this shape shows:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the shape of the pincers for clamping and extracting is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of veins from common sources
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are XXXI veins from which we cleanse ourselves, of which sixteen have a head or origin: Two that are after the ears, they are called "herbech"; and the two arteries in the two visible temples; and two veins that are in the corners under the eyes, they are called "aspires"; and the vein that is at the forehead; and the vein that is at the nose tip; and the two tendons located in the neck; and the two veins above the mouth in the lips, these are called "augeherich"; and two veins along the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins that we often treat are found in each arm: one is the cephalic vein, and it lies on the left side of the chest, and people call it the "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "femoral", and it's made up of the cephalic and basilic veins, and people say that this is the "heart vein"; and the basilic so lies either on the right or left side of the chest, and people call it the "vein of the belly", and it's above the femoral area, and it's precisely this vein which we treat, opening up clearly under the armpit.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the salvatelle is the vein that lies between the little finger and the ring finger, and there are two of them; in the leg and at the ankle there are three veins: one is under the bend of the knee on the left side of the chest, and the second is sophene which lies at the ankle on the right side of the chest; and the vein that's called "the nest" - it's located at the ankle on the other side. And in the other leg there are three veins underneath these ones.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	Healing of veins located behind the ears utilizes ancient cauterization techniques and aids in migraines; understand the qualities of a healer as I explain, such that you might know which part of the body to touch, and rub where the veins are on a rough cloth; then pinch off the vein's neck with a pin until the two veins appear behind the ears at the base: touch these firmly, and where you feel your pulse beneath your finger, begin here; take the lancet, insert it down through the vein until reaching bone, then raise your hand all the way up to the top of the vein, cut and remove the skin along with the vein in two parts for a total of twice your thumb's width, and let blood flow out until you see it; then pinch off and tie, ensuring cleanliness while doing so; I have previously discussed incision and cauterization in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The treatment of the two arteries that are in two temples, it involves ancient migration, and suture, and habitual ophthalmology, and at the body's tears ague-like ones; and the quality of a surgeon so is as I say: and what the patient does make their neck strained, until both vessels appear clearly open; you feel the pulse over your right index finger, and then gently raise the head high up to your right thumb; then lift the skin above the artery at its peak, and hold the lancet on the side, and lift the vein upwards, and cover it, just as you would with other veins, and control the bleeding according to your need; then release the patient, place your index finger over the vein for an hour, then put cotton; and then secure firmly, leave until it heals properly; and we have spoken about this and their extraction, or the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The treatment of the vein on the forehead is as valuable as that of the cephalic vein in ancient diseases, and for migraine, and for facial redness; and this quality is that patients twist their neck until they feel the vein. Then take the instrument which is called 'saw', whose form it is described as:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand or something else, letting blood flow according to how much you see; then untie the patient's neck, and bind the vein until it becomes firm and no wide operation has been done.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Always, it is not advisable for the flames to be too close; and make them lie diagonally, as the bone is nearby, and by chance they might break the flames when they are subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The treatment of the two veins that are in two eyelids helps with tears, and facial redness, and in the ear near the eye, and for diseases affecting the face; and this quality of their treatment is that patients twist their neck by some means until they feel it as described before. Then heal them, and ensure the healing covers through to a slight length along the line slightly wide, because there's no tissue involved.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are thin, by chance should they break; then make it correspond to blood flow, as much as you need, and then bind with cotton, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The treatment of the neck's veins involves ague and sudden suffocation, as well as facial diseases like migraine and redness that appear in the face, and particularly when it is old; and the quality of this treatment consists in constraining the patient's throat, then guiding their nose to your left hand, taking a fine flame long, and placing it within the lip in the space between the two nostrils, as the vein does not open properly. And now, smoking begins; don't go too far outwards, and perform surgery according to your need, then rest it overnight as it will be restored very quickly; this is how the flame looks:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The treatment of the two lymph glands assists in tightening the skin, initiating the process of spreading infection, causes much illness, leads to disease and pus formation. It is characterized by the patient's throat being constrained on both sides as we have discussed; and be aware that if one master is found at the head of the ailment, and there is an incision at I location, then heal the vein long but slightly wide, then handle the blood moderately or according to need; then perform another part in the other vein, then release the tie between the veins halfway so as not to strangle the patient. Leave it until morning for the wound to heal.
de la sainie des leivres	Of the health of the veins
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the veins above aids in collecting in the mouth, and it contributes to gum decay, and裂s in the lips, and nosebleeds and nasal congestion.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of health requires you to have the patient face you and hold their neck as I said; then turn the cheek, and look at the two veins, one being on the right cheek and the other on the left. You know them by their blackness and because they contain small black veins inside: therefore grasp both, and if you do not recognize them, and are in doubt, cut the larger of each side. And treat the two veins just as described above and below, for this is a uniform method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	Of the health underneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The health of the veins underneath the tongue assists after the treatment of the cephalic vessels, and this is at the constriction of the throat, and in diseases of the eye, and in diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the surgeon is that when the patient lies with their hands under the sun, and they lift the tongue, you look underneath each side for a black vein: then treat both veins healthily, but do not go too far into them, because underneath are arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the arm which are commonly treated are healed according to two methods: or by holding them over a large, flaming brazier, or with an olive-like fine flame if it's an ax-shaped knife, and they're called "anesil"; and their size is as wide as and as fine as the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the Miritin flame is very renowned, and it is quite wide as you can see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	It requires to open the veins filled with large visible blood and that contain large blood and disorder; and this is made by the shape of the olive flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and is more refined and pointed; it serves to cleanse delicate veins or has a subtle citrus blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The treatment of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that affect the throat and neck, and in the chest, and stomach; and it's incumbent upon the surgeon to heal properly, and they must be aware of the artery that is nearby.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if it hits the artery, and bleeding occurs, should be stemmed if that happens, as I have said; and must not grasp with fire but cut like a professional.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilica does not clearly open, it is necessary to extract it and use another one. Or if you want no needle from that side, or you puncture through the limb instead of using a vein in your arm: it will clearly open; and then insert at the fire as we said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you recognize the location of the needle, it is appropriate to pull on your arm so that you touch the area until you feel the pulse; then mark where the insertion point should be and then tie your arm, and insert into the vein towards the fire as we said. And watch out not to pierce the artery when you see the skin swelling, because that's an artery: listen then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it sticking out up top like urine from a child, and the veins are red and thin, know that this is a vein: so hurry, place your finger there firmly, then remove it once the bleeding has stopped, as often happens; tie the arm down, and leave him thus, do not move the patient; be careful, and don't move them until they're well.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the wound has not stopped bleeding, and it's urgent, and you lack medication, if the artery is open, take it, because the head of the patient retreats; and stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take the bark of a rue plant, and cut it, and take one half and bind it tightly up to the other end; if the bleeding stops, that is well; if not, then apply it like we have said, using powders that stop the blood; and for wounds on the small part of the limb and the strength in keeping the arm together, several remedies are suitable.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The healing of the vein in its middle helps to treat blood flow from the top chief and under the heart because it is made up of basilica and cephalic components, as we have said before. And it's important for the healer to be aware of the nerve that exists there, if he doesn't go too deep, and should he find the nerve, and it swells causing injury to his health, potentially resulting in inability to heal; and this nerve opens multiple times, and if it does not open in any person due to its subtlety, it's necessary for you to warm the instrument before surgery; and avoid touching the nerve with your finger.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two thighs, cut it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The healing of the cephalic helps to treat blood in the head and aids with veins; it is appropriate for a surgeon to use an olive oil lamp or a mirthin lamp as they are the safest among all the veins, because neither nears nor beneath them lies a nerve or artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Always aim for the lightest weight, and do not be discouraged if it has to happen twice, you simply try again; there are instances where some people's arms swell when doing it the first time, but it causes no harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health depends on your thoughts.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you need to know about health care is that health care is managed only for the purpose of maintaining health and avoiding future diseases; it should be conducted in one of the three veins: namely, cephalic, abdominal, and basilica. And health care should be done at the beginning of prayers on your knees, and during autumn and winter after meals, when signs of satiety appear; and you should get health care on the first or third day, after two or three hours or even four days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	Health care given for diseases does not have a set time, but it is done as needed each day or with nutrition at all times; and it should never involve health care for children until they are 14 years old, or for pregnant women only during the first quarter of pregnancy up to seven months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Neither should one nurse the aged who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when some seek to heal themselves in any way, it is necessary for them to evacuate the intestines with a gentle cathartic if they have retained mucus, so that the veins do not draw out excesses detrimental to their main parts; or they will not heal themselves if too full of meat, or drunk, as long as there is strength, nor those who are dropics; and be careful when you seek to heal after colic passion, vomiting, and abdominal pain, and frequent pregnancy, and labor, and watchfulness and excesses, and what is late in the virtue, or by thing of the weapon or of the body; then refine the humors, if they are large, through food, drinks and medicines, if you have the power; then take a bath, unless there is any defense against it, for refining the blood, and to heal from the stomach wound below the middle third, as we have said; and guard yourself that day of work, and of point, and of lust, and of similar things; and be bound and joyful, and let the healer stand higher than him who heals, and rub his hand on it twice or three times, then pinch it up a little bit from above, for when it is too tight or not enough, it cannot correct the body; and then rub the stomach with your hands until the veins swell and are felt; then moisten the healer's finger in a little old oil, then place his left hand's thumb under that vein on his stomach a little below where he wants to heal, so that the vein does not burn and fail at being pricked.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that behave like strings when heated, and there are ones so full of windiness that when placed over the flame they pull away from it and cannot open the vein. And thus one is among those cases; and if the wound leaks out, then the wound is too narrow, which means the surgeons must be aware of these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens on the first try, it is good; if not, start again very slightly near that spot or as soon as possible, provided the arm isn't swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the veins are swollen and the patient feels discomfort, let it be for one or two days without binding the arm: perhaps pus will come out. Do not enter water baths, then restart the operation as you please; and if your needle is small, or if through doubt you think it has not drained enough blood compared to what you see, pierce that very incision directly over the flame; and remove a bit more hastily, in such a way that the veins are swollen. For this happens many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the area swelling, do not start the healing process again, and put a bit of garlic oil on it. This lightens the body with blood flow and makes the oil adhere in that place where the oil is placed; then apply the garlic oil to every cure you perform on veins, to stop the flow of blood; and do the same when you put vinegar or wine on the area; let the oil evaporate if it becomes too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if it comes to large abscesses which occur frequently, even when it isn't being healed because the opening of the vein is small, you should hurry and apply a damp sponge with warm water and wine on it for an hour. And it's necessary that you do this after the blood has flowed out of the vein; and if it remains in place in the area for days without any sign of darkness or greenness, it doesn't harm him; and when you notice it, apply something of aloes or myrrh made into a juice from calamus, balm, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times there was pus and appearance in the healing of the basilica: so place your hand there, and if you find the part soft under the pressure of the hand, then it is an unpleasant appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, do not apply any of what we have said to it, for by chance on the artery; but make one poultice of it dry to harden the part, then treat with another treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each person with blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	But if the patient's blood is dark, let it only flow until it becomes red. And if you see it thick, let it continue until it thins out. And if it's too thin, allow it to cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for him who has strength and vigor, needing extraction of blood, to make a larger wound, and have the flames wide; and for him who is weak, do the opposite, and this benefits healthy care often, and one should heal him by cutting across, not straight on; and this way of healing prevents the leakage of blood and compression of nerve, and it's better than long cuts as opposed to large ones.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for the one whose body needs healing, it is good to give them a drink of apple water; if they are flushed, they should have three or four times bleeding. And if they have a cool constitution, before the healing, they should consume pain made moist in syrup with muzé (likely a type of spice), or in flavored honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, along with well-smelling syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if they bleed during delivery, after a little blood has appeared, it is necessary for them to inhale a broth of mutton and an aromatic thin syrup, and use other things that we have mentioned in the chapter on fainting or division, for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to bleed his arm and heal again, should it be necessary, when he is weakened by much healing, let him heal little by little, according to the strength of his remedy continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if one wishes to bleed their arm after the first healing and they have strong veins, let them heal seven hours after the first bleeding or after the seventh hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if one wishes to be healed on another side, they should be healed on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there's quite some blood inside the body which is already agitated, causing fever; if you need to remove large quantities of it, and expand the chest as much as possible until they breathe properly; then make sure that all conditions for health have been met, place your hand on their chest when they start breathing again, so the mouth doesn't slip into the chest, and this happens many times, when those responsible for cleaning are careless; and you shouldn't let it happen when you see them stretch out their arm, and have blood come out a second time, and the chest is closed, press gently on it instead; or if they seem to be choking, stretch their arm quickly as possible, because that would be badly done; but leave it until they breathe properly for the second time; then hold at the tip of the flame, until the inner blood that's frozen in the chest starts to flow out, and place a small pile of ashes on water, and press gently.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be alone and do not compress it, until the abscess calms down.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if the need is to bleed again from the second time, if it lies within its own place or in another vein, or on the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein is treated in its place within the arm because it's made up of that vein from the head, since she is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the way of healing is that the patient keeps their hand in warm water until it turns red. Then they should be bound moderately, so that the wound can properly appear, then now heal through it, neither wide nor long; and let there be wider parts, and be well healed near the joint of the hand, and if unable to go out further, then put the hand back in warm water and allow the blood to flow in the water until you have enough. And if it is like this, do not reheat the hand in warm water again because it would be kept more during winter than summer; and healing through this vein is more preserved compared to all other veins, for there is no artery or nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The treatment for saving the right hand from all diseases of the liver is as follows: hold your hand and immerse it in warm water until you see blood, if there is any; then heal across, and if you do this all around, without causing any pain; don't go too far beyond the limits, because the nerve is right under all that flesh, and then put your hand back in warm water, if it's frozen in the wound and can't come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated the blood as much as your skill allows, place a hot iron on the wound and seal it for rapid healing, and thus proceed with each case.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The cure for someone in the left hand is akin to the sickness of the mouse [a tool or method], and do all as I have told you for the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The healing of the soul is valuable for all diseases that exist in the body, such as diseases of the heart, and bloating of flowers, and diseases of the kidneys, and those of old hands and legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of this healing are that the ailments are treated with hot water, and rubbed onto the wound as it heals, and bound to the joint above the foot; and the wound is located at the ankle, and through the top of the foot many kidney movements occur; so heal in such a way that you aim for more extensive healing or around the ankle area, where movement is better.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal it above the heel, be aware of the nerves that are nearby, and heal through as well as when sewing; let the flames be after this.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if they cannot come out, you should place the part in water, and let it empty well from the vein.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the healings are needed for the first time, then repeat it a second time slightly above because the legs are salty; do not doubt about nerve as we said, and thus proceed with the heart of the other leg equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The leg of the sciatic vein is at the ankle on the right side, and its health matches the pain in the hip, when it's due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of her health is such that the patient immerses themselves in water and stretches it up to their ankle IIII times by twisting, because otherwise the vein won't open; and if it does open, treat it in every way you can, and in passing through it; and it's better to perform this treatment while holding onto her, for her veins are naked and she responds well to manual handling.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find it, treat none of the veins that open or at the ankles, and direct yourself towards the small ones, and beware of nerves; and make sure the flow of blood is correct as you see, and then loosen the tie, and place cotton on top and tighten; she is now cured.
des sainies de ventouse	of cupping treatments
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Suction cups are made of horns, or spiders, or snakes; and suction therapy can be performed in two ways: by bleeding and drawing blood, or without causing bleeding.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping which can cause injury is done in two ways: either immediately with no heat, or with heat; and the cupping that is done by causing injury and bleeding takes place on the twelfth ribs of the body, from which one is completely located above the head; and another is within the neck; and two others are on both sides of the neck; and the cup is placed under the chin; and the cup is placed over each shoulder; and the cup is applied to pimple areas; and the cups are placed around both arms; and the cups are placed on both legs; and the cups are placed under the ankles; and cupping does not target blood, for there are small veins that are scattered throughout the body flesh, and because of this they do not weaken in any way as in a blood treatment; and it should not be administered in any illness resulting from over-fullness until all parts of the body have been emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if it's necessary due to illness to suction, or by habit, we should do this every hour at the beginning of the month, or towards its end, and throughout each period; for there are those who, when they have need to suction, feel heavy; and those who find fullness and redness in their face, and on their head, and neck, and dark eyes; and those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and the tongue has fled, and they vomit blood; and there are also those who think and see by nose bleeding and discolored things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we observe these signs, especially around the month mark, we instruct them to take blood suction after three hours on the third day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The suction of the nose helps in alleviating the pain of the head ... the eyes, and it should not be done after the evacuation of everything from the body; this suction is part of the treatment for cephalic disease, and it should not be used by those with cold constitutions, or those who have phlegm, because it causes a great amount of harm to them; so that one should not use it if they are having head ailments.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And the one who frequently sweats off with it, becomes forgetful, and for this reason it is necessary to place the suction cup a little further down due to the risk of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventilation in the chest is placed near the heart and basilica, and thus it is useful for constriction of the abdomen, and for incision on the channel of the lungs, and everywhere else, and repletion; and here you should gently do, because if it holds too tightly, it may cause obstruction or stomach upset and/or heart trouble.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventilation at the second rib of the chest relieves pains in the throat, eye infections and earaches, as well as strangulation, tooth pain along their roots. It is placed near the heart and basilica region; it's appropriate that you instruct the surgeon to hold his hand steady during treatment, not to touch the artery, and not to repeatedly allow blood to flow back.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The ventilation under the chin is related to mouth diseases and gum decay, as well as other similar illnesses that occur in the mouth; it is part of the healing processes of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventilation of the shoulders corresponds to diseases caused by heat and congestion.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The ventilation at the elbows is as effective as three veins of the arm because it drains blood from these large veins; instruct the surgeon not to cut too deeply, for the skin is bare of flesh and contains nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup placed on the buttocks is useful for bleeding disorders from the bottom, and for diseases nearby, it is necessary that the suction cup be large, and made of leather, for she needs to be treated well; and by chance, if it were thin, it would break; and I make large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction cups on the legs are applied openly, as they bleed throughout the body, and are useful for old pains in the kidneys, bladder, and uterus, and help to relieve swellings; and are at the places of the two shins, and the two ankles, and moreover, they weaken the body after long use, and cause fatigue in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of using the suction cup is as follows: you should place it empty first, and apply a steady suction, then quickly insert it, move it evenly, and keep doing this until you see the area turn red and swell, and observe the reddening due to blood; then remove it, and replace the suction cups again, take care of how each part is placed because there are those who have tough flesh and clear pores: one should pierce once only, and make wide wounds that are somewhat deep; and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the wound is large, it should be pricked twice: the first time to pierce through the thick blood vessel.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the wound is very deep, it should be pricked three times; and when we wish to draw out a little blood at a time, we should only prick once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we lack little blood, we often resume it. And if the patient is weak, one strengthens them sufficiently and ensures their ends so that they are pierced suddenly, it suits those with thick skin and hardness, who have endured many hardships, to smear their limbs with suction cups of opening and dissolving oil: if it's in a state of being, an oil of violet, or sweet almond oil, or oil from the seeds of cucumber; and if it's in yellow, an oil of cress, or lily, or chamomile, or other similar oils.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the superfluity is large and cold, take turpentine oil, or balm oil, or fennel oil, and similar substances.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if it is for someone who needs strengthening and has large pores, then it is not necessary to apply any oil but rather it suits to wash after suction with pink water, or cold water, or water from the rose, or water from cucumber, or water from porcelain, or other similar fluids.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And for those with some moisture, if it is relieved by rest, or water from a myrtle and sumac, and similar substances.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large excesses can be relieved by drinking old wine, or water from vinegar, or decoction of nettle or chamomile, or others like them; and they should not use suction cups for purification before the bath or during bathing, but one hour after the bath; and do not sleep afterwards, it is necessary that he be prepared for suction when he should be sucked and immediately after being sucked.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And guard the one who is being purified and is choleric, and if they are too hot and inflamed; it should be that they take cold things, such as apples, endives, lettuce, and similar items, and nibble on small fish, and meat from a castrated animal, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those with a cold constitution should take honey syrup and a moderately scented wine, which is between old and new, as well as nibbling small portions and eating small fish and young birds and poults; on the day they are to be suctioned, they must drink more than eat; it is appropriate to give some men neither triamcinolone nor muscat before or after suction therapy for comfort of the main limbs; and make them wear a loin cloth, but it should not happen that anyone who is hot drinks.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	Cauldrons that are used to cause harm are those placed on the liver, and on the kidneys, and in gout, and on the abdomen and the throat, and hips; because this part does not endure being harmed by heat, and it is done only for extracting blood from one part of the body to another. Just as we apply them on nipples when a child cries; for removing viscosity that exists within the limb; applying the suction cups on the abdomen and on the throat to diminish the size of limb; and removes pain whenever there's an obstruction or stone, and it accidentally removes the obstruction by its attractive power, or empties the stone from its place; and so does this when placed on liver and kidneys where there is retained viscosity; these suction cups are administered empty solely for sucking. They are never administered together with fire at all times, and sometimes filled with hot water, as in diseases of pleursin, and in such manner that we fill the suction cup with boiling water or hot water containing suitable herbs for this purpose.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the suction cup applied by fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And take two fingers of half a palm in length, and place them about the middle inch inside, just like to push a needle through, both in front and behind so as not to hurt the patient when placing on the limb; and have an inch wide rod across from spiders or iron, for holding a candle waxed, with it being both large and small according to the diseases and condition of those who use them; for children's suckers are different from adults', and they differ in thin people than in fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one should place this suction cup onto the limb like this: take the candle wax or the rod with a line, and insert it through the suction cup along the rod that's inside the suction cup, ensuring the light is at the bottom of the suction cup so as not to burn the patient; then put it on the limb, and hold your fingers above the part we've mentioned, so when you want to do it again, if there is vapor going out, remove the suction cup; and take the line similarly as before, and repeat often, if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the suction method therefore that is administered during childbirth distress, at all stages of fever, there should be neither a defect nor excess, and it should only be used when it is full of fluid, and placed solely on the body part; and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Without suction methods are used only for limbs where we cannot place suction devices due to their small size such as lips and gums, and similar parts; and for those who lack flesh in the armpits like elbows or knees, and other similar parts; and the quality of using it is that when you find slippery without any stickiness in mild water, take them; and put one in mild water until they become familiar and have nothing in their stomachs; and then cleanse with a vein and suction device, then rub the body part until it turns red, and place them on the suction parts; and when they are full and start to pull away, if there is a place where we can place a suction device, then do so, for this works very well afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If it's not so, then lift the limb from the aid, and then from water, quite well, and then apply oil. And if the skin has healed too much after a long time, soak it in cold water with linen cloth until it becomes moist; and if there are many wounds, put powdered vitriol or garlic on them, until they become moist; or you may place half peeled bean skins over the wound, leave them until they dry out on the limb, then it will stop bleeding now; and if you need more, get other blades.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the wounds do not heal quickly, then rub the limb with fresh blood, or you can stick a needle in until it draws blood, and place them there; soon after, as they smell the blood, they will start to dry; and when you see that they are expelling things, sprinkle some aloes and ground flour or ash over them, and they will heal now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These chapters are many times necessary in the art of medicine, and restoration of breaks and healing.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, child of the earth, that the people in this chapter are venturing into topics never found in ancient books or ever read from letters; and for this reason, the knowledge has been hidden in our land since I have never encountered anyone proficient. And as a result, I am ignorant of these matters, having studied them through the ancient books' science, which I practiced thoroughly enough to treat that science, also by experimenting and adapting to my way of life's routine; and in this chapter, I described what is contained here clearly and condensed it at the end, showing the forms of the instruments used so well as I did in the two chapters preceding these.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, it is necessary that we outline or introduce the contents of this book with its principles and chapters where the mind accepts understanding, staying true to reality. So that those who have experienced it may know and learn this noble art and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when any fracture or dislocation or twists or bruises occur in any limb, you must quickly cleanse the patient on both sides without causing harm if there's no obstacle such as weakness of limbs, children, old people; if the body is too thin, too cold, or too old; and avoid eating cold foods, such as chilled soups, eye and fennel; do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill up your stomach with meat that fills veins with blood until you have no doubt of pus formation in the limb or spreading of matter into the body; let the patient heal under their first governance which they had used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that you introduce meats into the diet that cause substantial bloating or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and radishes, and onions, and peas, and beef stomachs, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar items.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	And with this type of bloating, the healing occurs more quickly and the breakage improves.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that bones broken in old or weak people cannot be healed or joined according to their nature due to the drying of limbs, nor those that are too tender, like baby's bones; but with care, fix them back onto the broken bone, the thick tendons which expand and unite the limb together, until it holds as it was before; and don't cut off from his work entirely, for this requires fattening up with large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	Know that fractures can occur in various ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the heel or leg, and in this chapter, I will tell you all ways of fracture.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is cracking that goes to war, and another when sharpening, as with the size of a feather for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if at cracking with injury, and cracking throughout a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each way has its tool and its own proper instrument in the restoration, according to what memory comes into his mind; and he knows that bone breakage is perceived by when the limb is twisted, opens well outward, and gets squeezed under the hand; and when there is no twist or touchiness, and the patient doesn't feel much pain, if there's no breakage; but it can still have twists, cracks, or small breakages.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it is not suitable for you to move it by hand, but apply the following remedies, and then gradually tighten it now in a subtle manner.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that when the breaking occurred in action, and the two parts were separated, you must now place them equally, just like you would with incisions or wounds; and if the incisions are healing smoothly, then let no day pass until those incisions have healed; only then can you adjust them slightly and wisely. And know that their restoration is easier than those that had pieces; then restrain it, as described below this.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, and it is divided into two parts, whether they are hands or feet, or close to your hand as smaller limbs, or at two tendons, or one tendon and your hand; place the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the injured parts of the limb have healed, you reposition them through all means in their places with the movements you can, and remember that through your actions do not cause injury or pain to the patient; and adjust both ends of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right: if it is done beautifully, and do not strain too much, not pressing as those do when they extract pus and muscle tension in the limb, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limbs are in place, properly restrain the patient so they do not move them, neither while awake nor asleep, nor when turning or in any other manner; and ensure that the limb is secure enough to feel no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	And when he feels no pain, it is not quite in the right position. It should be placed in such a way that there is no pain felt and ensure it is put correctly so that there is no twist upon its restoration; and the quality of the broken member must agree with what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that limbs broken are varied in smallness and size, and in shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	And for small limbs, like arms and legs, and those similar: it should be wrapped in soft and fine linen; for larger ones, like breasts and thighs: they should be wrapped with a broad and firm band because the wide bands encompass the entire large limb and compress it evenly from all sides so there is no twist; then bind it with light ligatures, three or four according to the limb, and press your hand slightly along the entire band, then go above the fracture and compress less, allowing the fracture to move away a little; and soften the band gradually until you have reached a large part of the healthy part, then take another band and bind around the broken part. Then return to the area below the fracture and compress moderately, neither too hard nor too softly as we have explained above; then place linen or cloth bands between the ligature bands until they are all even, then secure everything with a belt on top, and then put your well-made pins in place if there is pus or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or pus, apply something soothing for pus extraction and which reduces the swelling, leaving it thus for a few days; then begin to extract your stars, being half the width of a slender reed cut evenly, or from the staff used to make lances, or from palm fronds, and do this according to this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it must be that the stars which one puts on for breaking are somewhat larger and wider than others; they should also be as long as needed according to the size of the limb, whether small or large. Then pull them on the stars just like you did in the first instance during the breakage, then tie a complementary thread above it, similarly to how you tied in the first instance around the breakage area; make them tighter now and less so later. And it must be that the threads are medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and they should be made of soft linen because if the thread is thick, as they do when making their thread for sewing with linen cords, and this is a great mistake, since the tie cannot be even if it is too delicate, and it does not fit that there is less than two dimes' width between each star.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the wounds are burned by the marks of the pins after the constriction in their health, then put patches of linen or shredded wool on them, so that they do not blister.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is burned and the joints are broken, I will tell you the treatment after this.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not right to restrain all broken limbs for the entire first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it is not advisable to apply these plasters immediately after three or seven days or longer depending on the severity of any subsequent abscesses occurring; and here is the way the ancient plastering methods were used to restore fractures, dislocations, and torsions: take flour that stays at the mill walls, mix it with plenty of egg and create a mixture not too thin nor too thick. Apply this concoction carefully, it is the common method for restoring fractures in various positions, even for women and young children, as neither the process is overly harsh nor excessively cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method for applying plaster to restore fractures and dislocations: take 30 raisins, dainy apples, rue, and asafetida, along with gum Arabic and mastic, each in an amount of .x.3; myrrh and aloes in amounts of .v.3; vinegar at seven parts out of eight. Make a powder from these ingredients and mix them with plenty of egg. If the consistency of the mixture is warm, use this plaster. It has a good composition, quickly restores broken bones, and is worth more than many remedies for men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method of plastering suitable for torsion: take mugwort and valerian root, in quantity of ten parts; myrrh and aloes, in quantity of nine parts; stonework (possibly meant to be acaica or some local herb), six parts; boric acid from Armenia, ten parts. Crush them well together, mix with water or plenty of egg whites, and apply it as required.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another method for dressing wounds and fractures, and alleviating the pain that arises, and they cut bone and cause abrasion: take new wool, and moisten it in a mixture of oil and heated fat, and place it on the wound area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Dressing wounds doesn't heal them completely, but it's better for soothing abscesses and properly handling bone pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method for plastering which restores broken bones: take dried fig leaves and terrestrial dogwood leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method for dressing, in the restoration of bone breakage and to soothe the process of pus drainage.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of vismarrow, chamomile, violet flowers, ground almonds, from each take one part; and grind them, mix with wine, if your limbs are heated, mix with wet coriander water, or water alone, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another method for more forceful plastering than the first one, when hard pus comes to restore the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of vismalve, and lin seed, balauste, melilot, and sansuce, and violet and chamomile flowers from all these take one part; grind and mix with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the warmth of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book, Ippocrates instructs that for restoring strength to a broken limb, one should apply a balm made of wax and oil, and nothing else more. He states it should be neither too soft nor too hard but in between the two.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems that Galen suggests applying something to the broken limb for restoration, things that are dry but slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar substances, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to plaster for injury and pain: take mussels and omelets' feathers or bird feathers, and basil, and lime of equal size, grind them, make a paste from it, and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then loosen it a little afterwards, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor move its bone in place; if you do not loosen it with your hands And when pain comes to the limb, or itchiness, without rest or swelling, if this happens, quickly, and loosen it, and replace the plaster now; then use a light cloth and wet sponge, dip them into water, and raise the limb until the itch stops, and soothe any pain; then let the member rest for an hour, then place on dried wool, moistened with water or rose oil, and secure it with a bandage, until you are sure of the pus coming out hot; and subdue the inflammation in the limb, and rid of the pain, then resume gentle reattachment, and a little plaster, but do not apply pressure as before; and with subtlety until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that pus is yellow and red, pain, swelling are present, indicating an abscess throughout, then you need plaster and binding, start again as you did the first time equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if there is nothing of what we have said affecting the member, or if it cannot be dislocated until after three or four or five or seven days; and each time leave it for twenty days according to this custom, as long as the injury heals, and brings the adaptation of flesh up; then increase the restraint more than before, and let its meat grow back, just as I said previously; and if you see that the skin dries too much, know that nothing can come out; start with hot water each time you dislocate it, and do this every third day, cleanse a bit of the wound; through this means then remove the injury from the member, speed up whatever local surgeons are doing, that revert the member in wrong position: this is bad practice, and such are ugly operations; I see nothing else than to let it heal straightly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	regarding various methods of breaking up
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many ways of fractures exist, and various shapes. Their causes are distinct; for there are fractures produced by the impact of a sword, and breaks in the neck completely crush the bone up to the symphysis that separates one bone from another, like when a boar tusk or spear hits it. This is why this method of fracture is called "haunching".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword penetrates through the bone from above without piercing it, and this is called a "complete" fracture; and the injuries caused by these two kinds of fractures are either large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is sequential impact, or crack, or break in the bone, or under a stone, or other similar occurrences.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a fracture up to the membrane that is under the bone or above it, and this wound can be large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there is a wound that heals within the bone as thin as hair, and has a small crack, this type of fracture is called "hairline". And if the wound is made by striking with stone or falling, or from some other object, and it causes part of the bone to enter the body cavity, like when candle makers work on candles; if one were to drop stones into the containers.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	This often happens in those who have wet bones beneath, such as the skull of children; it occurs through all these methods of fracture where small fragments are released like maggots; and I will speak more about this in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all methods of breaks through the removal above them, and the investigation on stakes, and by the putrid flesh which is upon.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of hair is known when one has uncovered the bone and rubbed inside it, revealing the dark break.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In treating a break, beware of adverse effects from the malady, and if you observe no harmful incident such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, extension, pallor, fever, and other symptoms appearing in various conditions, cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any alarming accidents, and you hope for salvation, then start the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when snow first comes to you, and it's in winter, then you should remove the bone before the fifteenth day since you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it's in summer, then hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day so that the pus under the bone may be rotten, and bring about the accidents we have mentioned.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if bone breaking reaches until the membrane covering the brain, then it is necessary that you cut through the broken part like this: and take hold of the bone's fracture edge, and uncover onto the bone in every way you can, and on the shape of the wound as much as you can, and if bleeding begins to reveal the bone, or pus appears, use what is needed there, and fill up the space with wet cloth in rose oil; then let the wound rest until the pus has subsided and bleeding has ceased; only then begin through the bone to remove, which is done according to two ways of work: one way is that you cut at a narrow angle forward, and this is its shape:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make another cut larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second way is that you have many different sizes of cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed, and made of hard iron; and in operation lightly, so as not to wound the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is thick and hard, it is necessary that you pierce inside, in such a way that you perform cuts with needles, not so deep that they penetrate beyond the thickness of the flesh, and there should be a margin above the point about 1 inch, ensuring the point does not pass beyond the bone; and you must have several, so that each goes to its place under the thickness of the bone, having needles for all parts; and this is the form of the three ways of using needles:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality to pierce through the bone is that you place one needle on the bone, and turn with your hands until you know the bone is pierced. Then replace the needle a little later elsewhere, and do so throughout, then scrape out the space of the bone between the roots of teeth as precisely as possible, and do this more finely than you can, gently, as we have said, as long as you are able to remove the bone with your hands or any instruments you have like forceps, pliers; and make sure not to touch the brain or the sinus.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and cut the bone, it is necessary that you remove any remaining preparation from the bone to all other instruments similar to a file. But it must be more robust and finer than the other file; and if there remains nothing of small bones or no scales, then gently scrape with one of these tools; afterwards treat the wound with dressings and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of treatment is as Galien said, which is safer; and it involves applying a strong lard, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	Firstly, you should uncover part of the bone, at or near where the break is made and moves, so when you have uncovered that part, place under the tip of this lens-shaped incision tool, as it's shown here.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side only, and make the incision go across in two parts so it faces the bone; then start cutting with a small mallet above, making sure you lightly touch the entire bone, being careful of the tissue surrounding it; if it sticks to the bone, gently remove it, because you will remove the bone without causing harm or fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not puncture until it touches the tissue and only the bone is cut from above, and there are small pieces left, then after that roughness, you should scrape off the scales with a fine shaver you must have various sizes, in order to apply the most suitable for each part according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you stand before great razors, and afterwards of finer tools, and do not stop doing this until it is done well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In every other haircutting and subtle breaking tasks, you should adjust the work according to its position; this is something that cannot be answered by someone who has devoted their study to this craft.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the wound is uncovered, it should be that you use a linen cloth according to the size of the wound, soak in oil and apply it onto the wound. Then take another doubled cloth with two or three layers, soak it in wine and oil, and place it over the first layer; do this more gently than possible without causing discomfort to the wound. Afterward, administer another bandage from above, not using too much force that it only touches the wound. Leave like this for one or two days until the abscesses are less inflamed, then remove the bandages and apply medications such as thyme roots, wheat flour, incense powder, and wormwood, among other things; make a powder from these and put it on the wound, and administer regular medicines without causing irritation. Take care to keep the wound clean, do not leave any ointment or allow it to coagulate; because when blood clots form on the brain tissue, they will spread and harm the patient; as soon as you apply something corrosive to the wound, it spreads from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take heed then, should any unfortunate events befall the patient as we have described, it is with doubt and without fear.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if illness does not come out only through the medicine we've placed there, should it have that effect, then you must take one part of honey and three parts of roset oil and a drapel of glue, then put this on his face; then you will treat him in ways suitable for treatment until he is well.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that the two parts above the nose are never broken, or only one is broken if you do so, because they consist of two bones; and this lower part is cartilaginous, it doesn't break, nor does it weaken from twisting or bending, then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, you must pinch your little finger or beneath your nose, and place that break evenly inside your index finger, and outwards at the nostril hole, until the nose revives according to its natural form; and do this gently, and be careful not for the patient to feel pain through your action.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is above the nose part and cannot reach to the place on the head, then it is necessary that you put it at an equal distance from the tip of a somewhat thick reed.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is of two parts, redo this procedure, and try to restore on the first day if possible; if not, after the seventh or eighth day when the abscess has been relieved, then pinch at the nose tip with linen cloth pieces, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	If you pull two from another side, if breaking occurs; and let the threads be so thick that they fill the little hollows of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say no one should moisten their wicks with butter, and change them each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I believe it might not be correct, but they should be moistened in the preparation of a mixture from an egg yolk and powder of mill; then leave the wick until the bone is hard and the cartilage toughened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes use goose feathers instead of threads, and if with one egg you cover the inside, and keep it warm, and blow into the wound, do whatever you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if the abscesses come to the nose in the same way as you handle them, put a wad of moistened wax or cotton in olive oil, or in a pot of snail juice.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if pus comes out, apply a poultice on the outside, made from ashes' powder and incense powder mixed with egg yolk, then place it on light sticks and don't bind them tightly; and if the stick breaks into small pieces, and they break into small pieces, you should use tools suitable for this purpose, then cut along the wound, and cure it with various remedies, joining them together, using bandages and ointments suitable for this; and if there's no wound under the sticks, cure the wick, and leave the treatment of wicks until they're healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the rupture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is fractured internally and there's no wound visible from the outside, and only the breakage is external, not shattered within. It doesn't crack into two halves but breaks internally, so it's easily recognized.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary; if the fracture occurs in the right part, you should press your index finger into the mouth near the jawbone. And if the fracture is in the left mandible, then use your right hand's index finger and press it gently into the inside of the injury, and do this with the other hand from the outside, making sure to do so evenly.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is complete and affects both sides (.i.e., left and right), it is necessary that you administer an equal extension on both parts until they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And when the movements of the teeth occur, or a rupture, hold them with a thread of gold, silver, or silk. Then place on the broken jaw pieces of beeswax, and put under one doubled piece of cloth; then on the cloth put a large candle properly made, or a piece of leather equal in size to the length and width of the jaw. Secure it in such manner that you can, command the patient to rest, and eat small pieces of light meat.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, then untie on the third day, and then adjust what has become undone; apply plaster, made with powder from a mill mixed generously with eggs or flour of almond meal, after removing the beeswax; then place under the plaster light wool, and if the plaster hardens, and the patient's position does not change, let it be for as long as they are healing. Many times heal in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if you encounter pus-filled sores, then follow what we have instructed many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is both fracture and wound together, reward nothing of the bone that has been removed; such delicacy requires tools suitable for this task.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and there remains nothing, if the wound is wide, place one dressing suitable for it over it, to promote healing, until it has healed.
de la forcele	by the power
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forces break many times ahead of the shoulder, and breaking occurs in three ways: it breaks and is dismembered into two parts, and there are pieces, which makes it lighter to restore; or there is breaking with an injury.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the procedures are such that when there is breaking with an injury, have two assistants so one strikes the shoulder where the force is broken; and the other extends their arm towards the affected part; then make the break equal with your hands, so that its form matches what it should be, and there is no appearance or movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, place a round sponge of cloth or wool under the shoulder to the skin; and make its size according to your need; then stretch and lift the force (which likely means muscle), and hold the sponge in your hand so that you can make the break equal as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head from the strength's force at the front, because it comes forward, it should be that the patient lies down on their backside, and places one shoulder pad in the middle under them, and pushes the shoulder downwards. Until the bone of the strength is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then strike the break with your fingers, and if you find small pieces, it should be that you split through them; and pull lightly on the fragments. And if the bone cannot join by any means, cut near one of the incisions you have made; but place this instrument against the strength's tool to hold the joint open:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	It seems like a spoon, and it is nowhere to be found, and can be as wide as it should be according to the size of the bone and strength of the work; and has two heads, just like you see, and one being broad, and the other narrow, just like the wound of a wound when you have treated the bones; and when you are sure of an abscess, if it is cut off from the wound, and if the wound opening is small, or you doubt about removing the abscess, if it is cut off from the wound, you should fill the wound with bandages and cloths according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if pus comes out, if moist is brought in, oil rose and salt and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The grinding of bone, when it is in wounds and size cutting, you apply the plaster powder and egg yolk on the bone, then place light splints over, and if needed put a peg under; afterwards take a very long bandage about one palm wide, then lay two layers of cloth over the splint, and the plaster. Then take an elastic thin band about three fingers in width and length, wrap it around that band so its top hangs down, and place this band on the wound, and fold the band up to the neck, under the clean part, and under the dirty area; then tighten each part of it, when you see the healing is growing over the wound, and clearly see that the elastic does not move above the broken bone, tighten it every day, until the ligaments are healed, and once they detach, tie them. Let it heal on its own side, and put a small pillow under the wound while he sleeps next to the clean area, to raise the shoulder; if you can alleviate the wound's pain by aligning the shoulder, or if you tie his arm around the neck, do not untie unless bad accidents come, up to twenty days. Then renew the plaster, if it needs it, and bind and leave that way until he is restored. And she/he will be fully restored in thirty days, and earlier for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of the breaking of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	A situation may arise where the shoulder breaks or is very wide, at its end or in its middle, and if it wasn't broken there by touch; then shape the break according to its figure, and reset it according to its natural form, in all possible ways. Then place on the inside of the shoulder a mixture made with mill-ground powder together with abundant eggs, gently wrapped, and place them over an inner covering. Then place upon a wide but subtle pillar that is slightly larger than the shoulder, so the pillar doesn't move anywhere on the shoulder; then fill that space between the pillar with strips of linen hair, making sure the pillar sits evenly. And then tighten it into a large band firmly, making sure the pillar does not move from its place, and check each day; and every time when it loosens up again, you should tighten it, and if the pillar is back in place as it was originally, the patient lies on their side; and the shoulder will be healed in twenty days or twenty-five. And once this number is completed, if it gets dislocated again, take care since it's not just bone that puts itself together lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a bone piece pushes forward and not within the socket, then it is a dislocation of the hip joint requiring the evacuation of blood clots as we have explained in the dislocation of the knee.
de la brisure dou pis	From the breaking of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The bones are broken once in the middle but this happens rarely. But they often break at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, if it decreases at the end, and makes the patient feel great pain, lack of energy, and so on, suddenly, and by chance vomits blood, and opens up the movements in the broken bone, and one feels this well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that the patient lies on their back, and you place them in a sitting position between your shoulders, then press their shoulders, and join their ribs with two pieces of cloth under their shoulders, and gently assemble them together in all possible ways until the shape of the bone matches as it should; then place plaster and strips over the subtle salt bed, or any other lightweight material, wrap it once in a cloth, and bind it to the broken bone so that it doesn't move; and turn the patient's back round and press it against their body, and tighten each hour for this bandage, and if it loosens, tighten it again; and when it suits you to relieve them of the splint due to corrosion or itching, or pain or abscess, do so quickly, and relieve them, remove the plaster cast, and treat the one who has come with remedies as needed; then replace the bandage, and press until it is set.
de la brisure des costes	Of the breaking of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the breaking of ribs comes only after the backbones are broken, and within them, and it happens only because they become brittle; and one feels this well in examination at the spine.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And for the healing, it's that you put an equal break, as is proper.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster, and keep it in place with one arm, if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the break in the ribs is occurring internally, one feels great pain and throbbing, like weeping, because the bone rubs against the tissue; there are also pains everywhere, sudden and immediate vomiting of large quantities of blood, and it's a distressing illness. The elderly had to endure a lot of suffering.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if someone says it is necessary to eat meats that puff up the belly, in order to expel wind from elsewhere.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not follow this advice, that we should apply antiseptic ointments instead of it, if it has not appeared.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has appeared, then heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And let no one say that we should put suction cups on the body to suck out pus, for it is as if they are reasonable; still, there's doubt whether the suction cup attracts excess fluids to the body due to weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that when one must cover the body with wet wool in oil heated, and you lay out strips between the ribs to make an equal line across, then use the treatment for inflammation, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels intense pain that cannot be borne through the hole where the skin was torn off, there is doubt with the patient whether it should cut above his/her broken part of the chest wall and whether one needs to place an instrument inside to keep the lungs in position; then one must cut into the bone, drain slightly, and then stitch up the two edges of the wound, if it's large, and cure it with plasters until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses come about, place them on oiled cloths and let it sit in oil rose, then put that under the wound; and cure while the wound corresponds to the needs of an abscess, and have the patient lie still on that side where it should be, until they are healed.
de la brisure dou col	Of the cracking of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	None of the time does bone breakage occur at the neck joints, and there is no bending when it happens; similarly with the spine at the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to any of them, and you want to know if they will recover or not, be on guard because if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and that they cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, if you do not feel anything.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is deadly in various conditions. If you cannot move them and they feel well when they are being held still and not moved, know that the bone joint has been saved, and that the wound has healed if we apply treatment to it.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if such a thing comes to the spine of the back, and you need to know whether it is sound or not, be cautious that his limbs are softened, and that the events that occur in his body happen under his hands, and on his back there's wind disturbance and defecation against will; and when it has been observed on his belly, it jumps with defecation against will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is examined on his back and wants to stand, he cannot do it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it's mortal: if there's no relief in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this misfortune does not come to him, then it is a lighter matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that you should apply it if there's pus present; place oil on the spine or on the yolk of an egg where pus is found, until it soothes. Then place one of the soothing plasters and let it dry; tie it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest. And do not sleep in that area where they feel pain, until they recover.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone were to break open, then you should cover it with a cloth; extract the bone, and then align the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with stitches, then treat with ointment that promotes healing until they heal. And if the bone chips off, which are called "chips from the knee", when your handbag in your left hand, place it level with the other hand at your power, then put on the plaster and elevate it; if you need to do so. Then compress, and if any broken bones were to come out, then treat them up and remove the bone, and treat the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the breaking of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it happens, there may be a slight numbness at the top; and it extends long, declines to the knee, and comes to the patient's pain in the thigh, and puncturing, and swells what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And for the restoration, you should extend your hand upwards as long as it is over the wound; and be aware of where the breakage occurred and its shape. If the breakage is only at the top, then apply an even pressure until it reaches its natural position.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the breakage is along the length or it declines inwardly, then guide the body upwards towards its abdomen, until you see that the restoration of this breakage has been achieved.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have placed it evenly, place it on the plaster. Then put a stick or wood base over it, and hold the burn wound still so it doesn't move. And apply the heat along the sides until the skin is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his back or on his side.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the abscesses swell and come out, do not touch them until the abscesses are relieved, and place them as we have mentioned earlier; and then proceed with treatment, restraining them appropriately without any bad incident happening. And this is how it's done.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	From the breaking of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder is that which is between the collarbone and the head of the shoulder blade; if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of these two ways: in one way, you take a rod half as thick as your finger, like this form:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two ends of two cords each on, and place them upwards, then hold the patient's broken arm above one spot; then pour their arm broken downwards onto the rod until it reaches the armpit, having bent half the length of the rod, then place on any weight-bearing object or have the attendant extend it below; then put the eyes of the breakage evenly under both hands together, until the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that you place the patient on their elbows and tie their hand to their neck, then command two attendants that one cuts at the breakage where it touches their hands, and the other cuts halfway from each shoulder strap, and stretch each to their respective side.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is deeper, hold the bandage near the wound, and near the wound, and extend each of the ministers to their share.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is close to the head of the shoulder, it's necessary to place the bandage halfway up towards the shoulder, and the other one towards the blade, near the wound; and similarly if the wound is in front of the blade, then it's appropriate to apply the bandage lightly, without effort, until the wound is equal on the left and on the blade; then evenly make the incision, as it should be, and tighten, if pus does not come out.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if pus comes out, do not hold it tightly for more than seven days, and place moist wool and oil on top until the pus comes out; then release the pressure, and apply the way of holding it tight like you put plaster over the incision. Then attach your arm to the shoulder rest, and put your hand under the shoulder or breast; and place the cover, hold it tightly on the rest and the arm, so that the arm is straight as needed, without anything preventing it, or if the bone is not dislocated.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone doesn't move, then use elbows and place a larger and stronger brace over the incision than the others, ensuring there is one inch of space between each brace. Each brace should be large enough to pass the incision by three inches from each side; then hold tight on the braces as I said at the beginning of this chapter about the incision, with more strength but less in spacing out.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the bed of the ulcers, and the constriction, as we have said, in your effort to restore the broken limb, and if there is doubt about the abscess cutting, should you leave it bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then check each three days on the link, ensuring no itching spreads or begins near the wound site, or that tumors cannot reach the limb due to it being too constricted.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If there's the artery, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such incidents occur, or if the dislocation only happens three days later or more, let the wounds lie on their backs, and have their hands on their stomachs; and place under the shoulder one layer of cloth evenly filled with equal fiber, and observe every hour during the day or night, whether the figure of the broken limb moves or becomes soft; if the artery is affected by the power of medicine, and gives flesh that we placed before him in this manner, so that the meat becomes at first fine. And when it begins to heal, if it's large.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg must be put back in place within forty days from the beginning; then one should release them, take baths, and administer ointment medications to bring relief to the affected area.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the constriction is ugly and bound up, it should be allowed to unbind for one or two months.
de la brisure du bras	from the breaking of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is made up of two bones, which are called the "foscile" duo. One bone is small and serves the pocket; while the other is large, being this one underneath, towards the small two. By chance, only the large foscile breaks, or the small one, by chance they come together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small fractures are broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the large ones are broken, the healing is bad, and more painful than when they were broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it's only the small fracture that is broken, then gently extend it slightly, and make it even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it's the large bone that is broken, then you need to pull harder; and extend it upwards on one cushion, and lift the hand pouch higher than the others, and place the small muscles lower than the other bones, and have the muscles cross over themselves, with the cushion in front of him higher so they do not suffer any strain; then extend your ministers (or assistants) some of them towards his part under his arm or elbow, and another minister to the other above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then place the eyes evenly, according to their best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the breaking apart into pieces, you place each one in its own spot; and should there be none that gets caught with a bone, and you cannot return it to its spot, then proceed by making contact with the bone, as we have explained previously.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if in the process of healing from an injury, I spoke about it specifically in chapter singular; then take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if during the beginning of the reattachment there come pus streams, then make a dressing with a cloth saturated in roset oil and white beeswax, ensuring it is neither too hard nor too soft; and secure the dressing delicately above until the pus streams are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then place the wax, and apply the plaster made from ground powder mixed with enough egg to form a paste. When setting the bones, make sure that the splint is positioned so that the injury affects one bone more than others; ideally, it should be slightly above the injury area compared to other parts of the body, just as I have explained at the beginning of this chapter. Also ensure that all dressings covering the injured area are soft and moist, not too hard or abrasive. The threads used for securing them can be made from linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have mentioned before.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And heal the member and the joint after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad incidents come to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, it is necessary for you to immerse the member in hot water until that itch subsides; and leave the member not allowed to be disturbed, resting.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then resume the squeezing, and if the joints have been dissolved and the bones are exposed, and similar things, then apply them.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if care is taken that no hardening should happen to the limb, because it is too confined, then it should be required that you soften it by rubbing, and leave thus for a few days, until the hardness disappears, and then tighten.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said come to the patient, or up until the twentieth day with no discharging.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Otherwise, or during this period, then place their hands on the neck, and make sure both sides of the neck are equal, and be mindful to avoid movement and disturbance, and sleep on their back; know that this restoration of strength takes thirty days or forty, and by chance in twenty days, depending on the compositions and qualities of the patient.
de la brisure de la main	from the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and in our thumbs we have slight injuries, and nothing more than bending occurs many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the sole of the hand is broken or bent, it's necessary for the patient to hold their fingers straight and in front of them equally; then place their hand on an extended surface, extend the broken bones, and position them evenly with their fingers until they are properly aligned; and then apply bandages and splints if there are no abscesses. If abscesses do appear, he should then place a splint according to the size of his hand; and wrap it in one layer of linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the breakage is near the base of the fingers at the edge of the sole, make a cone-shaped pad and instruct the patient to place it on their broken finger tip; then stretch this with a long piece of cloth. And the splint should be made to fit the thickness of the hand as well as its size, stretching it in such a way that it is appropriate.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is at the front side, it should be that you place one splint above and another below on the foot part, so that hands are open and straight, then tightly bind them altogether around the hand and seal off the connection between fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the break occurs in neither of our feet, it is if it's on the knee, put them equal and as should be; tighten with the heel, and if you see that putting a small straight splint can lift the break, and don't let it move. And if the break is at another foot, such as in the index or one of the others, put them equal and bind with the healthy one which follows; or bind all together when your hands allow, taking care to set each wound properly and tend to who comes next as I've said.
de la cuixe brisie	If the thigh is broken
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the shin is often broken, and one sees this when it turns both forward and backward; and for restoration, this means fixing over the break with thread, and another underneath.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the muscles lie under this skin, then stretch each ministerial muscle to its equal part; and this is when the break is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is close to the root of the nail, then one of the threads towards the edge of the nail, and the other threads above the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is close to the knee joint, and then have the ligaments on either side of the knee, and the back extension; then place the pins level with her two hands, until it conforms to its natural figure, and then apply plaster, and bind it, so that abscesses do not come.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess nearby, let it heal and then return to your work and treatment; the healing has been done in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap around the wound three or four times with a stiff bandage, leaving the excess hanging, then turn the leg so that the heels reach to the root of the ankle, and keep the thread long between the foot and leg, under the knee downwards, and hold the end of the thread up; then turn on the leg and around the foot with the bandage, then place a pin above the wound, and put a pin above the bone in the leg; then fill with eight strips of cloth under the leg and thigh for even pressure, then begin to bind around the wound forming three or four twists; and when you go higher than the wound, and bind less tightly. Then hold two ends of the thread that you had placed between the leg and foot, and tie three pins above it, then return down to the end of the thread where the knot was held, until you see below the ankle; and tighten if it does not move from its place, then leave him like this, so long as no abscess or inflammation comes back.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if this happens, and it is dislocated, address what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that catch, one must remove them, if possible; and if one cannot, then it is necessary to cut the skin, and squeeze out force; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And at any time the thigh bone is broken in such a way that one puts asterisks there, as in the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, no harm befalls the patient with such treatment.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the digestion is restored within one day, or somewhat less, or somewhat more, according to the variations of the constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	From the alleyway by the garden
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that near the joint of the knee there is some cracking noise, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, except in a few cases where there's just a crack, or the bone is broken and leads to every wound, and feels like pain, and one can feel this quite well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that you should make it flat where it was rounded until it comes together and moves as can be done. Then put on plaster, and if necessary add a round support, and tighten it according to what's needed, then reassess all the preparations we've discussed for other breakages, like removing an abscess or similar; apply whatever is appropriate for each situation until it heals properly.
de la brisure de la jambe	Of the breaking of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called "right" or "mustelz", and the other is called "foscile". And it suffers from all sorts of breaks just like in the arm, and its treatment is similar to that of the arm. The operations involved are the same. And if both of these bones break together, then the leg turns in every direction.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bones (perhaps referring to smaller or thinner bones) are broken, then turn it in front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone breaks, one feels intense pain and sees it clearly; and it twists around.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Therefore apply extension, making it even, and align the stars evenly as well; but still, if the break is uneven or there are many fragments, then extension should be gentle and more delicate. And perform this according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two wooden splints that fit the leg from side to side and at both ends of it, and they should be as long as the leg from the knee down. Then wrap them with bandages on top and bottom, bind them in the middle too, and ensure that the leg can't move neither to the right nor to the left when done; this way it's well. And two fust fibers of a suitable length for the leg should be applied, they are of wood, and place the leg so as not to allow any movement. This is done properly where there was injury or an infection; and move the leg each day to check if there's pus or other complications; treat it until it's clean.
de la brisure des os dou piet	from bone fracture near the knee
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no breakage, but in the bones of the foot, some breaks occur and there isn't any force that justifies them in multiple positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there occurs a breakage in the foot bones, and you see these bones pressing one over another, place the foot's bones on the ground like they want to go somewhere. Then put your foot where the bones are lifted, just like that. Press it down strongly until their pulses revive; then apply plaster and bandages on top of it. Place a small table under his belly with two bowls full of water, then tighten him to the foot's insertion point. Wrap him in blankets all around, and do other things you need to do.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, if the tie is released, because you will find that the bones are even, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the ribs are broken, set them back to their place, as we have mentioned for the hands' bones; then put under each broken rib an elixir according to its length, and make it slightly wider. Then place under that piece of wood the board I've told you about, and hold in place with this device; if there are two or three or more broken ribs, break them, then place on each one an elixir according to their quantity, wrapped in a single linen cloth, and secure the board underneath your fingers. And being placed at the top of the board above the belly under your fingers, make sure it is held well in position.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have mentioned about other injuries, just as we have discussed; and assist each case according to how it requires.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	Regarding the fracture of the hand bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bones of her nature are broken in a woman, let her stay enlarged for some time. Then incline her towards the part under her back and support her from behind. Fill the cavity that nature made with moss, spreading it as thickly as possible throughout. Then lift the woman up slowly and support her back bit by bit until you can make the moss jump to where nature intended it to be, and pull the bones together again as she does so. And whenever she wishes to urinate, remove the moss, and when she has done so, let her return to normal, doing this for seven days or a little more. Once healing is complete, use a goat's bladder, tie a reed at its corner and fill the entire bladder with water up to nature. Then blow through the reed forcefully until the bladder is inflated inside. Nature will heal the breakage then fill it back again with moss, let it rest for some days more until it heals completely.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the hand is broken, or from the woman, if it is restored in this way as we have said about the hip bone; and these nearby fractures should not be neglected by those who devote their study and usage to it, and listen to my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For breaking means in multiple configurations the right path of restoration: thus, understand it then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the case of a broken penis, take a goose's throat and fill it with the penis; then wrap it tightly around, and let it be for three days or more, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	Of breaking with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it's large, such as in the thigh bone or shoulder blade or similar places, that they be treated now, so that the treatments we have mentioned prove themselves.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healing, you can apply vitriol to it, and if there's no other option, then continue to try restoring the broken bone in that same hour or day, or on that day, should abscesses not form.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if abscesses do form, let the treatment continue for another day, until the abscess is relieved, and don't disturb it on the third or fourth day either, as you would be causing harm with that.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if you see the bone has broken out from under its skin, it is necessary that you place it gently in your hands, with a slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the limbs don't allow you to place them evenly in your hands, then use this iron tool with it, which is made of iron and has a length of seven or six inches, and its width should match the size of the wound; for each fracture treatment, the surgeon must have three or four of these tools according to his need; they should be round and slightly thick, so that they don't bend under compression on your limb when you work, and they should be sharp in front, and rounded in the middle towards the front.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And is called 'palanché', because it is necessary that the bent shoulders be placed on the tip of the visible bone; and hold it in place once, until it heals, and be equal to each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle, and the tools cannot well grasp the bone, it is necessary that you hold the tip of the bone, as long as the tools have power.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you can't return the bone back, as we have said, if you have an instrument suitable for this purpose, or a scalpel or surgeon's knife, in your power; then cut into the bone that is stuck within it with roughness and small shavings.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is returned, and after the patient feels intense pain, know that it has not been placed in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you aim to place it back in its natural position, then smear the wound with a black and thick wine. If done properly when it's in such state; and do not apply any ointment or other thing that might cause oiliness, which could lead to infection and corruption on the wound; instead, ensure no such thing results from this action. After setting the bone back into place, administer herbs as you see fit after restoring the bone, keep the wound open, cover it completely according to the size of the wound, and take care that the wound is not tightened up by the pressure from the covering; many have done this mistake in the past and led to death or corrosion on the patient's body. Ensure that the tightness of the bandage is softer than other injuries.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that harmful accidents might have taken place, as we said earlier, and should find pain in your arm, then it would not be suitable to apply ointments; but cover internally, instead of applying ointments, wrap with hard cloths, and fasten them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the wound is healing, remove what you have applied with all the wine, and then put on a healing ointment for wounds, such as the fourfold medicine and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary for you to dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and at vespers, until it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary for the limb to be bandaged in such a way that the joint slides easily.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if the days pass and it cannot heal anymore right away, know that there are small pieces of bone causing this, so it is necessary for you to treat the wound with a tent, and remove all these pieces causing discomfort, which bring about pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the arm or any other way of decay, it is necessary that you treat it according to what he said in his previous chapter.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and exposed in the limb, like the bone of the elbow or shoulder, or others similar to large bones, you should not treat it immediately because many die from it, but let it heal by itself until it becomes putrid. By chance, it might drain on its own after about 20 days or 30, then treat the wound if possible; and if you cannot, leave it as it is.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	The blows that come from sweat
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	The blows come many times after the healing of the wound, especially when it's near the joint. And there is much to see in the shape of the limb; and by chance cannot perform its natural actions on the limb.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care therefore when it comes to such things: if you give him/her stiffening medicines such as aloes, frankincense, and myrrh, sarsaparilla, senna, and similar others, do so according to which of these you choose or all together, mixing them with stinking wine or enough eggs or milk; then apply them on the knot in poultices, press well and don't remove it with your hands day by day; then reset it, and start again another one until the knots are removed. Or apply pressure onto a piece of wood well made; because the properties of wood is such that it removes all swellings from the limbs; and if the knot has hardened into hardness like stone and needs to be removed, cover it with a bandage, showing the excessness clearly visible; or take it off to any barber until it's removed, then continue the treatment until healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	Of the limb that is weak after the siege
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the breaking of the bone is restored, and after that the limbs are weak and delicate, it happens for many reasons: because one was tied too tightly and wasn't tied as it should have been; or because there were too many bandages, and they couldn't breathe properly on the limb; or due to excessive swelling; or due to too large movements not in their time; or because he lacks blood in his body, being weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the treatment is that you make the patient eat the herbs, and make their body soft until the swelling multiplies within them; then give them baths, and bring them joy and rest. Afterward, apply grease to the limb so that the grease attracts to the major swelling, and wash it often with lukewarm water until the swelling aligns with the limb; and restore its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	If a limb is bent after an injury.
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limbs are twisted after being put back in place, and if the bones have been broken apart, and though the shape of the limb is distorted, it does not lose its natural function: do not believe those who say that one must break the entire limb anew; many such actions are done in our land. These practices are criticized and result in severe harms and even death; however, when the swelling and pain are still fresh, they should be treated with hot water or with herbs that soften tissue, like mint leaves, roots, and thyme, etc.; and one should apply a moistening plaster, such as well-made duck fat, and take the essence of mint and mix it with lard or oil from sesame, then make a plaster. Alternatively, take greased figs and grind them with cornmeal and similar medicines that reduce inflammation.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And never is the node removed by rubbing continuously and for a long time with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	Let there be gentle movement of the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the twisting is hardened and durable, like bone, and requires being treated with metal, so that it reaches up to the bone, one should do this gently at the precise point of incision. And include consideration and study in the treatment process.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book on dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, because it cannot move there anymore, and the limb is incorrectly positioned, causing great pain and injury to the body.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation happens without any reason, if it fits now to bring back without disturbing anything.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if you delay, it will swell the limbs, and by chance put pressure on the joints; in this way there should not move the limb when it is swollen: many times bring pus and other pains. Nevertheless, whenever this happens, have a surgeon treat the patient, then leave him alone until all the abscesses subside; then immerse the member in hot water and oil, then gently manipulate it, and cure each member as they come into their own place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have organized the chapters on shoulder dislocations up to this point.
des mandibules	of the jaws
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes the jaws are dislocated downwards, and the dislocations of both occur in two ways: either they are somewhat connected to their places and slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the chin, and causing saliva from the mouth not to be contained, nor able to close his mouth, and wrapping his tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When a dislocation is small, it can return through various arrangements.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And when it is complete and accomplished, it should be treated promptly without hesitation; and in such a way that the servants cut the head of the patient near the disease site, and hold the pins in his pocket in the root of the dislocation inside the mouth, if the dislocation is in two parts; and the other hand should be outside the hands for adjustment; command the patient to soften, his jaws, and move them around.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the fingers are kept equally placed until it regains its position in place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if returning it causes pain, similarly when these two jaws are together, using hot water and oil, as long as gently resetting them; do not overly force the reset, just as we said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought back equally, and the mouth of the sick man is well closed after being mollified, you should put on wet cloths as poultices made from rose oil and wax, then bind them lightly with moist threads; and make the sick person lie down facing their back, and have their limbs situated between two cushions so they don't move neither to the right nor to the left, nor even attempt to chew, but should only consume light food until the pains are relieved and the jaws are stitched; and then feed them what they desire lightly, without trying to open their mouth during eating or drinking, until the jaw is well healed and restored.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be properly set in one hour and are not returned to their original position, they lead to fevers and chronic discomfort, and by chance stomach release, and by chance vomiting of pure contents.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a loss; and many times death befalls the one to whom it happens, within eight days.
de la forcelle	from the lever principle
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The strength cannot relieve from within the continuation of it and from its back, and is dislocated only once outside, and one feels this well indeed.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the healing process is as follows: The sick person lies on their back and extends their arms. Then they are positioned in a shape resembling your hand, which will eventually return to its place. After this, place them on plaster and bind them up, then firmly press them together; and if they dislocate again from their front side, you must reset them into their original position as we've explained previously. After that, place them back onto the plaster and wrap them up, pressing tightly, while instructing the patient to rest until they are completely healed; by this method the shoulder joints of the back are also brought back when they have been reset from their location.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Know that the shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: one way is when it dislocates towards the back of the socket; and the second is at the bottom part of the joint; and occasionally dislocating above the socket, this happens rarely; and does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor inward for the nerves; and several times dislocates downwards towards the socket, even in those with little flesh, because they jump quickly; for those who have enough flesh, it jumps on points, and returns into the points.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes happens to some men due to percussion or cracking, and the shoulder swells with an inflamed abscess, and they think that it is dislocated from this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Thus, you must verify it as long as you are certain about it; then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known that when the shoulder is dislocated downwards towards the socket, there's an obvious difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one; you'll find various distinctions in them. You will see a depression at the top of the shoulder and from the socket to the neck of the shoulder as if it were another one; also, the patient cannot bring their hand back to their nose nor move by any means; similarly, if it is dislocated upwards, it isn't concealed either since you find it clearly at the neck; this way of dislocation can only be cured when it's new, or when there was a lack of care for the patient.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is: the surgeon raises his hand above the illness, then places his fingers on the elbow and lifts the joint to full height at the top of the body; and the surgeon raises his hand and extends it upwards, then puts it under; if it comes too quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it doesn't come about as we said earlier within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and have them stretch out, soothing and relieving any pain, such as decoction from garlic and fenugreek and marjoram in hot water, and they should take this treatment. Then place bandages on their back, and underneath one's buttocks put a cushion of even size, neither too soft nor too hard; then place the heel of one's hand under the cushion, and lift the head from the shoulder gently, and pull the hand away from the patient; and other assistants should sharpen the tip of the hand of the patient so it doesn't move backwards; this shoulder has now returned to its normal position, and if you see that you are pulling it back in this manner: then let there be someone who is larger than the patient present at home; stand straight towards their side, and place your shoulder underneath the cushion of the patient, lift the cushion upwards so the patient hangs in an 'A'; and other assistants should pull the hand away from the patient's back towards the stomach.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, so it can carry no weight, then the dislocation returns immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And the method of resetting is also done in other ways: one sticks the long stick into the ground so that the shoulder sits like a nail, and it should neither be too big nor too slippery; then place this under the patient but with leaves above, and make sure the leaves cover fully along the length of the stick; and have the part of the stick with the handle on top. Then extend your hand from below on the other side in this formation, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it doesn't return due to all these things as we've said, perform this treatment: take a piece of wood that is two arms long by three inches wide, which has the handle large enough for it to fit into the socket fully from above according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then tie it on the top of the stick with a sheet underneath, so that the stick does not irritate the wound; then place it onto the socket towards the wound; and extend your arm up to the stick from its tip, and fix the shoulder support onto the stick, and the arm at the base of the hand, then put the arm down on one pole as long as half a span wide, and let the other hand hang down now; the joint will return in this position.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is so, no matter how, should you need to place upon the joint a thread that's even, then apply plastered with powdered mill grain, along with incense and yolk of egg, across all the shoulder and around it, then remove from the joint addition, and tie back on the plaster, and wrap the hand in its neck. And let your hands stay like this.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it should be that he eats a little, until the limbs are strengthened, for it will heal more quickly; and then eat more after five days or seven, and move them; and if it is firm and not softened, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has moved due to moisture or some other reason that caused it to move, then you should apply three cauterizations to it, as was explained in our previous chapter about cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint doesn't stay in place, and can't lift your arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is damaged or extended or weakened; and know that the joint would never be properly fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Dislocations that are near the buttocks and breasts, or behind, if caused by pushing and stretching of hands, are administered in other places; treatment should be applied as long as it remains clean.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing there comes stiffness in the limb, and late movements, then apply hot baths many times, until that stiffness is relieved, and returns to its first nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	Of the shoulder joint's dislocation
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated at points and returns to these points; and if it has been dislocated from all directions, equally in front and behind, then dislocation cannot be fully restored, for you can see this clearly and feel it well; and it is dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the metal of the cut with the healthy part, if you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	Because the joint is swollen, and you cannot bend or touch the arm to either side.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And it is necessary to reset it in this way that the abscesses are close to heal, because if they were healed too quickly, it would be a problem to bring them back; and sometimes cannot be brought back completely, even when it's behind; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes more pain, and in consequence death may come.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is like this when one can return it to its normal state: you extend your patient's hand with both of yours; and his arms are spread outwards and downwards, and his hands are placed in front according to the length of the forearm, forwards, backwards, and sideways, then you push the joint towards his wrist area or at the base of his palm until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, then it returns when he holds both his hands together, and pushes with the base of his palm against the knife that is stuck out.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it doesn't return to its original position, apply strong extension; and when you do this, extend the arm with both hands, and keep the other hand on it, so that it does not move during extension. Then, bend the arm in all directions, once you've wrapped a doubled piece of long and wide cloth around it; and when you attempt to join the joint back together using your hand, apply oil for softening purposes before this is done. After properly joining them, make sure they remain joined until they reattach naturally; once they are in place, cover with dry plaster mixed with egg whites, shape it appropriately, and allow the arm to hang by its side near the wound. Leave it like this for a few days before removing the bandage.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in its place, remove the bandage and let it be; and if you see that the joint isn't set well, redo the plaster and the bandage, and leave it like that for some days, until it's firmly set; then release.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if it feels chilled after the repositioning of the joint, and it moves again, bathe and scrub it well, press until it is relieved. Or you place a layer of fatty sheep's wool on the joint for one day and a night, then remove the flesh, and let them take a bath; when it sweats, gently rub the joint, then put back the wool, and then enter the bath; and so do this two or three times until it feels well; and if you see fit, place a damp cow's skin heated with butter on it, then apply pressure; if it returns to its position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The hand's dislocated joint decreases gradually, more than other joints. When it happens, one should immediately bring it back to its original position during the dislocation itself, so that the limbs swell up or an abscess occurs.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And for the relocation process, you place your hand on a board, extend his/her minister's hand and look at it to align it evenly. So that he/she puts his/her palm in line with the appearance of the joint, press until she is fully recovered. It should be noted that you must check if it is well placed; therefore, place his/her hand on the board when it is extended and relocated.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then have the patient place their hand's back onto the table, and you look put their hand on that point of the joint appearance.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	And if it returns now, that's good; but if not, let the dressing for easing abscesses be done, and leave him without starting again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he can't bear it, and you can't have him in place after some days, then the joint remains twisted; and it does no harm to the patient as long as their hands are swollen, and they cannot strain anything fully: thus you'll know that a nerve has been cut, or an artery; there is no other reason than applying heat with a cautery if necessary, and by chance there's nothing else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when your hands are ready, if you place on the plaster that we have mentioned, then strain it and leave it for five days, then release it and leave it like that.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you can't move it well, and there's no fracture, then apply warm water, and rub it until it is clean.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	From the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	No time is it when the shoulder is freed from each side, no time at the back of the palm or belly; then set the shoulder straight and hold off dislocation in your pouches until recovery occurs. Then support its head on the shoulder, and lead it towards the part that was injured; and leave it for two days, and then place it evenly that day; and tie up so as we have said, and release dislocation that day, and make it move, and re-tie it after nut. And do this repeatedly until it is tight, just like you did previously, when it is freed from the belly of the hand, and do it as you've done before until it's sound; and in like manner when it is freed from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	With ankle dislocation or back.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the ankle, back or neck is dislocated, or if there are multiple dislocations, without any treatment, for the pain overwhelms the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs for this are that the discharges spring up with no will, and cannot be held back, and many times they soften any limb, or both of your thighs, or both of my arms, or indeed many times it becomes limp on three sides; the one that becomes limp at the back is called 'gilbositez': the cure for this is that you reward if gilbositez came from childhood: there should be no treatment or healing throughout.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from falling or impacts or similar things, the old methods of treatment spoke in grand words, but without any great benefit to all. However, I have shortened it according to my intention and formed various tools.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the case of a belly wound coming forward towards the groin, nothing heals; and similarly when it comes directly to either side, one cannot cure anything but what is precisely where it goes behind, as I say; and let the patient's wounds be stretched out over his/her body equally on the backside, making sure they do not bruise. Then stick a piece of charcoal into the main wound in wet earth formed, and another one in the side, tie two bands under each side of the mire near the wound, then tie another band around the hips, knees, and ankles; and let the two attendants hold onto these bands, one at the head end and others at the sides, between the charcoal pieces; they must be properly closed, like we have said about the charcoal. And the patient's hands should press on the back part of the body until she recovers.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if this remedy does not work, take an arm table of three lengths long, and place it on the body, and let the patient lie on their side, with the sick person on the side. Place the head under the edge of the table, then put the middle of the table under the spine; and position the eyes at the other end of the table, pressing well until they return to their place; and if you see it, perform this action for the turning wrist which turns towards the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And if you stick two spits to the head of an arm bone of great length, and in front of the feet also two more, with each spit there is about an arm's length space between them; and within each spit is a piece or the turning joint, close and into the ground, so they don't move; and between each pair of spits insert one turning stick, whose ends turn towards the joints; and in each pair of turning sticks place two smaller ones with an arm's length apart for turning the wrist; and then tie the knot among the assistants at the wrist towards the head, and the other knot to the feet at the other wrist, and each servant turns their wrist throughout the knot, and the masters make the spine level as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, if you place desiccating plaster with an abundance of egg white, then coat it, and then apply the lard from a tableted three inches long, that purges the fatness and the healthy part of the spinous process, then bind it with a bandage as we have said, and allow the patient to move subtly, until they are healthy; and if any sign appears at the end of health, it should be administered softening medicines and soothing ones, alongside the treatment that we mentioned earlier; and whenever one is given a piece of pork fat, and at no time does the appearance of the lower vertebra appear in the back, take care that it's dislocation; and this bone opens, so there should not be any presumption: it may lead to death by chance.
des dislocations de la hainche	Dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and shoulder only suffer dislocations, unlike other joints; and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and more inside, somewhat dislocated in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the understanding of his dislocation internally is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and opens more the diseased knee than the healthy one, and the diseased person cannot double their knee joint in the fire; and those limbs are swollen due to abscess beneath them because the thigh bone comes to them.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of one who approaches death, if it is that this event is contrary to these before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of one who approaches before [death], if it is that his leg is well according to completion; nevertheless, he does not even double the knee without pain, and if you want to make him walk, he cannot do so beforehand, and he retains his urine, and swells up the ankle, and when he walks, he goes on tiptoe.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of one who approaches behind [death], if it is that he cannot spread his knee, nor double it, and this leg is more bent than the other, and the ankle becomes soft, and the shoulder of the hip moves under the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The remedy for this appearance of dislocation is that you should confirm whether the dislocation is old and stays in its position, if there is no treatment; and it does not benefit to assume anything.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for those in which the dislocation is recent, there are four ways of dislocation, if you hurry to correct it and stretch inside and outside, and move to the right and left; should it return successfully, requiring no other treatment afterwards.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, then you should apply strong force and hold the leg firmly with both hands or tie them onto the knee; and another assistant extends their hand on top in such a way that they pinch their fingers between their knees, then pulls back suddenly with the ligament attached to the thigh; and another holds the head of the ligament; and stretches both upwards and downwards at once, until the diseased person is lifted off the ground all at once, and stays hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This way of stretching is common for four similar situations, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is correct.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not this way, you should apply treatment according to its appearance When dislocations occur in the chest cavity, it is necessary that you align the patient's healthy side and then place the tie on the root of the foot, and the part above the armpit. Then position the tie towards the armpit, then towards the ribcage; afterwards guide another assistant with your arms and embrace the larger part of the foot affected by the ailment, and extend it forward in a square shape: if this returns to its place now; this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot secure it in this way as we have said, then bind the two feet of the affected person together with a strong bandage around both heels and both knees; make sure that the affected leg is stretched out more than the other by about two arms' length. Then hang them up from the head with a pole, and place your arms at the end of the pole above the ground; command an assistant to embrace the foot of the affected area, while another assistant hangs on with the person, embracing the foot as it is necessary for the joint to return quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocations are at the backside, if the patient lies down, as we have said in those with hypermobility, and constrains one line to the diseased leg properly, and to the stomach as well; then apply two needles, one on the head and another at points, then insert the needle between the buttocks at the diseased area in the shape; and place moist cloth around it so that the patient does not blister, then extend each minister towards himself, and place the dislocation under his hand equally.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If she comes back, that's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place on a board, and press it down as we have explained in hypermobility, and the patient lies on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it's necessary to extend the affected leg quickly, and according to what I have said; and make the patient feel their pain on the side of the affected shoulder, then press with the other hand, and pull forward towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is at the back, it does not work to extend the diseased leg backwards or lift it off the ground. Instead, the patient should lie in such a way that they are like when their hip was dislocated at the back as we have described about lying on both hips; and he lies on his chest, and the line is extended as we previously mentioned, and one must press to the joint on the table; it's done right when the leg extends and they are equal; then adjust the buttocks, place the plaster, and apply pressure with a bandage, so that the hip does not move. And he should rest for three or four days, then release him, and put plaster again; and if you see that they are equal, reapply the pressure as before, and let him rest for three more days; then release him, and make him walk properly until his limb is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	From the dislocation of the shoulder joint
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The shoulder joint can be dislocated in three ways: this means, inside and outside, and behind; and it does not dislocate in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the symptoms are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at their knee, and if they cannot reach their knee, know that it is dislocated; and all treatments consist of having the patient sit upright, extend their leg if possible, place your back against their buttocks, and place their foot on yours; then hold their knee between your palms, pull it between your fingers, then bend both sides from the knee tightly; and another assistant should spread their foot out until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that they gently reach well into their knee; and apply the plaster, make the leg rest against the knee, keep everything tight for three or four days, then release; and do not disturb the patient's activities while their limbs are still weak.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not in place, apply strong extension, as we said in the treatment of the hip, until it is sound.
de la dislocation dou talon	Regarding the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are never completely reset and still remain in or out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it attempts to move before reaching the point where it has dislocated: the realignment should be gentle, and one must gently extend it with their hands as soon as it's slightly in place.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is slightly dislocated, you should make the patient lie straight and hold their leg straight out by their side with your hands above the ankle. Then pull the foot towards yourself with your right hand, and then with your left two times, followed by extending it upwards, and firmly push the foot upwards; do this two times while pulling and stretching the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, start working on it again because it will return; and if it can't return like this, you should displace the patient so they are lying on their back on the ground, firmly place one peg in the earth between their buttocks, and tie cloths around them to prevent chafing; then cut the clothes near the ankle of both legs, and another person holds the foot with their hands or at a rope tied to the neck below the foot; then extend each person's hands equally, and put the peg firmly between the patient's buttocks so that it retains the leg when stretched; finally place the dislocated parts in line with your hands, and another person cuts the healthy leg just above the ankle, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it's at the right point, place the plaster and apply the bandage on top, hold it tightly in position, and fasten the boot to the leg. Make sure not to tie the ligaments behind the ankle too tight; then leave it for two or three days. If the ligament gets loose, untie it. Then remove the bandage after three days or a week, and gently guide the patient for another four days; if they proceed beyond this period, there is no certainty that further dislocation will not occur.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you find pus coming out, then it is necessary to soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it heals.
des dois	This seems like an incomplete line or a typo in the original text. It would be "dois" which means 'two' in Old French, but without context, I can't provide a precise translation for this line. The full sentence might have been something along the lines of: "Dois jours" (Two days), though that doesn't fit perfectly with the surrounding sentences either.
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the shoulders are dislocated, if they need to be beautifully extended due to work, it's a light matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is at no point on the back or bottom of the foot, it's necessary that you make the patient sit straight with their full leg or on a table completely upright, and place your foot on what opens from these joints. Then press against your foot firmly until they feel it. And when it feels equal, and there is nothing opening up, then put under the sole of the foot a bench for shoulders, then apply firm pressure, and let it rest for three days, then release; and make them rest until they are well.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	regarding wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound occurs along with dislocation and the intention is to restore it, many times the patient dies: so do not be presumptuous in your treatment if you are inexperienced in this art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not merciful and compassionate and slow, do not be hasty; at the beginning use soothing things that remove abscesses, and leave the patient to God's mercy if you see no hope of recovery; and when you see there is hope, immediately reset the limb back in its place, as if the abscesses would disappear; and once the limb is back in place, administer soothing things that remove abscesses, treat the wound appropriately with desiccated remedies; and if due to dislocation it involves fracture and small bones are exposed, set them and do as we have advised in simple diseases; and beware of entering into a path of fear, according to what I've said, because this is judged according to your Creator, and for the wisdom you arm yourself with and protect your body.
Amen	Amen
