O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	For you, dear children, I have completed this book which is the conclusion of the art of medicine, and have ended it through its explanations and by making its statements.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And I was shown in my vision that I would complete it with this treatise, which is a part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is practiced in our region and has been removed everywhere, it has lost its science and has been stripped down, and nothing remains from what was outside except for the small descriptions in books by ancient times that the hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And thus error and vanity have arisen, and minds are closed, and the science has been distanced away.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I should revive this treatise together with the order of this medical text according to the way of exposition and disclosure and abbreviation; and will come together with the forms of iron cautery tools, and other working instruments along with the adjustment of their declaration and preparation, exactly as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because there are no skilled doctors to be found in our time, the art of medicine has become lost.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for the one who intervenes to master anatomy science as Galen says, so long as they know how to judge the members, their forms and connections, separations of tendons, and have knowledge about bones, nerves and sinews, including the number of bones, their arrangement and movement, as well as the veins that move and those that are stationary, and understand where their outlets are.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And it was stated by Hippocrates that not with nothing but with something is much, and not with one but with many in the art of hands.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We will tell you at the beginning of this book that if someone does not understand what has been said before, they might make mistakes and deceive people; just as I have seen many times in those who interfere with this knowledge and abandon their studies.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a fool who cauterized one of the lymph nodes or neck of a woman, and burned the blood vessels in her neck; because so much blood came out that the woman died in his hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another barber who treated a stone in an old man's kidney, and the stone was large; so he carried away with him a piece of the bladder, and the man died after three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I have already been called to draw out this, and see the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and indeed if it was cut for him he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another case where I treated a duke of our land who had his leg broken, and along with the breaking there was an injury. And these doctors full of ignorance allowed the breaking to occur over the injury as though it were healed by strong luck, and did not drain at all from the injury; and left him like that for one month; and commanded him not to disturb it again; and waited thus until his leg was completely swollen and his toes and suffered destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I have been called to come to him, and I hurried to come to relieve his leg; and when I heard that it was relieved so smoothly and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But every pathway of corruption had already been confirmed or within the body and could not be cured; and the process of decay continued throughout the body as long as the limbs were completely lost.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see one other place where an abscess was flattened out, and then it swelled up due to the wickedness of its lordess.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a boil, when it is filled with melancholic humor, it should not be touched by iron if it isn't in such a position that one can remove all the corrupted parts.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, dear children, you need to know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: meaning, the task where there is danger in multiple conditions; and I will show you within each part of this book where it has risk and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Because it is necessary that you guard this well, so that no one speaks ill of you. If you take up your weapons with caution, and treat your illnesses lightly yet firmly, and use the best course, may God's grace bring you salvation and make you whole; and leave fearful diseases to seek health elsewhere; and remove from yourself those who cause you doubt, and have faith in your abilities so that you might come from this world to another of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galen instructs in none of his admonishments: "Do not seek to treat a disease improperly, that you might be called foolish.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cauteries and medicinal cauteries, and the chapters are arranged from head to stone; and about the forms of instruments, and the metals of cautery, and all that is necessary for the operation.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapters are arranged and discuss the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is arranged from head to stone, and discusses the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Just as we recall our work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of each remedy and its harm for each constitution.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I state that the qualities of aid, and harm, are the longest word and most subtle science and secrets they respond to. And many wise people spoke about this, agreeing with it; and they barely allow me to understand them because I fear their lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the fire cautery is universally applicable to all constitutions where there is matter, for there are two constitutions: namely, a warm constitution with matter, and a dry constitution with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the warm and dry combined constitutions with matter, they devised something and said that the fire cautery is great help; and another group said the opposite: that the fire cautery only works for diseases originating from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is so hot and should not be treated with hot diseases by heat or drying. And this man who says otherwise, that the cautery provides great help to hot and dry illnesses that come into bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of the person and their moisture to the constitution of fire, you find that the body is cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it true on every occasion through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And every way, do not interfere with it except the one who has proven it, and who knows through long usage the art of cautery, and the variety of human complexion, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the occurrences and space during treatment; we have no fear from other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all these things gathered together and agreed with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, children, that a combined fire cautery has secrets of healing and offers greater benefit than a burning medicine cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come forth from any other member except the one being cooked, and it harms no other limb if you do not name it.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fiery medicines move from one part of the body to another, causing diseases requiring health in their wake; and by chance, if fire reaches the patient's highness due to the goodness of its substance, it does not do so unless there is excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this through experience and the length of service and study that I've put into the art, which aligns with the truth of things; and because of this, I apologize for the length of my words, as I do not wish to withhold the secret of fire or the quality of its work, how it relieves diseases from the body, just as the philosopher explains in demonstrating. May you receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, child, that they agreed on when the cauterizations should be performed, and studied prayers.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is suitable in all times, for the nuisances occurring are reduced by the aid of the fire cautery; and also if the cauterizations are for necessary pains that cannot wait until a greater evil befalls the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, foolish child, like those who misunderstand; for a disease cured by cauterization has no return. And they say it this way: but it is not as they believe, because cauterizations are merely medicine that alters the complexion and dries up fluids which cause pain, and is worth more than medicine due to its speed in enhancing strength, and due to the virtue of its work and its sovereignty.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And know that disease can come at any time according to the constitution of the body and the nature of the illness and its virtue; and they are gathered in him the superfluities due to the intake of food and similar things, unless cauterization is given when there is little excess and moisture, such as with cauterizations for pain, and similar matters, so that this kind of pain does not recur; but it happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And very few people understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and it's clear to see; but they don't believe that cauterization can be effective after medicine. But their understanding is false, as cauterization is the last resort in medicine because when our methods for cures do not work in any disease, then we administer our cauterizer, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it's true that cauterization is the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of others who misunderstand.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The old ones said that gold cauterizing tools are better than those made of iron, and they mentioned this only because of the quality of gold and the high status of its substance; and they stated that gold cautery blades do not cause infection, but that is not visible since I have experienced it myself, and found out that it can indeed cause infection in some individuals; and gold cauterizing tools are better than iron ones, as they declared.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And still, when you heat the gold instrument, you do not realize it by the color of the gold, and it gets instantly cooled off; and if it is heated too much; then put it in fire; and thus there should be enough prevention.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this, we use our metal cautery that we have adapted to our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	So you should order this chapter about the shoulder until it reaches the elbow, for the sake of making it easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	The olive cauterizer
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	A cautery is useful against moisture and cold near the head. There are two of these that we perform due to the cause of an illness called 'soda', and through the influence of many humors descending from the eyes, ears, and through a multitude of dreams, toothache, throat pain, and especially for all diseases coming from cold such as paralysis, soda poisoning, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The shape of this cautery is such that the patient's body is purged by dissolving medicine, modifying the head three times or four times, depending on how the virtues and heat and custom to which the patient can withstand it; then wash the head with the dissolved medicine.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	Then place their hands together between your palms and place your hands on the tip of his nose. After placing the root of your palm against the root of his nose between his two nostrils; and when your middle fingers reach, if it bleeds through, then warm the cautery called "olivare", which has this form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it in its original location with ink, and as you lower and adjust your hand little by little while turning it around; then lift your hand alone, and check the bone if you see a small dot of .i. sol; and if you don't see it, continue using the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; afterwards take .i. poc of flour, and place damp cotton inside, and apply it to the site, and leave it there for .iij. days; after that put on a moist cream in butter; and leave it on until the scab is removed; afterwards treat the wound with ointment called 'tetrafarmaçon', until it heals.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And if someone said that when a wound remains open longer, the more it purges out pus; and for this reason, movement is advised.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they said that one should leave the cautery for so long that part of the bone is burned, and then restart with what has been burned by the bone, and treat it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And it says that for the fire cautery, one should let it remain there and press so hard that you lift as wide as two small cones like those women place in their bellies because fluids are forced out; and should one leave the wound open for a long time; after this, one must clean and bind it.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two ways of cauterization do not seem to me to be good for everything, except when there is a flow of fear; and I think that I should leave them. For the limbs are weakened by continuous discharge from nature as we have shown in other members; and even when the limb of disease is weak by nature, and my first sign of cauterization is more saved and healed to me, and I use this method generally thus assemble health.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When throughout the whole head comes chronic pain and lasts long, then one should use the patient's herbs and pills that are called "cochie", and treatments for clearing the head and ears and bandages; and if one applies to them the cautery as we have said before, and it proves beneficial.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the patient's head is of strong nature and not too cold; then apply the cautery over the spot where we have spoken above for a moment.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After make the cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and do one more cautery at the place that is called "vasselz"; and use two leu's in which you put suction cups; and ease your hand so that you don't touch until the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery compared to others, and I will speak of it elsewhere; and it should be known that the cauteries on the horns are more delicate than those done for half the middle of the head, and this is their shape.
dou cautere dou chief	Of the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hair grow long and even; and if they pierce at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain occurs in part of the head, and the disease extends up to the eye, and the head is cleansed by purifying medicines, and various other treatments that I mentioned in the division of diseases were performed, but none helped: then he should apply cautery according to two methods, namely using an ague medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The application of the ague medicine cautery involves taking one spoonful of oil and applying it with a bandage to two parts of each head, in such a way that you can place the spoonful of oil on the skin; then press and hold well for about 12 hours, and then release and remove the garlic. Leave the wound like this for 2 days or 3. Then apply a poultice with butter until pain disappears.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the oil treatment as long as it's clean; and if you see that you should use some of those burning medicines I have written or in the tenth treatise on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is done in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery which has this shape:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And call it "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a bell where it has .i. point of curvature, and in the middle there's a small appearance; and place it on the painful area, and hold your hand and gently move the iron for a bit, until half of the thickness of the wound is burned; then lift your hand to prevent the artery from burning, allowing blood flow, and apply an abundance of bleeding.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After that, put cotton in the wound as a bandage and keep it on for three days; then replace with damp cotton soaked in butter, and continue treating the wound with oil until it is clean. If you wish to cauterize this headache with the iron cautery which is called 'cultellare', do so at its entire point, but beware not to cover the artery in this headache as it is not old.
de emigraine	Of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraine as we have discussed in the divisions of diseases before, and if there is no improvement, and you see that the cauteries previously mentioned in medicine do not suit it, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white; and do this by placing it along the limb where a line halfway between half an inch and one inch long, and hold your hand steady once, and pull gently so as not to cut the artery and stop when reaching the bone; and watch out for the jaw that closes when eating, make sure only the mouth moves and no spasms affect the patient, and be cautious of bleeding from the artery if it is cut, or cutting too much and similarly for those who are inexperienced and untested; leave the work halfway done, but I will tell you how to stop bleeding once the artery has been cut, and show you its proper place in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that these cauteries do not suit the illness and the patient is suffering, apply them to the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals; and when you notice this, administer the cauterizing instrument that we've mentioned in the chapter on extraction of arteries with a two-edged cauterizer; and these are better than others and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ear from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain from cold comes to the ear, and there have been operations with dissolving medicines and other treatments we mentioned in this division, if the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery called 'pints', as shown here:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After applying the cautery to all around the ear, or around both of them where the pain is held in, remove it slightly from the root of the ear after you have indicated its place. Place ten pints around each ear; treat the area until it becomes healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Pain that should be treated with a cautery does not include those that move by flemmings, as we have stated in the divisions of diseases; and no cautery should be done on symptoms that come from dryness and pus of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this instance of pain that moves by flemmings from water and the purging of head and gargling, and when it fails, then it should be that you apply the heat of .iij. cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another a little further on the temple, and the third in fitting the .ij. lips; and put the cautery where health opens up, and make it cauterize the area above the ear near a bit under the horn of the head, and another on the temple as long as an inch; and let the cautery burn there until half of the flesh is burned; and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And there is the appearance of surgical pain as we placed before, but it's a bit more subtle; you should have the knife slightly larger; after treating the limb as I said previously, until it becomes healthy.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When dealing with an old apoplexy and treating it as we have said, if the patient does not benefit, and the sick has fever, then do this: four cauterizations: two on each of the two horns above the head, and one underneath the head, and one in the region known as 'vasselz' as previously mentioned. Lastly, perform a cautery near the mouth of the stomach; and treat it similarly to how we have said before.
de litargie	of liturgy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness, you should give the patient large pills and medicines that facilitate the brain's function; after that, let the doctor remove everything on top of the patient's head, and then apply the sulfur plaster to the back part of the head. And here is how to perform a cautery: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it's healed like this, that's good; and if not, do the following: three times apply a heat on descending from the head to the collarbone, leaving an interval of about two fingers between each application; treat as with others. If you see the need for adjustment after doing so and there is pain in the flesh, apply one heat in the middle. If further treatment is needed, do it twice more on both sides until it's healed; and use the heats known as "olive-shaped", as I've mentioned before.
de la froidor dou chief	from cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleaned of old scabs and what we have previously mentioned. After rubbing the head with a warm compress, then apply heat to the flesh, and on each horn of the head, and twice behind and three times on the spine below the collarbone; if you need more treatment and the area is moist and there's pain, and the illness persists, then apply four heats on the spine of the back. Let it sit until the most tender part is well dried, then lift your hand; after this, treat it until healed, and use the heat method known as "olive-shaped", as we have mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	Of the cautery
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics should only use a cautery for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary to first modify the brain with years of other treatments that we have mentioned in the section where the sick body is large and suffers from lack of medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot endure this treatment, make them gargle and chew often with good meats; after that they take their head in the middle, and I do as I have said for one dose of cautery, and another on the vein, and on each horn; and if the body is large and suffering, make them receive cauterizations like what I have told about those who are paralyzed and have softening of limbs, on the spinal column in back and neck, and let the olive wood cauterization be as I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	And if the body is a child, make one delicate cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to the cause of melancholy are excesses or fluids corrupted and large phlegm, then apply the partial cautery we have described to those who suffer from paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to the cause of melancholy are the excesses declining into melancholy and is there moisture in the body that affects the skin, then let him drink something so that the brain may be cleansed, as was described before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After obtaining the lymph from the body; afterwards make one and a half lin thread well made, as one circle, place it inside the lymph; and if there are any irregularities in the lymph, ensure they settle down and maintain proper support from all sides; after that present the liniment, mix it with old burberry butter; and heat it over fire until it can be tolerated by those who might be susceptible to heat; afterwards remove the circle through its opening while inside the body, and let it cool down; and do this once every week for a lymph each time with another good administration, until they are well.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	Or if you see that it is to be cauterized, do points on the entire cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cautering moistens the brain greatly; and then place wet cotton on butter and lard grease.
de l’awe des eulz	of the fear of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When fear comes first for the eyes due to the symptoms I have mentioned in the division, then begin and continue to make the patient consume something that purifies the head, keeps him away from all moisture, and makes him sweat or take baths several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After he commands about his head and makes him cauterize it, and makes two cauterizations on the two temples where his fear begins to descend along with the fear of both eyes together, or when his fear descends in one eye; and treat all the cauterizations for all the veins and arteries that are around the brain, and make them cauterize long according to the width of the temple; and beware of blood clotting, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it with a piece as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you about the extraction of arteries and incisions using the cautery, how to apply it; and one should never perform a cautery or cauterize between the two bones behind.
dou cors des larmes	of the two paths of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed, and located on the veins, or beneath the arteries that are visible underneath the surface at the forehead; and one sees that they result from excesses of cold humors, then apply the cautery as I have said at the beginning of this discussion: .i. on the forehead, and .ij. cauterizations above the two temples, and .ij. cauterizations or cauterize below the two bones; and if more is needed, carefully cauterize just above the eyebrows with every .i small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	of the inner paths of tears through the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you apply the medicine according to what we have said in the division, and it doesn't benefit, then give the patient three nuts to drink; after this, put your hand on their head and apply a cautery or an olive oil-based balm; and do two more applications of the same cautery known as 'clavilis' on the two ears, a little over the hair. And guard yourself not to cover the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery which is called 'clavilis':
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery which is called "olive".
de coi ci est li forme:	of which has this shape:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see to do two cauterizations on the two nostrils as long as they are together; and don't let your hand rest until a third part of the paper is burnt, following the method I have described.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of hair that touches the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	None of the times has it happened that the hair of the nostrils turns into the gum and touches the eye, in which case one performs cauterization according to two methods: namely by fire, or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and evenly long, then instruct the patient to be in good health; afterward depict on paper a figure that resembles a leaf of myrtle, with the beginning of the sign below the hairs. Then place moistened cotton in egg white glaze and cloves beneath the eye, then apply heat from this fire which has been shaped accordingly:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards cauterize on the figure you have drawn little by little a few times, until the burns are located in that place; and the signs of health from the work is that you see the paper pulled back, and the hairs raised to the point of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave like this for three days, then place moistened cotton in butter until the scorching is removed; afterwards apply ointment until it heals properly.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after this the hairs come out, and the paper becomes soft, then restart the cautery on that same place as you did first; and if the hairs are gone, cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural level, and evenly so, and does not pinch the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The hot medical cautery requires that the patient allow their hairs to grow long and evenly; then make a form of the bay leaf out of parchment. Then take French soap and fresh garlic from each, one unit each, grind them together finely; and do it quickly so it doesn't cool down, then spread it on the form like a bay leaf and place it on paper under the eyes. If the illness lasts only in one oil, you must open just that one, and if also in both; and put moistened cotton next to the oil as in an egg; and the patient's head be under your healthy hand with your thumb showing over the medicine, press once every time the patient senses the medicine's bite because they sense the bite similarly to fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a while, then apply the medicine to your finger.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the mordication has passed, lift the head away and reward it if you see that the paper is lifted as if it had been lifted by the constraint of fire or through a cut. And if it's like this, then it's well done.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, it still receives more medicine on the head or until the medicine has worked, as long as your organs are even, and your eyes positioned; then place cotton saturated with butter on it until the burn is gone, after cure the head of the ointment which is called 'dyafenis' and others, until it becomes well.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to take care of your body by great vigilance so that the medicine does not leak out through your eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes moist afterwards, and the hair touches in the eye, then apply medicine to that part of the head which is softened by the clean paper, just as you did before; after this cure until it becomes well; and this is like the shape of a mint leaf:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the hair of men is diverse in size and smallness, and according to this be your constraints; and do not let the right way answer to him who studies this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you are treating a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you apply the cautery method like this.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place their head in your healthy position; and hold the eyes of the head between your hands so that it doesn't move or remove its head; afterwards put moistened cotton inside an egg or garlic juice on the eye; after heat up the cautery which is divided: and over the head make like a formation of a quill pen, gather them as you are holding the cautery; if you see, should be pointed from one side to another, and if you see, it should also be like a tent; but in any case, whatever is held there serves your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it has opened, and treat the putrefaction, and dry it; and if it is closed, do work on it, and remove it from the body; afterwards place a form over the cautery, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the nose above the eye so that your hand doesn't make a mess; and place the cautery in the grease of the oil, and let it fester.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be well.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then continue with the cautery one more time, and if needed, you do so and leave it for three days; afterwards, place wet cotton on butter, and use the ointment cure until it becomes healthy, and when forty days pass without health, apply corrosive water medicine until the bone is uncovered; then follow the protocol according to what is written in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there's a way of cauterizing a fistula that none of the old ones mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Understand what a fistula is, and do as follows; after that, put in the incision a thin piece of something from which this has its form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and I make it in quantity of three grains; and keep your hand or camel firm, so don't move the patient's body, making sure the melted wax doesn't run into their eye; then we should apply damp cotton in egg white or oil to the affected area: the wax will then heal the fistula and brings wonderful healing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed through the cauterization method that we have described, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	But if not, it is necessary to administer pertussis to the child, and bring the fistula back to the body around the neck according to what is proper in their own nature.
des crevaices en levres	gashes on the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Occasionally, gashes occur on the lips which are called 'whiskers', and similarly on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these gashes using what we have discussed in divisions, and the treatment does not help, then apply this: use a small surgical knife to shape as follows:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place him immediately into those wounds until they open; after that, clean the wound from wax while it is still sound.
de l’aposteme de la goule	from the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess appears in the root of the throat or in the lymph node, or on the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, it will first become gangrenous and inflamed, then form a fistula. You should treat it as we have instructed before regarding divisions, but if it doesn't improve, you must use the method that fits your situation.
dou movement des dens	movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and if you cure it through medicines but it doesn't work, then apply the head of the patient to your healthy position; afterwards ignite the cautery in such a manner that after its form comes back in this way, that you put one stick under the tooth; and place the cautery over the heated area, and hold your hand firmly so that the disease feels heat approaching to the root of the tooth; afterwards lift your hand and continue with the cautery according to your will; afterwards fill the diseased mouth with salt water, and keep it in for an hour and then remove it.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And by this manner the moving teeth are made stable again, and the softened gum is restrained, and the moisture that had caused corruption is dried.
de la dolor des dens	from toothache
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from coldness, or there is coldness or a fever, and medical treatments do not work, then it requires the use of cautery according to these two methods: and wax cautery and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Wax cautery if it's like this that you take cow butter and at the tip of a iron or snail spoon; after that take cotton and wrap it on the point of a needle, then soak the butter until it melts, and place it on the painful tooth quickly and hold it until it cools down; and do this often until its powers reach the root of the tooth, and if you see wet hair and cotton in cold butter, put them on the painful tooth again, and apply hot iron for as long as the fire reaches the tooth's pain.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The fire cauteries are such that you may take a piece of iron or silver, and make it large enough so that the fire does not enter the mouth of the patient; after heating the cautery, let the heat dissipate afterwards, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery cools down; do this often because the pain will be relieved either that day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary for the patient to fill their mouth with good butter in anticipation of that cauterization, and then quickly remove it; this is the form of the cauterization.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a fire cautery to whatever degree you desire, and according to what you are capable; and this is the form of the cure:
des scrophules	regarding scrophula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrophules are of phlegm and cold moisture, and do not respond to digestion by medicines, then heat up the cautery according to what comes after this form, and have it with two openings for fumes to escape from on the other side; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once, or twice if needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess. And if the abscess is small, then adjust the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it like that for three days; and apply moistened cotton with butter until all pus is removed; after this cure the area with ointments and poultices until it heals properly.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of sugar:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When moisture invades the channels of the heart, especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary to cleanse the body first with diuretic medicines; after that, you should apply heat cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful not to go all the way up to the throat, but just a little bit.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After making one more cautery at the joint of the neck beneath the spine's head, and let the cautery known as 'the clavicle', which we describe in front, be that; then treat it as described in front until it is sound.
de la toust	Of the cautery
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and the diseases of the prostate are due to cold moist, and the patients have no fever or dryness, and it's an old disease, then apply two cauterizations on their urinary system; and one other cautery under the buttocks between the two nipples; and use the cautery called "clavile" according to its shape as described previously.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see it, apply the cautery at every point which is called 'the points', as its form has been described previously for the disease of ears; and let the points reach up to thirty, or even beyond.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating it according to what was said before, apply the cauterizations in three rounds according to this shape:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And for this reason, the fire cautery is lighter, because you do it with three copies.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	from the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After that, bind the wounds on his back and sides; afterwards, lift the kidney which is inside the illo-humeral joint to your left hand's side; and if the joint is dislocated internally, heat the cautery which has two handles as described here:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	And apply the cautery to the leg until it penetrates up to the bone, and let the shape of the cautery consist of three applications; and for this purpose one uses a cautery with three prongs because the patterns of the cauterization result in three applications; and they follow the nerves according to the delicacy of a tent and that is the form of the cautery that has three prongs:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And once attached to this one nerve because there are seven cauterizations for it.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After placing the cautery, stir with a thread; after that, let the patient rest, and do not allow the limbs to be strained for too long until it is well settled.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above that, where little happens, then apply the cautery on the thick part of the 'clavicle' cautery, or do a few cauterizations by pressing.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and moisture has been removed from it and blood has flowed to the patient.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	For when colds and moisture come to the stomach as long as they are in accordance with its complexion, and multiply his urine production, and uses various treatment methods which are customary and he gains nothing from them, then it is necessary that the body be covered on his back, and extend his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	From this on, I perform three fire cauterizations under the foot near the elbow for the quantity of two, to each and every fire cauterization on the knee, and two fire cauterizations below the two ribs until the pattern of cauterizations is at three angles, and have space between one and another so that when they are subjected to gangrene, they will not be joined together; let them perform the cauterizations exactly such that they purify the two parts of the knee, and let the shape of the cauterizations follow this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see cauterization with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form; and whoever fears that cautery, cauterize by pressing and commanding it on the stomach at one point according to the amount you see of it; then cauterize to the full extent of the cautery which is called 'points'.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment we have done, as long as it is clean.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	As for the liver, it feels pain from coldness and moisture and large wind. As long as its substance is altered by excesses; and the patient should be treated with what we have mentioned in divisions, but they do not benefit from this, so it's necessary that the liver is treated on its rib cage; and make three marks for cauterization according to this form and figure and amount on the liver, below the flanks, where the ribs come together; and leave a space between each mark about twice an inch; and have the marks long across the body, but do not completely cover your hand with them; and heat only half of the keel, and make sure the patient's hands are straight down their sides; and if they cannot, then lie on their side and extend their legs, and lift their arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you wish to do so, cauterize these metal cauteries, if you are skilled and prudent in this craft, and watch out not to burn all the flesh; because you would dry up the entire body. And don't go until it boils, because the muscles are very delicate in that area, and know how to see with your eyes.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When it has progressed to the liver, and you know whether it's within the liver tissue or the membrane: if it is in the tissue, you'll feel moderate pain; and if it is in the membrane, you'll feel extreme pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this treatment affects the organs, it is necessary for the patient to be covered with a cloth on their head; and then press against the body where the abscess is, and then heat up the cautery that resembles a needle, as depicted here:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And treat with the cautery until the ears are charred, and proceed up to the syphac, until the pus is all out; after that, follow the treatment for boils while it is healthy. And one should not use any part of this cautery that has been removed from its proper place than he who has studied long in the art of medicine, and through these hands have cured such diseases none times before.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	So he can boldly operate, and always it seems to me that letting them stay in place would be better.
dou cautere de pleuresin	The weeping cautery
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The old ones said that one should perform weeping cauterizations using the root of aristolochia, and do it in this way: take a long root of aristolochia, the longest you can find, make sure it's dry, and also as thick as your nose; and soak it in oil, then heat it on fire, and cauterize once between the nostrils and neck, and twice small cauterizations just below the part under the beard; and four cauterizations between the fifth rib and sixth rib, slightly behind; and one cauterization near the navel, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and four more along the ribs under the cauterization which is between the two shoulders; and don't press your hand at all, just do it wide open as if you were smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And it is said by no old man that any person uses the fire cautery to the raseur, and heats it up then puts it between the ribs until it reaches this abscess; and when the pain leaves, as we have mentioned in the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this chapter is fear or the body dies now, or the fistula comes which cannot be cured.
de la mice	Of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the illness of mice in those ways that we have described through the divisions of treatment, and it does not benefit, then they try three methods of cauterization, all of which are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	There is a method such that you make three or four cauteries, according to the length of the mouse, following the shape of the heart as we have explained previously; and do not press your hand all the way into the cautery, and let the body be present under its back; and another way to cauterize involves heating the cautery with two ends, just like we demonstrated in the shoulder dislocation; lift the rib that is located under the mouse, or where the pain comes from towards the left side, and lift the elevation according to the rib, following the length of the body, and the cauteries should follow the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After I ignite the two wicks until the ends are pierced from the other side, and then remove the cautery, and thus there will be three. And if you see it, fully cauterize with all three wicks on the cautery.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the cure when it has treated rot by a long time, and this is useful that the other methods of treatment described previously do so.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	The cautery isn't effective for dropsy, except in the way that is called "asclepiate".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat according to the methods we have discussed in sections, and your treatment doesn't benefit, then it is necessary that you apply four cauterizations inside the mouth, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the kidneys, and one behind the back on the spine, and one location on the buttocks; and make sure that the cauterization spots are well close to the spinal keel.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leave the cauterization in place to heal for a long time, and do not stop the treatment of the illness after the cauterization; and recovery would hasten, and both methods (the cauterization and other treatments) would be combined with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The shape of the cautery for the abdomen is like the arm we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, as was explained earlier.
de l’enfleure des piez	Of the swelling of joints
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the joints swell in the thirsty person, and are full of yellow bile, it is necessary for you to apply the cautery on the back part of the foot between the index finger and the ring finger; and move your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too far inside the patient, in such case it would lead to the expulsion of bile and apply the cautery according to this form:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After doing two cauterizations on each leg at the tip of the thumb; and make the cauterization along the length, one in front of the knee cap and the other behind, in the middle of the leg; and leave the cauterizations alone for a long time without curing them until the yellow bile comes out; afterwards treat the other treatments as we have said.
de la menoison	From memory
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the belly is troubled by coldness and moisture, as long as there are restorative and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines, they cannot be cured by ordinary treatments; you see the patient suffering greatly with a green appearance from these symptoms, so perform this: apply one large stomach cautery according to what was discussed earlier or the stomach's own cautery, focusing on circulating action; then make two further applications around the mouth of subtle parts. Apply one subtle clavicle cautery and four more over the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture in abundance and the patient suffering, then apply a cautery to the knife, and one cautery on each heel, and two small cauteries over the stomach around the large one, because the treatment benefits when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	regarding the treatment of piles (hemorrhoids)
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the bleedings are located at the base or elsewhere, and they are old, filled with large cold and moist pus, treated as previously described in sections, if it does not benefit, then apply the cautery: III on the spine of the back, exactly at the very end beyond the waist, gradually, forming a triangle, and I application of the cautery slightly above the belly button for II doz; and if you think that the stomach is cold and the meat is not cooked, and one sees swelling in the abdomen, then apply a large cautery on the stomach as mentioned before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the applications of the cautery; and let the application of the cautery last for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treatment until the wound heals.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the thickening called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you are working with an artery, if it seems to be 1/2 inch thick, heat the cautery until it glows red hot, and then apply the heated surface directly over that part of the artery; hold your hand steady so that the heat reaches the opening of the vein from which blood flows, causing the blood to coagulate. Perform this once or twice, and if there is more artery tissue, cauterize each section as we have said; after the use of other healing methods until they are healed. And if you apply a large heated cautery, it will provide greater assistance.
de plaie mal curee	from a badly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient's skin cannot tolerate cutting or opening, as we will explain in its section, if such a disease occurs that can only be cured through cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	If there's no瘘管 comes and grows with putrefaction and corrupted moisture, if you need to test it completely with one attempt, and make sure that you know the extent of this attempt.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After the redness has subsided and it appears to have healed, use the cautery that seems suitable. Insert it into the fistula according to its size, then continue the application of heat until all rotten and putrefied parts are burned away, once or twice, depending on how much is needed; but beware not to burn nerves or major veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula extends to the bladder and the intestines, be aware of this and do not perform such operations outside of their natural location. Remember that it's not in the kidneys. After treatment until the wound has healed. And if these veins are sealed, and the contents have been solid for long periods, then you will know that the wound is completely healed. And if the contents are not hardened, understand that this vein is diseased, and the bone inside is rotten; thus, as one of these we shall speak about in its natural location.
de la maladie des reins	Of kidney illness
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When stomach pain originates in the kidneys and is accompanied by swelling, and it affects women differently, then it's necessary to apply the cautery on both sides of the kidneys and also to use the wrist cautery that we have described; and if we cauterize in the middle, one will do three lines of cauterization, and they will provide more assistance.
de la vessie	From the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is swollen and weak from heat and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then instruct for a cautery in the lower part of the bladder, where the body hair begins near the fingers. On each hand (right and left), and let each cautery be as long as the distance of one hand; and make one cautery behind the back, or two if needed; and let the cauteries follow the outline described beforehand.
de la marris	From the marrows
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception, and the flowers (likely referring to menstrual cycles) are corrupted and their periods delayed; and when they come in, one feels great pain: therefore, it should be that you perform three cauterizations inside the uterus, as we have said about the bladder cautery, and two cauterizations behind the back; let the cauterizations follow the outline described previously.
de la hainche	From the thigh
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the oily fluids descend to the socket of the thigh, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the signs are that the leg is longer than the other when measured together; and you find the bones at their origin points visible, then you should apply a cautery on the socket of the thigh with an appearance like one half of a circle, and mark in front of the bone inside the socket as it turns, so that the socket remains within the circle; and if you make the cauterizations like those made to the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you don't have access to such cauterizations, make three large ones from the olive oil, and make sure each cauterization is as perfect as all the rest; and treat it until it heals.
de la dolor de la hainche	Regarding the pain in the thigh
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the thigh bone, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and patients are treated as we have said in the division, but the treatment does not work, and the disease is old: then you should cleanse the patient of the large humors using putrid pills or other beneficial similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After performing the cautery; and regarding the manner of the cautery, it follows two manners: that is to say, together with burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery follows several methods, among which one is like this: you should cauterize at the hip bone with three triangular cauteries according to this form. Each must have a good depth and size large enough, and there's space of the width of two thumbs between each cautery. The shape of these cauteries is that of an olive; never make a cauterization in the middle of the upper part of the hip bone because following this pattern results in four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see fit, when cauterizing with the circular cautery as we have described in the dislocation of the thigh bone; but do it this way that all the thigh is contained within the circles, and every part of the knee's skin be burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is how it's done in sciatica, when the pain stays in the hip and doesn't reach up to the thigh or down to the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it extends up to the thigh and leg, make two fire cauteries there where the patient says pain holds them back, and add three above the ankle, on the left side a little bit; and use knife-like cauterization techniques, and scorch off any thickened skin around the wound. And if the patient feels the pain spreading down to knee or almost at its knee, apply the cautery where he feels the pain for three or four points of heat, considering these as "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if more work is needed, then do it; and if it appears that the pain lies between the knee and thigh, then perform cauterization with a surgical or circular instrument. Be well guarded in all your cauterizations making sure not to leave them incomplete until you burn nerves and large arteries, and do not cause the patient more harm and contraction than necessary.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I have seen several cases where cautery was done on the ankle up to the knee, and it was only stopped when the leg was completely swollen, and also all the toes, and they were pierced and corrupted entirely.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After an abdominal treatment that led to death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pains are in two parts together, apply a cautery to both areas, according to this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise men spoke about the fire cautery for the hip, as follows: make it like this kind of iron, and let its size be as thick as one's little finger or a bit less, and have it with joints in between and place the joints starting from one part to the other of space equivalent to the length of a handkerchief; and let the joints be divided into two parts each, and they should also resemble knots, and there should be an iron rod well made; this is its shape.
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And heat it until it's completely red and smokes emit, then place it on the spot of the hip disease, and twist over the healthy side; and apply one application of this cautery once and leave it for three days; and after that, apply a poultice of butter, and keep the wound open long; cure with ointment until it heals.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use little of this cautery for the fear of his judgment, and we rarely see it being used; nonetheless, this is a good type of cautery, which one can tolerate, and leaves where it appears.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The medical hot cauteries consist of an instrument with joints through which the edge descends within the door. It should be made of steel or iron that is long on one side and has two knuckles at the top, with each having the thickness equivalent to a small bone in between. They should also have a flat surface from above and join together following this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After positioning on the hip of the lying patient toward his sound side, and quickly place your hand close to the hip bone; next pour a small amount of hot ash between the two circles which has been heated by fire, and let it stay for an hour while allowing the patient to endure the heat and burn.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it also finds a bite as with fire; and when the biting passes, raise your hand along with the tool and gently lift the hip from the ash. Leave this for three days, and apply butter until that which is blackened by the scorching dries out; and let it be for three days while putrefaction takes effect. This would then be considered the second aid after the treatment of ointments when the patient is healthy.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread up to the thigh or even down to the leg, you should make the instrument that pierces according to what you have done in the buttock area; and this is the method of the hot needle, which I have written about in the section dealing with correcting medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take an equal amount of alum and live chalk, as much of one as the other, grind them together, and put them in a new jar.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	Let it have the small blade of a razor so that its point can enter; and place that jar in another well-sealed jar, and put alum and chalk and gentle heat underneath, until there is twice as much above the powders than you will take with your hand; and leave it like this until the heat produces water vapor and sediment or till the contents are fully heated. Then take all of that substance, and pour it over chalk and on top of the alum so as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And indeed it will be much useful and administered in the process of medical operations and fire cauteries on other limbs. For they perform work akin to fire's actions, and are applied with other medicines like tannisine and anacardi, honey, chaldron mixed with soap; all these things combined together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a treatment that some nobles were subjected to for the pain in their hip and sciatic nerve, and he says much about it, and states that no other treatment was done, and that they became well all at once when this treatment was applied. And he recommends bathing as he instructs later on in this manner.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And it instructs in this way: take some pure green and dried litargite, crush it finely with a little fat, mix it thoroughly and place it on the hip, thigh and leg where the pain is felt. Then bind it on; let it stay for three hours, and ensure that no longer do you feel any burning sensation due to the application of this ointment.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make them enter into a bath as their body becomes somewhat revived, and have them lie down, and the pain will leave them entirely and they will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	Know that no one should use such medicines with a cautery, unless after the removal of the body's essence.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides states that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with donkey's blood, if it helps not at all; and the cautery should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take ash and mix it with old oil, then place it on the depression located between the base of the thumb and another one called the instep.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After taking donkey hair, dry it and hold it over the flame until it becomes charcoal. Place it on the ash, let it stay until it turns black; and do this again several times, without stopping until you think by sense that it reaches to the hip bone and the pain is relieved. This method of cautery is called "donkey hair cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	Of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or from percussion or due to an excess of evacuation, or due to any likeness of cold matter spread out, none of these likenesses warrant cauterization, because it is something that comes from the introduction of cold matter into the body.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary to do this after the body has been emptied of fetid pills or other likenesses, by placing marks on the back at the place where the pain is felt, three lines with an 'enche' symbol in each line, and in each line more than .v. cauterizations according to the virtue and quantity that the body can endure; and perform the cauterization using the type of cautery called 'points'; and if you see fit, do three or four cauterizations on the middle one in this pattern:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often affects young children, and the signs of its beginning are that they become faint when they stand up and fear. And you find that in the last spine at the back and on us the appearance that comes upon the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you watch it being treated,
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	If the fire cautery burns each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see this, apply the fire cautery between the vertebrae at the place where it burns two or three lines in, and make sure the points are close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After the healing is complete as long as it is clean according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply the cautery in pus which is in the area of a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain in joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain is caused by moisture spreading throughout each limb, and when pain appears in the feet, which they call "gout" properly, and when it is due to cold reasons and treated with medicines that cannot cure it, then treatment involves using cautery in this manner: make the shape of the cautery around the joint of the foot, and have the olive oil cautery look like this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need that you touch on the side of the leg near the foot, if you make the cautery across the entire cautery saying "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains extend up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, if you need to apply the cautery on each knee three or four across each part, for the entire olive oil coated area; and if you need more, do so more, but don't remove your hand until the skin under the heat is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend just to the knees and back, then administer the cautery that we said in our chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make points between the inner wrist lines; and if there remains no pain on the wrists, make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come up to elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good care to the patient and take medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	And if you give him good care and cleanse phlegm, he will recover with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the rupture of the syphilitic sore
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When division comes about in anger, and the veins descend into the intestines it is newly so, you should know that when you are curing him or her, do not eat meat for that day; and use things that lighten the stomach, so that the wind descends from his or her abdomen. After that, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to cut his fat until the veins repair themselves, then take them with your fingers, and examine around the division above the bone in the hand's wrist, and at every sign it should be similar to half a circle from above the chest; then heat up the cautery which is described here:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	Until it is white and discharges pus.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then remove the boils at their source; and have the attendants shave his hand so it doesn't turn back; and work well on the thighs for the patient, and apply one over him to keep them in place under his thighs, and another under his buttocks where they can shave his hands; then apply the cautery to the sign on all your hand, and hold it straight until you touch the bone, and if you don't reach the bone on the first try, repeat once more until you get there; and be subtle that the boil doesn't spill when you do the cautery; so as not to burn them; and by this way the patients should not die or suffer from other maladies.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not reach to the bone with the cautery, your work is worthless.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cauteries for children be subtle according to their size, and also those for adults as large according to their measure; after three days apply wax ointment with the fire cauterizer until the scab is removed; after this application of other dressings until it heals properly, and let them lie forty days on their back so that the wound is well sealed; and these instructions should be followed for a long time, so that when they wish to go into rooms the boils do not burst.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when they want to get up, they should use a well-made bandage and wear it for another forty days; and have good rest, work little and guard against overeating and drinking too much, as well as not shouting too loud; and once he follows this advice, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say after the treatment of the tailor in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	And when wounds come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, then I will have the fire cautery done according to its quantity with each application, and perhaps use one-third of the full dose; after treating it according to what we have said; and none of the old ones said that one should apply the heat of the cautery at three angles according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	But the first sign is the location of the entrance and draw a line across the width above the wound, and another below, and hold your hand with the entire blade of the cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first applications of the cauterization are lighter and more moist.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in no limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	And when pain comes to any limb, due to falling or being struck, and that pain lasts for a long time, and medicine does not help in treating it, then it should be cauterized using the fire cautery known as "points", with applications of the cautery according to the length of the member, its smallness, its weakness and its usefulness, as well as its position of twists and pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If it has healed after the first cautery, that's fine; if not, start another cautery on this one, because these kinds of burns should make the patient feel discomfort in the limb close to where they are applied, so you must perform the cauteries as long as the body is healing.
de meselerie	Of cautery by fire, command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they pierce at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The patient is treated once with each cauterization by a great help, and similarly the disease comes from the putrefaction of humor and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	Can't you see the cauterizer? Please take care that if the disease is at the beginning, and it's treated according to what we have said in the division, without spreading or remaining there, and you doubt that the corruption would spread throughout the body, then do these cauterizations on the head: I move the head from one side to another nine times, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and II on the two horns, and I behind on the cheekbones; and let your hand stay as long as the cauterization reaches up to the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the fumes of large humors can escape; and cauterize it lightly according to what was done previously.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the moisture is everywhere dispersed; and it is clearly absent, then you should cauterize with these cauterizing tools that we have mentioned: one on top of the nose, and two cauterizations on the spine at the neck, and six cauterizations on the spine of the back, and one big one over the buttocks and another down below, and two on the shoulders; and two around the knees, and two on the tendons of the feet, and one on each joint of hands and feet, and in the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are behind the last toe, do not burn them. And never cauterize over bone at the elbow, and one more on the bone of the stomach, and one more on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more I use a cautery, the more help it becomes, and benefits the patient; and know that patients do not feel pain from the cautery as healthy individuals would, for their body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it should be that the cautery is large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in ways of iron tools.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After the treatment, wash the affected area with flour mixed with honey and other treatments until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When inflammation occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters but remains inflamed, then apply cauteries to the limb according to its size and the size of the limb; and let the cauteries penetrate a little into the edge of the wound. Then treat it with ointments until it heals.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And never does one perform cautery on the hand and foot and back, at the place where the nerve is that makes the limb move; and thus there must be an incision; and in no way should anyone interfere unless they are knowledgeable about the limbs and the release points of the moving nerves in the body.
de albaras	Of cautery from fire, command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is advanced, and medicine in its original form proves ineffective, then apply a small amount of cautery using a fire cautery, according to the quantity of the root being burned, until the white part emerges and changes color; then treat with flour mixed with lentils several times along with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood from rooster and blood from duck, each in one part; mix all together, wrap it with a cloth, and let it be exposed on the affected area until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The treatment for gangrene by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When the ulcer begins and you see it stop, if you notice this, cauterize with the fire cautery around the entire circumference of the ulcer.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And still the wise ones say that one should also cauterize in the middle of the ulcer; and yet I do not think this is good, for I fear it might cause the tissue to become damaged and decayed, and I have already decided never to do so again; and a more straightforward approach is that one should cauterize around, with the fire cautery which is called 'circular', as we described in the context of various cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the boil that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has an illness called 'adubelati', and it slowly progresses towards death due to overactivity or the excess caused by her, or as she ages with weakness (that is, being too old), and she has little blood, or because of tension; and you see that she is hastening to die: then cauterize internally using several small cauteries; after which leave it like this.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	And it will hasten towards death.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced right through with all the cautery, if you heat up this form of the cautery:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of this illness called 'adubelati', while the cauteries have penetrated through its heart, and let these cauteries be such that they push out from within in such a way that the process of decay is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After you have treated it as long as it has been properly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure by fire through iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another form of disease one encounters is called 'corrosive', and it is nothing else but a member infection for it destroys members as if the dry woods were being burned.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in the body that can endure a fire cautery, then prepare your fire cauteries with small and large tongs according to where the disease is in the body; after cauterizing all around until you remove the entire corruption, and leave nothing behind, so that everything that has been corrupted be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And leave it for three days, and apply burning with oil on the treated areas until the dryness from the fire has healed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the cure of ointments that produce flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if after three days you see that the wound is healing well, this is good; and if not, then reapply the cautery to where it has remained on your shoulder from the corruption of the first one.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this method was sometimes treated with medicine instead of the fire cautery; but still, the fire cautery is more effective. I have already mentioned the treatment for the application of medicine elsewhere in my division: use it whenever you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	Of stones that come to stones
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Quite often, stones that emerge from within cause a sickness known as "cysts" according to our understanding, and it is a large lump that causes pain in the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauteries for this sickness are done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This means, you know, fire cautery and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery commands you to heat it just like a feather from a goose; make sure it is well made of good iron at the size that can hold the nail in all directions, and ensure there are delicate edges. After making it very hot on the nail, twist your hand around the stick fully until it reaches the end of the hole; and leave it like this for three days until it begins to produce gangrene; then have him make a dressing of ground wild onions mixed with oil, and let the dressing remain all night, and the nail will come out and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the area with ointment until it is cleansed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they have turned on the inside of your arm and occur many times in hands and nails, it is necessary that you take a hot water cautery; and do this way: take a spider hair or iron, or a goose feather, and place them over the nail and the thistle, which means for warts. And put the rod where it turns everything around completely, then add a bit of hot water, and hold your hand well, pressing with your hand as you turn the edge of the rod to the root of the nail, and then find the deep passage of hot water all the way to the root; and let the patient endure the hot water bite for a little an hour; then leave it like this, and it will be uprooted from all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	So treat one after another, until you have treated all those within the body, then cleanse of growths that cause flesh.
li cure dou trembler	treatment for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	And when someone shakes due to cold or nerves, or malaria fever or other conditions, it should be that you do this: apply three or four hot applications on the spine of the back, one hot application between each vertebra; and one application under the fingers and one at stomach with the olive cautery. If this doesn't stop shaking, then hasten the recovery from the cold illness.
des pustules puans	pimple sores
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Every time visible from outside the body is bathed, or pus-filled ulcers that come from large corrupted matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	When they become visible at the start that one should do cautery on each tip of the pimple: a fine fire stick, whose tip is held in the flame, or from the root of long Aristolochia, or with the lentil-shaped cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And each time they are cauterized at the beginning when they become visible, according to this manner, and they cannot grow into more before, but all excesses from which they come are removed, and it becomes healthy; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there have been great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound, or during the incision of an abscess, or with the cautery on the limb, and similar situations; and it is very unpleasant to smell this.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And yet, when this happens to no one, if you hurry to place your index finger on the cut of the vein, hold it there until the pulse ceases under your finger and no more drop escapes; then heat several olive oil cautery tools, both small and large, until they are all red hot. Then take one, or a large one depending on the size of the wound and its location where the artery is routed, and place the cautery over that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery in contact until the pulse has been extinguished.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cauteries are extinguished, then take one of another cautery that is heated quickly.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And continue to apply this one after the other until the pulse has been extinguished completely; and beware that you do not burn the nerve underneath it, and that no harm comes upon the patient; know that when there is no beat of the artery, you cannot properly extinguish the pulse even if the artery is large, except through four methods as we have said: by cautery, or by extraction if it has not been treated, or by strong tightening of a thread, or by medicines placed on which have the power to extinguish the blood; and bind it and hold it in place.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers bandaging tightly with cloths or places burning objects upon them, or other similar things, if it does not benefit, they should not do so.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if such an event occurs and there is no sight or medicine available, should place their finger upon the wound of the vein as we have said, and properly extend it until the coldness remains above the wound and above the vein; and they must not move it but moisten it with cool water often enough until it becomes very cold so long that the finger is frozen, swollen and remains cold; and apply cauteries and medicines where necessary.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book on treatments for amputations
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases where it is necessary to use a fire cautery or medicine cauter, and their uses, causes, instruments, and forms of cauterization; and we placed that chapter up until the knee, and I will proceed with this chapter in the same manner for those who find them more easily understandable.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And as I begin this, it is necessary, dear child, that you understand that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than with the first uses of a cautery instrument, and for this reason it requires greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often blood evacuation when opening veins, and incising abscesses, and treating wounds, and extracting arrows, and cutting into stones, among other things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I urge you to refrain from foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For few ways of people come into treatments.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	if they come from those who have barely survived with their illness that they die lightly due to the ignorance they find in their disease, and the severity of their evil; and from this one must have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And of these ones who give their meaning and say: "Wait, I am okay"; and the illness is deceitful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not right that you consent to those who come to you with this manner, but place more consideration in your honor than in your greed, and do not act foolishly but wisely from what you are certain and can know; and use prediction and indication in treatments for the well-being of your patients; and this will help you gain good reputation, glory, and lasting memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dear child, our kings give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to inspire from the holy inspiration of their hand, so be it.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or if I have organized this chapter by devising it in parts according to chapters, specifically regarding the sections on cauteries as I devised them from the head down to the feet, so that you will find it easier to understand what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	The head filled with water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this disease comes about very often in infants at birth, and when the mother restrains the head of the infant too tightly; and it happens not because of any known reason.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I never see this disease in anyone other than children, and among all those I have seen, death came quickly; and because of this, it seems to me that I should stop the work with these kinds of treatments.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw an infant of whom the shoulder was full of water, and the head swelled each day to such a degree that it could no longer bear it; and because of this moisture, he died. This moisture is assembled over the bone near the elbow, between the bone and the skin; and the surgical procedures are such that the moisture is between the bone and the skin, and the abscesses are small, causing you to cut into the head along a broad slit; and it goes as far as two inches in length while the moisture flows. And see here the shape of the suppuration:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If there is more moisture involved, and if the abscess is bigger, then make two incisions in a cross-like manner, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and if you see that the openings near the head on both sides are widened from each part, and the sharp pain increases when you press it with your hand inside, and this does not respond: then it is necessary to cut through the middle of the head with three incisions according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after making the incision, remove all moisture completely outside.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After holding the cuts from cloths and powders, then I apply wine and oil, and leave it like this for five days; afterwards release him, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, and let the head rest equally, then let the patient eat dried meat of the back of a wet animal until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another way of incision is that you look at where the opening of the abscess is large, and the assembly of the water; for it is never in front; it is never behind; neither to the right; nor to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Then cut the place where the abscess opens and fill with water, make a cut according to what you are able to do; and be careful not to sever an artery; look for blood flow, so that the patient dies due to bleeding and removal of moisture.
de reume	regarding the treatment
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to anyone a disease called "catarrh" in the eyes or at the anus, and this illness is old, and the treatment with medicine does not help, then the last resort therapy would be the cauterization using which one severs those two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you see them recover, the patient should take off his head; after that, rub the back of one with a coarse cloth until the arteries are visible, then remove the patient's neck up to all the cloth. Then look where the vein lies, and on both sides after the ears, and they have come together; then mark the sides with an incision, then cut each side from an incising tool in two parts, until the cut reaches the bone, and do this by making cuts around the size of a large head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you can see it, hold the blade near the artery and cut above it, also making a cut as deep as two inches through it.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein has been cut, make sure that the blood flows continuously outwards at the top.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open upon feeling, it must be that you measure the size of the space up to three fingers, then press and push until reaching the bone; and what needs to be removed from blood is six c/ (approximately 3.6 liters), and by chance a little more or less according to how the patient can bear it, and the filling of the artery; then observe the wound: if it remains on the bone just above the cut point, if there's no abscess developing under the cut, then close the wound and bind it, and apply ointment until it heals.
de emigrainne	of headache
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old age headaches and acute colds arise, due to the moisture from tears and heat in the temples and forehead area as well as similar symptoms, it is treated through various methods of medical treatment and none of these help. Therefore, we should remove the veins of the temples and cauterize them, as we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of their extraction is such that one should place themselves behind the hair on the temples of their patient and hear at the artery which opens in the temple, because it opens well through its beating and responds only within some very cold men; and if it does respond, then restrain their neck by some cloths of theirs, then rub their head with a rough cloth, and raise their head in hot water until the artery appears clearly. Then take the spatula from which this is made:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then lightly scrape the skin until you feel the artery, then take it up high with forceps, and remove all threads that are from each part; and if the artery is thin, cut it at the tip of the little finger, then cut out that part according to the size of two shoulders.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if she isn't cured, then neither will her child live fully at all.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And drain out six and seven times up to ten times; and if the artery is large, it is necessary that you tie it with two thick silk threads for double strength so that decay does not occur before the welding of the wound, and it does not recur with bleeding; then remove the excess matter between those two threads at that time itself, and then, if you see fit, gently cauterize up to the bone with a small cautery tool until the heads are hollowed out; this is the completed work, if the patient does not have fever and has hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cauterizations are aid to finish off the wetnesses: because it is more great aid for the wetnesses.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For it is necessary for the extraction of arteries that we fill the entire area with old cotton and place good tents on top; and when they are released, if you apply dry medicine-making substances that produce pus, as well as tents, until they become clean; and if there's a lack of a copper piece in the artery, you must do it like what you perform, hurry by cauterizing or use the area filled with vitriol and hold it tightly with your hand so the wound becomes dry; and if you don't have that tool at hand, insert a small amount into the cotton until the wound is frozen, and rinse the cotton in cold water until pus stops coming out, then hold it properly. And the one who is slower and lighter during the extraction of the artery should cauterize the skin of this cauterization trenching for two parts, but make sure the trenchings are well separated to last longer with heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the tools are too tight, it retains less of its heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And there should be between the two knives an inch of space, and then when you mark to close the two ends, and you place the hot iron up until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in both places; and they must be separated by about one inch because this cautery does not stick throughout completely; and this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes are draining through veins above the neck bone at the head's back, and no benefit is received from the medicine being applied there, you'll see the skin turn red in response to it, and feel your forehead pulsate as if with a fever; and wherever they are damp and moist so that paper hairs fall off, and the papers heat up due to this, and are burned by the heat of the tears, then this treatment must be used.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they named the old "healer of burns", and if you treat a person with this illness, let them have hair on their head or forehead, then make three cuts evenly across the forehead according to its length; and make one cut halfway down along each side of the forehead, like two doves all in line from nose to mouth until they join at the corner, and the other two cuts are parallel to the sides through the paper-like skin. And beware not to cut the arteries that run above the skin; and keep your hand away from the continuation of both jaws, and each wound should be three inches wide across their joins; have a piece of sponge and some cloths ready to wipe off any blood, then use the sharp blade from one of these four corners they form.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	After making the cut behind the temple up to the second cut; and burn all the skin that is between the two cuts completely until it reaches the flesh above the bone. Then cut further along the middle cut up to the other end, and then remove this hot broth.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If there's a first cut in the opening made with the tool known as "cutter", and it is very sharp on one side, while on the other side it's blunt, not sharp, and this has the form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And position the incision towards the soft tissue at the knee, and direct the cut towards the bone at the kneecap, and press the blade until it feels at the smallest fissure.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And remove all the vessels that descend from the head as veins until the cut continues down to where it opens at the knee, and then do more cutting in the middle fissure up to the other opening; and then extract equal blood, express the wound for the taken blood; then place a piece of old cotton into each incision, and apply moist cloths soaked in wine and oil and garlic, and make sure not to let pus appear; and on the third day, release the stitches, and bring a large amount of water bathing, then administer a remedy with basilicum oil, and other remedies for wounds until they are healed.
dou reume des eulz	from the pus
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When it comes to sudden catarrh (illness) accustomed to occur, and you see the eyes red and small, and weakening of vision, and burnt paper; and the hair is greasy, and one sweats profusely in fever, and the body shivers; then know by these occurrences that those substances and that catarrh do not come from many veins, and the moist cure that it is, if it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you instruct the patient behind his forehead, then make a large cut through the middle of the forehead, and another small one below.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And start from the temple on the left to the temple on the right, and let the incision go until it reaches the bone; and move your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move during eating; and when the bone is revealed, drain all the blood with a sponge, then clean inside the two lips of the incision and place old cotton between them, and lin fabric; then cover it with moist cloths soaked in wine and oil, and avoid removing any tissue; once removed, you should rub the bone until the root begins to appear, then cleanse it with things that dry out roots.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of coloflorence, and make a paste; and apply this paste to the wounds to promote flesh growth everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Regarding ear piercing.
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that is inserted into the ears is one of the four things: or grains, or beast, or mine stones or similar things such as iron; or seed, such as beans, peas; or flowing matter such as water and air and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it closes in the ear hole or any other manner of thing that does not fit with the ear, and does not grow in the ear, place the ear under the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, if any purple or saffron oil distills out, then proceed with extraction; and make them sneeze while holding a candle, and stuff their nostrils when they are sneezing, put pieces of cloth or wool inside the ear; and place the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	It often comes good through this treatment; and if it does not come out, then proceed with the removal by using fine needles, of which here is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out with the forceps, that's good; if not, proceed with extraction using fine forceps of small double curvature; and if it does not jump out through this, then make a spider's thread and plug the end of the thread or the ear wick strongly, and stuff wax into the part inside the thread so that nothing can enter the hole with the thread; then pull forcefully, because many times it succeeds as we have said; and if it doesn't succeed in this manner, then take some glue from this, mix it with its oils, put a small tool suitable for this task, and place a little cotton inside; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and pull forcefully.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not respond to all these things that we have mentioned, you must quickly make an incision into the ear in order to drain pus and abscesses, and relieve the pain. The method of this cut is that you first displace the head of the ear with the help of the patient's cephalic bone, and remove blood according to its natural extent, then place the head back between your hands and turn the ear upwards, making a small incision at the base of the ear near the fatty part hanging down; and make the cut in such a way that it resembles a crescent moon as you approach the bone. Then break through the bone according to your capability and suck out quickly into your mouth; and continue this until it's clean.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is grains that are inside and they swell up, you should administer extraction; and if it cannot come out, then administer a thin spatula according to this shape:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	And perform an incision on that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this if you think the grains are wet due to ear moisture, until you have made many pieces; then remove it with fine needles and sucking, as we have said, so that extractions can be facilitated.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In an earache then, when one sneezes in the ear, it is necessary for the patient to do a few sniffs of the cold air first, and fully fill the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And be sootish above that ear itself where the illness is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps up through heaven, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	And if heaven does not permit it, take many stones according to the length of your nose and make them light, and heat them slightly on fire; then put one or more of these stones into their ear, and place the other from his foot on the other side, and set another stone against the stone that is in the ear; and keep repeating this with each stone as long as the illness leaves completely, and thus jumps out all its strength; and if you see it, take a rush and insert one of your fingers into the ear, and bring the other end of the rush in contact with fire until the tip of the longest rush is burned; then redo several rushes until the illness leaves entirely, as we have said about stones.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small size, like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in division; but if it is of large size that one can feel, perform the extraction with forceps; and this is the more gentle thing to remove which is inside the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of the worms in the ears, when you follow the treatments as we have said in division and regarding distillations, and if the cure does not help, then it is necessary that you observe the ear under the sun: if there are no worms visible, then remove them with fine forceps; and if nothing can be seen, then take this form of cane which is described here.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And apply the finest point to the ear according to the amount of pain the patient endures, then form into the entire canal; do this often until all the pus has come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not wish to come out, soak the cotton tip of the swab as I have said in the cavity; and if they do not protrude like we said, administer distillations that the old ones have proven effective for worm expulsion; and you will find instructions on distillations elsewhere; and distill your oils and medicines into the ear using this tool, according to this form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And let it be made of silver or lead, with a narrow end at the bottom and .i. small tube above for distillation; and to press within the distillation use .i. properly made tool from lead suitable for this purpose, and if you see .i. rasp attached to the tip wrapped around the inner extension in cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and what you see of your medicines inside the tube, and the tube is in the ear; then push within the rasp all the cotton, and press your hand properly until the oil is distilled or out of the ear; and feel the patient internally, and let one hot distillation be poured for .i. minute with fire as it's done in the ear; and keep it from being too cold, because the medicine wouldn't be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Regarding ear piercing.
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without any hair on their ears; and this same thing happens to adults due to wound impalement or a fetus forming inside the ear, and these wounds never enter the ear, so one cannot see them; and neither does it happen that two hairs emerge from the absence of hair, and one can see this clearly.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes in through the wound, if one cannot see it, is of concern for its internal healing at various stages, and you should understand that when it's appropriate to place the ear under the sun; and look inside: if you see the obvious growth, if the work has completed this form of pus that I've mentioned.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be so when cutting in front and behind completely flat surfaces, ensuring no harm to the ear; if there's a growth due to pus or part of the ear, use fine needles to pinch it gently until all that is purulent has been removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the probes go all the way into the ear, take a thin and light probe, heat it slightly on the flame, then place it inside the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the inflammation that makes the patient's ears painful upon touch, lightly puncture it and ensure not to damage the ear nerves; then place a tent in the ear according to its size at the opening, and fill the ointment from Egypt into the wound.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Continue this task every day until the wound is healed, or take a tent and moisten it with rose water, and add powdered vitriol. And if you see swelling in the ear, it's necessary to remove the tent and insert another moistened one made of rose oil and beeswax, until the swelling disappears; then treat until it is clean.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge and soak it in cold water, then place it on the ear, and apply other treatments that stop bleeding which are also effective against distillations.
de la char des papieres	Of the ash of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	When the wax that comes from the ears when they are wet and dry, it is necessary for you to spread them with forceps and scissors, and take a spatule from its roots; then put under the eye vitriol powder.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if it is not removed, then apply the small lens cautery and burn after making an incision. And afterwards clean up several times, so that no part of its roots remains; and when they are burned by fire, those roots get burnt and do not return.
de la gresle	Of the gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times papers bring in things that seem greasy by their form and hardness. Because of this, there is a disease called "granulation", which is a collection of large moisture on the surface and beneath; its symptoms include: be alert when granulation stops spreading to all sides, it's an easily understood matter; so perform these steps broadly first, then gently scrape each part, then pinch it, and finally cut it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cut the paper without piercing it slightly, do not harm the patient; and if there is a large tear, and if it has a seam, cure until it heals completely; and if it is small, don't apply too much force, because the ointment will heal it quickly and encourage new tissue growth.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the granuloma descends within the ear towards the part above, flip the paper, and place the granuloma on some pincers, then cut it from one side to the other; and if the paper is displaced by the incision, this does not cause any pain; and when the granuloma has been cut out, drain off the salty water, and heal the region where flesh is nourished until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	Of the grease of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Extraction is a fat that binds on the paper's mesh, and this happens more among children than adults, and causes great distress to their eyes, and it brings them tears in the mornings, and they cannot look at the sunlight because tears hurry into their eyes; for this reason, they lie down by their stools always, sleep upright, and have wet paper under their foreheads that is covered with the extraction which opens in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press your hand on it and feel the extraction between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the way of the operation is that the patient places their head in your hand; and then take one linen cloth, and arrange a tent like a circle according to the quantity that contains extraction from each part, then place it on them; and press with both your hands on either side so that the extraction is collected within the circle; then make in the middle of the moisture in the hollow at the tip a cut not too wide, which should not be larger than the wound when made to open a vein; and make the leather fit perfectly until you can see the extraction from it; and with various positions extraction comes out through the slit according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Remove it then with the whole piece of flannel cloth between your hands outside, turn your hand to the right and left until it is dispersed; and make sure you do not stick in the slit, that you do not reach all the way to the tip up to the eye, that you do not hurt.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the incision doesn't open at the beginning of the cut, you should slightly enlarge the cut a bit; then pull it as we have instructed. After that, smear with a moist cloth and water, then place it on the wound, and wrap it tightly in a bandage.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if there are those who grind salt and place it to spoil the moisture that has remained.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it as long as it remains sound.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it comes to cutting out pus at the site, if the treatment of plastering is done until it becomes clean.
des poilz des papieres	Of paper hairs
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When paper grows hairs atypical of its nature and ages, if they harm the eyes, they cause diseases such as habitual tears, paper softening, and albugine. All these are causes leading to eye damage; treatment should be done in four ways: through a combined fire cautery method, or by using water medicine as described in the previous chapter on cauterization methods, and this is also applicable when dealing with injuries, whether you choose to treat it surgically by incision and stitching or by suturing, depending on what I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It is necessary that you place the eyeball in its health and then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it turns, it's good; if not, stick a needle through at all.1 thread from above; and be it beyond the margin of the paper or where the hairs grow beneath these hairs, stitch one thread above across the entire paper and then turn it on the knife. Then cut in the area under the paper, under the atypical hairs, to all the spatumile until the large tear to the small; then extract one thread, place a tiny cotton tent and scrap of cloth on top of the paper, then draw a figure like that of bay leaf on the paper, just as you must make sure the figure matches the quantity you see, lifting the paper that is woven underneath.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if that requires working with large quantities of paper according to how the paper is softened; then have all the spume spread over the two lines you indicated, and start from the largest hole to the smallest; then leave one of the fractures near the natural hairs until they grow, then press the inch into one of the two corners of that place, then scrape it entirely; then join the two edges with a thin thread using one needle, remove the blood, and weave the excess threads over the two central points in any sticky things if you see fit; and if this isn't done, don't worry about it, leave the stitches until three or four days; then treat the wound without stitches with drying and constraining substances, because the paper heals due to the tightening of the wound and the joining together of the material but the stitch is loose (as older people said), and it's work without fear; and there's another way: and you draw a piece of paper in such a shape that it resembles the leaf of myrtle as we have described, with three inches cut out according to this form:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut those that are above at small forces evenly according to the shape which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the forceps, and the object is not equal, take a needle with thread instead and place it in your hand. And hold the other piece of thread at the large artery, and the second piece of thread at the small one. Then bring both threads into alignment evenly between your fingers; then lift your hand evenly, lifting all the skin above where you pierced it as we have described previously, then stitch together the two edges of the wound longitudinally, and treat only when it is clean. And if pus comes during incision, soothe it with tallow and soothing ointment; and any time the paper hair is converted: then follow what we have said about incisions; but the stitches in both cases are more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of the ears follows this form: and it is that you should convert the paper and cut inside according to what I have said, and then make four stitches by art, and two fine threads each as long as the length of the paper and wide as the space between them; and hold four hair ends from each end. Then assemble both delicately above what stands on the paper near the eye, and pull the four stitches from the four sides together; and leave it like this for a few days, and the skin that is held will heal and tighten and close, until it comes out naturally.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it takes time or the patient has strength, then treat until they are clean. And when the wound is stitched and raised, and no hair will stick again; this is the form you make with the two needles according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work involves taking the following steps: you should choose a fine needle and attach two threads of silk that are fine and strong. Then, assemble the joints carefully by connecting them with each thread delicately. The lengths of the threads should be about one hand's length apart. Next, in this process, prepare another thread that is both fine and made of silk briefly; tie the joint to it securely. Place the patient's head into your position for healing; ensure the light shines on the work area as it requires subtlety and precision. Then insert the needle throughout the entire process at the root where hair is attached, piercing through paper quickly while pulling upwards from natural hair. After that, remove the hair up to the process line in the paper, and secure this hair in place if there are more than one or two hairs; finally, pull your hand out ensuring all the hairs extend fully from the process line onto the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the process is treated and the hair doesn't come forth with it, then pull the process away from all the thread that you have ordered, until the process extends far above the end and you can see this through your sight; then pull the process and the thread, cover your eye and leave it covered for two days or three, until the hair hardens in its place and grows new flesh. And if the hair is small, accompany it with one long hair from a natural source, and lift it up alongside the other or let it be lifted by you until it's stretched out, then let it go.
de la porriture de l’oil	Regarding the decay of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease which is called 'Aleacrati' or the corruption comes to the eye, if it occurs in two ways: one naturally, and the other unnaturally.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And happens suddenly from injury, or through surgery or cautery treatment, and by similar actions.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the method of the operation in this case is that you cut through the scar tissue, and open the lips, and place linen wadding inside, and hold it until the wound heals; and there should be no use of things in treating it that dry out and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	But if you do this, the illness returns worse than the first; yet work with things that soften, such as fenugreek; and washes in water or vinegar and linseed oil solutions, and onion poultices made in none of the oils, and wrap a tent, and treat it thus.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasures of your cure are that you must beware not to reattach it in a form as it was before; and the operations we have spoken about do not go beyond treatments for this disease so that it does not return in the same form as it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	Of the fluid which comes to the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease, which truly is called 'axacrati', and it's natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	Accidents come from wounds, cracks and cauterizations, as well as similar incidents. In the work of this chapter, if you take a needle with double thread, insert it into the flesh, and make the hole on the left eyelid from inside outwards until you reach the right one; then, the needle emerges in two parts of the flesh. Then the flesh covers the entire length of the needle, and the copes (a piece of cloth) are large at the spatumile opening.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure on paper is as expected according to what should be, that's good; and if not, take a piece of wax (ruse) and place it in the crack, turn the paper, and make two cuts inside the paper. And let there be two edges for the two cracks at the corners of the incision you have made, and make an angle such that when they are assembled, the figure is also like the figure of a letter which has no 'I griesche'; then remove that flesh according to its size and thickness from where the paper was placed. Then adjust the two lost parts and sew them with wool thread; then apply the treatment we have spoken about for softening medicines, and poultices, until it's healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a cut or stitch or cautery, it is necessary that you make a full length cut along the hairs of the paper (which could be interpreted as skin), and follow the procedure mentioned previously; then split between the two halves like a tent, as I have said. One must perform the operation according to the shape of the disease for she varies greatly in form. The surgeons should prepare themselves with all necessary tools so that they can return the figure to its natural shape; and even the patients themselves need to do this, according to what actions suit the procedure and instruments most in various conditions.
dou soudement de la papiere	right away from the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this stitch happens in human hands in such a way that the paper above is glued with the white of the egg, and cannot move or do its natural works, then it is necessary that you pierce the tip of a razor under the paper, and lift it up; and stretch it to the clamps, until you get to the delicate part that comes out of the fine spatula, which should neither be too sharp nor too thin, so that the patient does not suffer from the spatula being too sharp and causing irritation in their eye; and make your incision, burn this gathered together part slightly, gently, so that the paper regrows according to its natural shape; and cleanse all of it, and do not put any salty water into the eye once, then lift it with cool water and wool; and after that, fill between the paper and the eye with a linen tent, and place wet wool on top of the eye; and after this, use cold colliers and other things to heal until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the eye's eyelid
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the nail is in two ways: it's nervously and resembles one hard substance, and another which isn't nerve-like, but resembles white moisture frozen, that when you touch it with iron and care with the force of pincers, it cannot; and both appearances start at the large lacrimal sac, and grow a little by a little until they cover all the eye and all the light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the way of incision is that the patient puts their head in your healthy position, then lets out the pus; and lifts the eyes with care; then takes off the paper with your hand, then straightens the nail by pinching it slightly from both sides, and lays it above; then take a needle, and insert one horsehair, or cow hair, or ox hair, and one strong thread; and double the needle point slightly and sews it into the nail, piercing all of the needle through, and fastens the nail with a thread and lays it above, and scalds right down the length of each hair on the edge of the nail until it reaches the pupil and the silk fibre to the base of the hair up to the root, then cuts off the remaining part under the lacrimal sac from all the delicate tissue and small forces, and leaves the natural tear duct, so that no body fluids flow out through the incision as usual; and only once is the nail laid at the bottom of the cut, and with the thread, just like we have said; then scalds off all the delicate tissue from this point onwards, it being thus the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And ensure that the cautery does not touch the flesh and tear it, nor should the needle pierce; and after making the incision, pour a little flour into the wound, then make a collar out of stannic acid paste, and let this remain until the next day. Then clean as is appropriate for as long as they are well.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nerveless and you cannot push in the needle, and the nail cuticles cannot enter it, this issue of nail-like structure can be treated with many medicines; they will come out as I have described in the division section, and if you see them filled, treat the eye with this medical knowledge, take the cautery point lightly sharp according to this shape:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And lift the nail gently upwards, and if you see that it is not getting smaller and presses against the reason, distill from your mouth into the eye a collar made of stannic acid and red paste and flour, and swab out the eye until the next day; then begin another procedure in this same way, as long as she is completely extracted.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If there is no opposing factor in the eye, like an abscess, then you must proceed, and first treat the abscess until it is healed. After that, restart the operation as was done before, until it heals.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh from the tear ducts is disturbed in the eye due to great harm, then suspend it on a pin and extract some parts but not all at once, until tears do not flow; then instill red oil into the eye which is made of stannic oxide.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that arises from the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Hair of some men is born in red once and covers the eyelid, stays on papers and turns outside, and looks like a rose from balsa wood; and so it happens with veins that when the patient's head is in health position, then they let out these hairs, and thus every piece of this flesh matches to suit those hairs, and holds it up by strength; then cuts off this first flesh part, goes on shaving until the end, make sure you don't hurt your eyes during this operation; and ensure that the incision is just as described with spatumile in our instructions for cutting a nail and using smaller forces of removal, like after showing this process in our chapter. And when all flesh has been cut off from inside through the incision, then use seil oil or distill into a red strip of medicine that seems corrosive, put outside cotton with egg covering so it's secure against any potential pus; and if nothing remains there, and if it stays empty, and you suspect heat pus, then leave your eyes alone and treat the boil for things soothing hot pus; then return to your operation until it is healthy again, and do this for all flesh parts matched in the eye by this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But still it is necessary that you treat each weak oil in the natural and accidental ways; and with iron operations, in this manner. Do not let your hand enter any of these operations until you see that the limb endures this operation.
des voines des eulz	of veins and eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	When veins are red that cover on the eye, they tolerate their work and weaken the sight for several days.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Thus the first thing you must do is look at where the eye is, along with where the swelling occurs, and there is no other disease besides that; then work on it in this manner: instruct the patient to position their head towards your health. Then suspend those veins according to every ounce by their wisdom, and have the ounces thin and double as per this shape:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two circumferences by degrees in one course according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then gently guide those veins with skillfulness and let blood flow hour by hour from another vein until you see the affected veins removed outside the eye; make sure that you do not pinch the eye against the ends of the needles, perform this operation at noon in front of the sun, and be very active in your work so as not to apply force other than on those veins. And when you have accomplished this, then pour a collier of green and red essence into the eye to corrupt that which remains due to sebel.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you don't have the strength to do all this at once, make a plaster with things that soothe the pain of the eyes and leave it on for some days until the pain is soothed and assured of no pus formation. Then start again according to this manner which was mentioned before until he/she is healed; and this is the form of strength:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the ear's discharge
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The remedy for what is called "arissati" fistula: when you cure it with a cautery and with burning water medicine as I have said before, and if it hasn't healed yet, there's the area where you cut into the abscess, at the place where it should die out, and drain all the moisture that's there, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is discovered, and you will see corruption and darkness, if you take possession of all the instrument as described here; and it is called "hard head", and made from iron in the shape of one inch of a chief's head, and pointed like a file just as it appears in this form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place the corrupted part of the bone upon it, then turn it between your hands and press your hand a little until you know that this corruption has been removed; and do this once, then restore the part with medicinal remedies.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	Let the limbs be sewn up, and if it grows anew, and the body of the bow is sewn up, and remains thus for forty days, and does not heal nor become abscessed, and no bad incidents occur, know that it is healed; if this is not the case, then there is another way: to bring back the fistula to the tip of the ear according to this shape: and you uncover the bone the second time with iron and with water medicines, and when it has been uncovered, take the tree in accordance to this shape, and have the iron limb at three angles, and the shaft should be thinned up to the head as shown here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	Place the tool over the bone near the eye socket, and keep your hand away from the nose a bit, then return fully to the front until it pierces the bone and feels it by touch when his breath is on you if he keeps his hand on his nose; and after restore the limb with dry medicine as I have taught you, and when the heat has developed and hardened the limbs, let the matter reach your nose; if a lighter thing appears in the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the extraction of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes open completely and there is no disturbance in the chest or diminution, it is necessary that you tie the patient. Then heal them, then place suckers or a plaster without piercing for suction on the eye, and apply an ointment made from acacia, aloe, incense, and sarsaparilla, and then drain the eye, and cover with strips of cloth; and the method for the strips is that you take cloths soft enough, fold each one into four, and place them one on top of another according to how many times the eye needs it. Then apply a hard bandage from above and repeat the suction without piercing; then remove the suckers and leave the eye bound day and night, and if the strips loosen, you should bind it even tighter; then remove the strip after day and night, and if you see that the eye is healing, this is good. If not, continue applying the ointment, cloths, and strips as well as the suckers until they are healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	from the breaking of an oviductal membrane
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruption comes to the oviductal membrane, then opened, and brings out material like a grain of resin and is observable; thus if you see this coated, the organs are such that you can insert a needle at the root of the part below until it reaches above there, then insert another needle or with double thread from the part behind the bladder; and make the puncture, and leave the first needle according to its position; then cut the part of the double thread and tie a portion of the membrane internally, and tightly stretch it, then remove the needle and place wool soaked in abundant egg on it; and let it until the thread and the membrane are both removed with the oviduct, then treat the eye with soothing substances until the wound is healed; and none of these times is the wound restrained by the membrane from each part of a circular piece of cloth until she is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes show a large appearance, then pierce at the thin sinus which comes through the back of the eye, and drain the watery mucus and lower the eyes, and enter into them straight away; then remove it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	From the bowl of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called "alcunnati" is only due to bile that has accumulated in the liver, resembling descending sharpness, and it's not real pain; and the appearance of this work's way is for you to make the patient sit on the prepared seat and straight, then take his head between your hands from both sides, and move him as much as you see bile coming above to your eyes; then let it be placed and doesn't descend and clear out light, observe the things inside the person just like they were supposed to; and if it doesn't descend immediately, know that it's pain, and if the descent of the bile isn't prepared as we've said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you are to have the afflicted person sit between your hands, then take the fine spatula and cut into the corneal tissue beginning from the junction of the conjunctiva with the cornea and the crown, as long as the bow exits; and when it has exited, pour in a hot, sharp water mixed with honey, or hot water that has been boiled with fenugreek, then apply another cure until she is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	From the tears of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have the signs of heat in the division, and what needs to be pricked; so we operate according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you make the afflicted person sit between your crossed hands, away from light by the sun, and tie the healthy eye tightly; then place the paper of the eye on your left hand where the eyes are together, or on your right hand if the eyes are apart; then take in your right hand (if the eyes are together), the tool called "almagda", or in your left hand if the eyes are apart; then place the tip of the tool below the cornea by about a finger's width into the corner of the eye up to the part lower than the tear duct, then push the tool called "almagda" forcefully and turn your hand until it pierces through the corner of the eye, feeling that almagda comes to the empty thing; and it is necessary that the size of the path of almagda be at full length to the measure of the space which starts from the lid until the end of the darkness; and this is the cornea of the eye; you will see the bone in the paper through the clarity of the corneal tissue, then place the tool up to it or where the water is, then expel along another way after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	Let him feel this now, so he can see the surgeon before him and the instrument in his own eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After a brief rest, and when the needle ascends the second vein, apply force with the tool. And when it's firmly in place and no longer rising, gently remove the pearl by twisting your hand back and forth; and then add a little powdered emerald water to the eye, removing what is inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then place the ointment or wet wool in olive oil and plentifully with an egg, and bind it with healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Yes, and those that belong to our nature, let's apply common balm with plenty of eggs.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, as there are people who have hard eyes, it is necessary that you take the tool called "alberit", which has this form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And prick only the conjunctive, do not go too far in it but make him lie subtly. Then put on pearls, as we have said; and upon completion of the operation provide a doctor to the patient who sleeps, for he sleeps on his back with his eyes closed; and refrain from all movements, and eat light meats, and do not move your head neither to the right nor to the left, and tie him according to his position until the third day. Then release him in that dark house himself, and test his vision, and make sure he sees nothing, then again tie him until the seventh day; and it should not be done during the course of treatment or after the incision now, but you should do this because the needle has risen quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	The healing of abscesses comes about when you release the eye before the seventh day and apply a dressing to the one who relieves the abscess; and once it is alleviated, then release the eye and place an eyelid on its face for a few days, and remain in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then leaves the house little by little, and adapts to its conditions; know that no pupils should interfere in such a situation.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	One came to us who was from Yrach, who told us that they used to pierce alum here, sucking out the fever, but still, I have never seen anyone like this in our land nor have I read about it in old books; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the appearances of the forms of mercury, because those who do not know them see them; and they are properly of the property:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And these are the head of the four from this same subtlety, and the last one in three angular veins.
de la char sor le neis	from the nostril's wax
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	None of the times, or hens' eggs laid in different ways, among which some resemble scorpions with the feet of pies; and if there are such cases, or if it has a charred carcass of a red color, and if a carcass is soured of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In this matter of those carcasses that are soured but not burned, you must have the patient lie between your hands facing the sun; work on their nostrils and sprinkle vinegar onto those carcasses, then remove them. Proceed with what you can bear up against the subtle sharp spittle on one side, until you know that this carcass is entirely ossified.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains no matter we cannot remove, if you open up to allow the use of all one instrument finely lightly, ensuring nothing stays; and should it not ascend, or pus appear, then seek it out as seems fit; and should these be malicious pus, act swiftly and apply heat until the pus is stopped and every hair is removed completely, then pour water or vinegar.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	In its operation and with moisture reaching up to the palate, know that there is blood; and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is new flesh in the bone above, which prevents tools from cutting: thus you must insert a thread of linen somewhat thick, tie it by hand, and leave an interval between each knot equal to one or less; then put the thread in the nose of the patient, through their power, pulling it so that it emerges inside the mouth; many times children perform this as a school task, and it is a simple thing for someone who wishes to do it; then hold the head coming out by the nose with one hand, and the other head coming out from the mouth with the other hand, and recognize each in turn observing us who are holding.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Follow this as you know that the new has corrupted that flesh, then pull out the child, bleed it and moisten the filth with Egyptian ointment, and place it back in front of the nose as before; follow this for three days or more, until the ointments dissolve all remaining rotten flesh; and then put a snail of opium under the nose for several days if it is sound, and if there are needs for dried medicines, you can use them; this is the form of the tool to purify the head, on which one distills oils and medicines or wine.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be of silver or arsenic, resembling an open lamp, like a rod, and guide him thus; and if you see fit, make a closed rod, and have your instrument filled for purging the head; and hold one end of the rod when you heat oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	from the nostril's wax
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times at the root of the nose a disease is born which is called 'telul', it grows and becomes large to see; and because this requires that you catch it at its beginning, then remove all bone, afterwards place in the middle the cautery or hot medicine; and if one delays catching it until it's big, they must beware if it's hard, changes color, loses sensation: don't touch it with iron as it is an infected abscess, for when you catch it once, it causes great harm to the patient; and if the abscess is due to heat contact, not due to losing color, and you see that one can catch all of it, then empty the patient and treat the area with dry and restraining substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nose has been treated and sewn up
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when solutions of continuation come into one of these venous organs, it profits little, for in no men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	So then it is necessary that this not happen to any, if you notice that the wound is still full of blood; and then adjust both lips for suturing, then treat until they are sound. And if the lips have dried out on one side and another, then it must be that you scorches all parts of their skin until they heal, then join the two lips for suturing, and tighten them, and apply powder of dragon's blood and incense finely ground; and place a piece of plaster or other welding plaster over the powders, and let it stay until it discharges through him, then treat with ointment until they are sound.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of the seam is such that you join the material: or with threads, as we have said in the abdominal seam; or with string, as I have informed you.
des apostemes des levres	removal of abscesses from lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	With the cautery of fire commanding the unwell to let hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
de la char des gencives	From the pulp of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times, bone pieces arise on the gums that are attached, which the ancients called "albulus"; you should hold it with forceps and remove it to its root, allowing for bleeding or blood; then place it under vitriol powder, or other drying and restrictive powders; if this flesh returns after incision and many times occur, when you remove it again, cauterize it: if it doesn't return even after the cautery; these are the forms of instruments to remove it.
des sordens	Of cautering with fire, instruct the patient to allow the hairs to grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they grow.
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Some occasions are gathered at the root of the teeth within the mouth between the gums, and unpleasant and rough layers; and several times there is a black tooth with citrine stones and worms until the decay reaches the gum, and the teeth become stinking. Therefore, you need to hold the patient in your hands and have their head on the floor, and pull out the teeth or the scales that you see, as long as nothing remains; and then perform on the darkness and greenness, and yellowness and other tones until they are removed. And if what needs to be taken out is done at the first occasion, it's good; if not, start again the next day and the third day, until you have everything pulled out. Know that teeth require various types of instruments for pulling, according to what the work shows, because the scraper that pulls teeth from outside has different shapes than that which is pulled between the teeth; these shapes and others should be ready with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	It is necessary when you treat the tooth for its pain that you delay removing it as long as possible, because one should not do this; because this is a very high material up to there therefore there should be no excuse for pulling.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Therefore, when the patient is forced to endure treatment, it is necessary for you to be sure of your actions.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain of the patient, and watch that it is not a toothache, and make the good tooth bleed; and throughout this process never allow the pain to subside because until all the disease has been removed. We already have the desire to do this for these soldiers. And when you are certain about which tooth is causing the issue, then it's necessary to sear around the tooth up to two-thirds of its circumference in order to protect the gum from all sides; next move your hands or use delicate tweezers at the first pinch and pinch, until it is well separated, then firmly secure the tweezers. And have the head of the patient under the saint between your knees, and keep your hand still so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the right tooth correctly without breaking it, and if it does not jump out forcefully, take none of these tools and gently push them inside each part from both sides, and move it in the same way you did initially.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and broken, you should fill it with sponges where they were; if you tightly extract it with forceps, make sure not to break it during extraction. It is important to carefully open inside the gum to remove the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be sure not to break it and leave a piece, and warn the patient about the greater pain from the root's mischief that comes after the initial one.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And beware not to do as the ignorant surgeons do, who break it once because of their haste and boldness, and don't provide them with what we have mentioned; but instead, they cause the same kind of disease to recur due to the roots that remain or the tooth that is broken. As often as this happens for diseases caused by an extraction. When you pull out the tooth, wash the mouth with wine or vinegar and salt; and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, wash the mouth with vitriol solution. If that doesn't work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the tools, with which you make your teeth first, should be long-pointed and have large handles, so they do not bend when you pull the tooth; and these are the shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And may have large parts that do not bend during use, and they should be made of well-crafted iron, with teeth for holding them securely.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains during extraction, it is necessary that you place wet cotton with butter inside for a day or two.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	As long as the legs are softened, and I clamp the tongs known as 'alefri', making it seem like a properly cared-for bird's leg; they should also be done like a file and this is its shape.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not wish to emerge from all these tongs, then you must uncover the flesh completely along the root and place an instrument which is called "althali", meaning palainche, as it appears in this form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And make it hollow and thick so that it doesn't break at all, and if the root jumps out through this, it's good; if not, use all of the instruments, as their forms come after this:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you have to help with this tool that has two points, as it appears in this form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other tools that are arranged in the proportion of teeth in front, and with this tool that seems like large pincers, as it appears in this form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And be aware of this tool so it cannot break, and know that many tools of bone exist; similarly with other tools which are not named; and also skilled surgeons find their own instrument on their own according to what their tasks and diseases show them. For there are parts of diseases where the old did not teach any tools due to their variety; and if it breaks from carrying or another bone, or if it rots when it should remain solid, if they seek out the tool they need among those I've mentioned, and help through gestures, as shown here is its formation:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And may they be large and well holding to hold the bone, so it does not escape but can be held and removed; and then return him to his place with medicines that suit this. And if there is decay in the bone and it is small, if he uses all of this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the tooth appears not according to its natural form, and it is ugly in shape, especially in maiden women, if you need to know whether the teeth have been born after the tooth and are not in their proper place, and cannot be worn or filed: then extract it; and if there is connection with the tooth, take this instrument as described here which resembles a pair of small hooks, and made of sharp iron.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the bite is made little by little in my hands because of the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move others, and if it appears that one could shave it off, then I grind it with a piece of stone as shown here:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it's also like the file used to make needles; and I grind the tooth slowly by hand lightly, so that it doesn't move until it finishes; then you level off at the end with a rasping tool, and if it's too sharp causing pain in the tongue, then you need to smooth out its roughness until it becomes even, so that it does not cause pain in the tongue nor damage speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the tooth is heated
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the tooth in front is removed, or by percussion or by blow, and the patient cannot press against it what they eat until it chokes them; if they should be treated with medicated substances that restrict, and this does not work; then you must restrain it with a gold thread, as silver threads turn green and rot, but gold never changes. And let the gold thread be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the size of the space between the teeth; and if you see that they are overlapping the teeth, take the thread and double the handle between two healthy teeth, then place the diseased teeth between their teeth if there is one or more, until you feel it properly on the other side of the healthy tooth; then repeat the covering up to where you interrupted, and pull your hand gently but firmly until it does not move; and tie your wound at the root so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then twist the roots with a thread on tweezers, and join them together, placing them between healthy teeth, making sure not to irritate the tongue; and then leave it that way as tight as possible without causing discomfort. If it comes loose or the threads slip out, you may use another thread in their place; if it remains intact and serves this way for its entire duration, and this becomes the arrangement of the teeth and the position of the two healthy roots and the two remaining ones, just as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth is removed, if it's placed back in its socket gradually, as we've said; and don't intervene with anything other than what you're instructed to do and can bear, and at no point make a form like an ox bone tooth, and place it in the socket where the defect is, then tighten it as we have described, and it stays and serves for as long as possible.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	covering the wound of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	None of the cords come from under the tongue or in their natural place at birth; or by accident from a healed wound. The procedures are such that you work on the mouth with the patient, having their head in your hand above them, and lift their tongue. Then twist the nerve cord until it's wide enough for the tongue to be dislodged from its position, and if there is hardness or swelling, this is due to a sudden wound healing, where you push out the hook and twist the nerve cord wide; and make sure not to let the incision go too deep as there might be an artery under it. And when you're done, you remove the patient from pinkish water or cold water, then place beneath the tongue a linen tent; and wipe down each night with antiseptic solution so that the wounds don't stick.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if bleeding occurs, put sulfur powder on the wound; and if it does not stop, cauterize with a slow-moving cautery which is good for this; then treat with other remedies until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it to be of any color or blackness or hardness that the illness doesn't feel, do not touch it for it's a sore; and if it declines towards yellow fever, and there is moisture present, use the hook on it and cut with a fine incision from both sides, then release it on all sides; and if your wound doesn’t heal in your operation, place vinegar on it until it stops bleeding, then return to your operation as long as you apply force; then lift your head away from wetness and ease, and continue other treatments until it has healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	extraction of throat abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	No matter comes inside the throat cankers which are called 'godath', and they should be properly named as the two almonds. And when you treat them, just like what we have said in the division, if they do not heal, then take care: if it's hard pus of small sense and with a thread-like color, don't touch it even with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if they are red and the root is big, don't touch it with iron even for bleeding; but leave it until it stops bleeding. Then you can remove it manually, or it would burst on its own. And if it's of a whitish color and the root is thin, have your tools ready to scoop out the pus, but first check if the pus clot is settled and calmed down.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then have the sick person sit in front of the sun, and let their limbs be in your right hand, and make them open their mouth and grip the surgeon's fingers between their hands, and press the tongue down to all the instrument, which is this form; and let it be made of silver or very fine tin as thin as knives.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Can you press the tongue with all this tool, and see the pus-filled abscess? Take an onion and place it in the almond, and pull it up harder than you can; take nothing from the tissues with it, then scoop it out with your tool, as shown here; which looks like some strength. And both the head are set straight, and one place the other, and are very sharp, and made of metal inside or of silver:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this tool at hand, scoop it out with forceps, as shown here:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And make the incisions on one side and the other; and when you have completed one of the almonds, complete the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the sick with hot water, or hot and easy-to-swallow water, and if blood drainage occurs, gargle with hot water, or peelings of cooked cherry stones, or leaves of myrtle, and similar things, until the saliva is completely drained; then complete the cure until it becomes well; and do not allow any new abscesses to form in the throat other than the two almonds, then proceed similarly as for the two almonds.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman with an abscess that was inside her throat, which is called the small abscess; and had I well nearly closed off the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe due to the blocked passage, and she could neither eat nor drink, and died if she remained like this for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess had risen so much that it had caused to become blocked both openings of the nose for two days.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I hurriedly performed the operation, inserting an awl into one of them, then pulled out the other limb with a large portion of the bow. Then, I made another cut on the other side near the nose, and I had the mouth open and pressed against the tongue; afterwards, I inserted the awl into these abscesses and cut away part, only releasing a little blood. And thus opened the windpipe in the woman, she began to drink water and later wine, and I did not stop cutting from that abscess for a long time; the abscess grew right back again, filling up my empty space until it was no longer just small; then I sewed her up and cauterized inside the throat: thus he remained without growing. And left those parts, only God made of him after me.
de l’uve	from the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When the return of blood flows into the eye, and it is filled out and extended, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it's distended and round, it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit, and you see that the extraction of pus has calmed down, and it's subtle; you should take it. And the one that is round, assembled, and not long, and it's red or reddish or black; you should avoid making an incision on it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	So, when you see it, according to the manner that I have said, regarding its swelling and length, you should have the patient sit in front of the sun, and press their tongue with a tool as we mentioned before; then insert the needle into the eye, pull it out slightly, and remove it using two tools that I mentioned earlier during the incision of the two almond-shaped areas.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you must not apply force beyond the natural boundary; because if you do so, you will harm the voice and speech. After incision, use what we have told about in the incisions of two kidneys, and treat until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient is prone to fear when being treated, it's necessary that you apply something in their sense of pain for cautery.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the way of the cautery is by using hot iron.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And when the patient feels their health returning, then press the tongue with the tool that we mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and use brisk water to do so, ensuring it is neither too thick nor too clear; and employ the movement of this instrument, as described here:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place our head with a hair or where we put the medicine, like in the movements of a spoon, and place the tool across all the medicine on the bile; and let the patient remain stationary on their side, so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth towards the medicine inside, ensuring it doesn't descend into the throat, and the wound heals. Then keep your hand over the medicine and press it onto the bile for half an hour's worth of quantity until you see that the irritation and actions of the medicine are subsiding; and if you notice this, take cotton and wrap it around any tool, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and place the tool on all the cotton above wax, until the cotton dries on the bile. And repeat this process as needed until the cauterization is perfect, then leave it to dry, and wait for four or five days afterwards. If you need to restart with medicine cauterization, do so, and after the cauterization of inside the bile, clean up that which was inside the medicine using a buttered cloth; rinse with cold water, and continue gargling until fully recovered.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This remedy is safer than the incision, not just the cautery; if it is treated with fumigation using this method, take camomile and myrrh and wormwood and rue and mint and similar herbs, and gather them all or any of them into one pot, and pour water into it, and let it boil; and ensure the pot is well sealed with strong earth, and in the middle of the pot place one cooking utensil according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And it applies to gold or arsenic, and in either case, place the tips of one's shoulders into the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises from the uterus through the vagina, while the uterus is necrotic; after that, repeat often, until the uterus dries up. Make sure you don't do this at the beginning of pus expulsion, because many things happen in that process; and don't perform this method during the decline of pus expulsion.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a reed and place an eggshell in the mouth of the patient so that it is not too hot for the patient; because the eggshell does not cause steam to burden the mouth. This is a good treatment together with salvation.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times, open in the throat bone or spine of fish, without anything else; if it is thus that you should apply what you can see, press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you may observe movement; and that which does not open at all and remains in the throat, you should make the patient vomit until the substance leaves; by chance if this thing is expelled through vomiting; or if the substance swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a small piece of dry bread; and attach to the sponge a thread, then swallow it again; and when she comes up to the surface, if it rises, and then proceed to draw out. And if this thing does not come out from what we have said, take one of a cork instrument according to this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the tools be adjusted near the neck so it can more easily enter the throat, have the head raised high above; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, so nothing goes beyond or pushes the bone inward; adjust the tools as they apply pressure on what is being removed, because if this happens, if you push it down too far, or pull force equally along the entire tool until it's done.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the windpipe
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Never use bleeding as medicine for the veins, as I have explained in division by medical treatment; and if this does not help, then look into the throat of the patient at noon, then press their tongue with the instrument I've told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see blood, direct it with all my small inch or with subtle pincers suitable for this task.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if it's not worth that, take a hair comb and place it in the throat of the patient, then apply pressure at the end of the comb to cause friction. And do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if you bathe the patient in water every day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full glass of cold water and let the patient drink it by mouth. Let them swallow it immediately without delay. Move their hand often; as soon as they sense the water, they will urinate.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if they do not urinate as we have said, then fumigate the patient with asafetida, using the tool I mentioned in the treatment of the eye; repeat this many times, for it will expel without causing harm.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the method of fumigation is as follows: you take a pan where charcoal sticks are placed and it's covered with a screen pierced in the middle, and in that hole is put the end of the instrument. Then pour your fumigation, and the patient puts the tip of the stick into their mouth, close their mouth so no smoke escapes but goes until the nose; and now the nasal passage will start to breathe out, if it doesn't exhale, then restart the fumigation several times; and let the patient feel thirsty and consume salty things and such, and do not drink water; and then it's necessary for them to excrete forcefully through this process.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	The form of the tool that treats the mucus, when you can see it, resembles curved tongs for moving things into the throat; and at the tip, it has a shape like a doctor's beak, and it also has a rasping edge, so whatever she takes cannot leave; now see this form:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	The nature of pus evacuations is as follows, according to memory recalling from both sides in this book, and they vary in perforation and size. This can be done in two ways; one is in its natural form, based on what it holds moisture-wise.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second method is for those who are within the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	For the abscesses on the neck are different from those in the base, and the abscesses on the inner thigh are different from those that come to joints, and each has its judgment in action.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And if it is abscesses one should not pierce until the bowel has died according to its development; and for some that need to be pierced as soon as they are ripe, and do not die according to their development, such as abscesses below joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come from joints, if they are cooked internally for some time, by chance the ligament and nerve of the joint might be corrupted, causing a constriction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	For the abscess is located within the main limb, and if you delay the puncturing until it's dead, it will harm the main limb. Or if it's located at the base, if you pierce or do so when it's dead; it should not that you puncture an abscess without digestion being completed, except for when it is at the base, that it might seep fully through and be inside, leading to a fistula; and cannot heal properly in a large period of time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And it should be known when the time is for perforating the abscess which has died according to its completion, and this is when the pain eases, and the departure of fever, and the reduction of pain and redness, and from the movement and sharpness at the head of the abscess, and other signs; and it should be done where the perforation stays higher above the abscess or below it depending on its location, and where it opens outwards; and make the perforation long through the body, and if the abscess is in hands or feet, joints and nerves and arteries, and all places where there are no wrinkles.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In these cases, according to that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the fatty part of the body, it is necessary that you wait for the puncturing until digestion has been fully completed, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before this, then the body gets full of venom from within him and is filled with all kinds of dirt; and by chance it hardens the skin and the parts beneath.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if there are no abscesses pierced along the width of the body, according to what the limb requires.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary that you use small incisions, small blades; and for large incisions, large blades, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses where it's appropriate to use leather and coverings; when they have become as rough as cloth, and are flattened, then it is necessary to do so similarly to how one treats infants: and for those that split into three angles, and those whose treatment is like the leaf of bay, as abscesses from corners; and if there are such where you make a round cut, and other cuts and similar cutting treatments.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	For those without a chief, like superficial abscesses, it's necessary to pierce them completely. And when the abscess is large and has grown substantially, you should pierce it but do not drain all its contents in that moment; instead, extract some part of it. Then flatten the abscess until it reaches the other side, then leave no means of drainage immediately after that; do this process multiple times from large to small, until the pus is drained completely. Similarly, if the patient has weak strength or is pregnant, or small children, or elderly and decrepit individuals.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For when it tries thrice with the opening of the vein, that perhaps kills the patient, and you would not know.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, be cautious of this chapter, and when you have opened your abscess, if the wound appears, observe that the wound from the abscess is small; and if it's a plain cut, then use linen or thick cotton patches; and if it's a large abscess with many cavities, then stitch one patch in each so they press against each other; and if you have cut into the abscess including some skin tissue, and sewed it back together internally, then fill it with old cotton or dry linen strips without moisture, and bandage up to the third day; then set it, and apply ointment until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if there occurs an evacuation of blood in your operation, you should apply cold and gentle pressure, dampen the cloth, and place it on the wound, changing it repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bleeding persists, you should manage the operation and treatment carefully. Use the powders I mentioned in this book when handling them. If it's an insect bite or if there is pus under the skin, it is advisable to place damp cloths soaked in wine and oil on the wound. If it's swollen, and the part of the body affected by a boil is soft, it's appropriate to cover with damp cloths soaked in water and oil, or cool wine and oil for three days, as we have said; then remove the pustule and clean it properly until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And it is necessary to know universally in treatments of abscesses: I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and here comes the chapter.
des soros	of the womb
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Cysts form on small abscesses, and they are treated in ways that involve bandages, similar to a jeweler working with glass, and there are many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that have moisture like fat or swellings; and there are others that are hard and stony to the tailor's touch, and there is no doubt that they affect arteries without causing opposition.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the tasks of tailoring involve using all kinds of tools that are called "introduction tools", from which this formation comes afterwards, containing something.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, do the incision over its length.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is drained, scrape without leaving any part of the skin containing that moisture. For as soon as nothing remains in it, it returns immediately. Then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment if available; otherwise, in water and vinegar, and apply to the wound, leave it until the next day; and those who are affected by nighttime rest will be healed.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And always reapply the cotton, as before, on the second day and the third, until you know it does not stay during the night; then dress the wound with ointment suitable for that, while it is still clean.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds in not-too-much fat, cut it out according to this shape, along its long axis; and drain its contents from all sides, and burn everything around, and apply your entire treatment's healing force to where it lies; and if you treat it against my advice, do as I instructed afterward.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And similarly treat if it's stony [hard], and cut and cure as I have instructed you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And when cutting on the stone-abscess and moisture, it is easier because they have little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if in any of these abscesses or head it has no moisture, and of these future abscesses that I saw or head from an old woman; and found the abscess as a soft stone, rough and white, and could not break; and if one had pierced it, they would have done so well to make incisions as with a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming or around the head, if they come from children's heads and ear roots, the opening should be as long as possible depending on them, for the blood to exit; and treat them as they should.
des scrophules	regarding scrophula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times an abscess occurs at the neck, and around the glands, and under the collarbones, and nowhere else on the body or chest, and they are soft, and they stick together.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scab is properly inside its shell, as with the nut and abscess on the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scabs are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are some that contain moisture, and there are others that do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In this kind that you see well formed in the pit, and resembles the color of the skin, it is silent from each part and is not close to the collarbone nor near the artery or vessel, and is not deep; then it is necessary for you to handle it above, and remove it from each part, and stretch the two lips around the artery if needed, as we have mentioned about abscesses on the head; and do it slowly, making sure you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and avoid any tearing or cutting too deeply that could cause the hand to escape and see too far ahead, so you do not remove more than what is necessary.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery and it doesn't allow you to open, place vitriol in the wound, or any powders that stop blood loss, and restrain the wound; and leave it as long as the abscess is calmed down, and the wound has softened, then begin to heal.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the patient is healed, return to your work until you complete it; then listen to your judgment if there remain any small pustules, cut and cleanse them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is large vein under the root of pustule, it's not right to cut out that pustule from its root. Instead, tie it with a strong double thread and let it fall off on its own without harm; then cover the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut out the entire pustule, it is necessary for you to assemble the two edges of the wound, and stitch them now, then there should be no excess left due to the size of the pustule.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	And it is necessary for you to understand how to cut the root of it, and drain out the pus, and stitch it up as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those pustules that have excess, pierce them where they open naturally; and pierce them in the same way as previously described, hanging down, then apply ointments and similar things to it, so that if it gets corrupted by the pus; and when the wound is well cleaned, then the ointment treatment continues until the flesh grows back, until it becomes healthy.
de squinance	Regarding obliquity or deviation
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The old ones spoke and wrote about the surgery of cutting the throat; but I never saw anyone do this in our land, it's just recorded from their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have squinting eyes, it is necessary that the incision of the throat known as "epiglottis" be performed; and one should not attempt this procedure alone, because all the veins and the windpipe are in danger for those with pus-filled abscesses either in their mouth or in the throat or between the two mandibles.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is within the lymph channel of the windpipe, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to prevent the loss that comes from suffocation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary that we cut through three or four small cuts across between the two circles, in the quantity of the cut opening into it, not within the cartilage; and this kind of cut is suitable for dividing the epiglottis so there is no flesh left, and the vessels are long enough to prevent bleeding.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the masters are fearful, it is necessary for him to extend the skin of the throat to the entire neck, then cut through the keur until he reaches the cheneil; and avoid any blood vessels, if you see anything, and then cut down to the syfac, as we have said; and this has been demonstrated by the section across the flow of the cheneil which jumps out through the broken side, and due to loss of voice; and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the time has passed during which one doubts strangulation, bring together the two sides of the wound neatly, and all along the seam without touching the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause healing flesh to form, until it becomes sound.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albanus states that one should not perform this until the entire throat is blocked, and the patient is deemed dead, and there is absence of breath.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	So cut on the epiglottis because the body can't heal properly here, and it breathes through the wound, thus avoiding death; and according to the old doctors' command they left the wound open until the disease's malice passes, which does so in three days or four. And then they instructed to stitch up the wound and clean it, as long as it was being treated. And I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I witnessed a maiden take the knife, and stabbed it into her throat, cutting part of the channels around the windpipe. And I was called to treat her, and found her as though dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood issuing from it, and indeed, there was no major vein or artery that led there but rather the windpipe, and the veins flowed through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurriedly treated the wound and healed her until she was cured; and there was nothing left to be done for the maiden except that her voice became rough, and she returned afterwards to her usual state. For this reason I say that in the cutting of the epiglottis, one should not have fear.
de la grosse gorge	In the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	Cysts called "glossocele" are referred to as large abscesses of a purple color, and are very common in women. They can occur in two ways: naturally or through accidents; natural ones do not have a cause.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And accidents occur in two ways: one resembles greasy matter coming from us, and the other way is like an abscess that comes from our arteries. And there's fear, so you shouldn't operate with fire except for those that are small; prove and seek all within: if you find it similar to what we produce grease, and it doesn't go towards any artery, then remove it as one would remove grease, and remove everything of its sheath; if there is nothing at all; search thoroughly and treat it accordingly until it's fully healed.
des nous	from us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many ways there are, so I shall speak of all appearances; and it suits that I should state the full difference between us and issues.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that dislocation is characterized by heat and fever lasting until the body's fluids have disappeared and decay has occurred; then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the normal state, there is no fever, no pain, and contains its own sac, which is its own internal organ and is colored like the body's tissues, starting off somewhat like a cyst, and then grows larger; and shows up in two appearances, greasy or moist, and varies in color as I have described in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary when you come to the treatment of a new injury that you first try and inquire about all the tool which is called "the introducer", according to its form or chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the method for probing our wounds is that you should probe it as moist as you find in the abscess, and twist your fingers gradually until you know that the instruments have pierced the core, then do so according to the size of the abscess; then remove the pus, and be careful not to rupture it.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If moisture runs along it, regardless of its nature, whether it's cut like I said for other abscesses; and if after the incision no moisture comes out, know that it's greasy, then cut diagonally, take hold of it with pincers, lightly scrape each side and keep the coat where it lies. And if you can't remove it whole, then pull it piece by piece so that nothing remains attached.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if nothing remains, it comes back to the patient many times; and if only a little stays behind, without causing him pain, you fill the wound with corrosive powders, keep the wound clean, and place healing dressings over abscesses that are hot. You heal other treatments until he is whole again; and if the wound is large, stitch the two sides of the wound together, and treat the one that surrounds it in this way.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein is larger than what is contrary or another thing that requires urgency, prepare the wound with vinegar and let it sit for two days or three days, until the wound heals from inside out. Then resume treating where you left off after removing the old material.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of instruments for internal drainage, and there are three ways: large, medium, and small. And among these there are three which are called 'albaret', and one that is called 'breb', and among them there are also three types: large, medium, and small to encircle abscesses; they resemble needles used to sew, made from citrine amber, iron or silver, yellow ones are preferred as they hold better than black beeswax for enclosing pus-filled areas. They come in three forms: large, medium, and small according to the width of the canals.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of the trepan blades resemble that of a sheep, as you can see here: large, medium and small. There are also trepan blades with two horns in three ways; there are those with three horns and they too come in three types; some have two horns and others just one horn, all these also come in three forms. All these are needed in their proper place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The chief of these ones that we sharpen, and among such who cut only from one side, they burn the skin, for in this it is not cutting veins or nerves; and those intruders are answered with long needles in their hands, so that the patient does not notice during abscess opening; and there are three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see; and none of them use any force but within the fatty area, like legs, arms, nipples, and joints, and similar parts; and every time a different small instrument is used, resembling surgeon's saws, according to this form, with which we stop bleeding.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And it is placed only once in its proper location among veins that are repaired and arteries, and never follows this large form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	None of the men's nipples swell up when they begin to become corrupted, until they seem like women's nipples; and remain swollen and puffy, and anyone who wishes to cure them should do so according to this form of this line .b. until .g..
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	Trim the fat, then apply medicine to the wound to encourage flesh growth. Then join the two edges of the wound with stitches and continue treating until it heals. If the nipple tilts downwards due to its size as in women, cut into it from above making two similar incisions; one should hold onto the other at the end of each, so that the larger line encompasses the smaller according to this shape, following this line .b.until reaching this line .g.; then trim the skin between the two edges, remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, as well as anything necessary for treatment until it heals. If it has not healed or if the incision is not fully complete due to the discomfort of the patient or blood flow issues, fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive ointment; leave it till it heals then remove the cotton and fat, then continue treating until completely healed.
des apostemes des asselles	removal of abscesses and boils
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	Abscesses that come from the armpits are methods of scrophula nodules or swellings, and if there are any containing moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. up to the line .g:.
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus from within the abscess is drained, fill the wound with old cotton and leave it for another day, then remove all the cotton and apply ointment until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scrofula, cut it as we have said in cuts for scrofula sores, and if the wound is filled with pus, apply a cautery as we said previously.
de la routure de l’artere	Regarding the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is exposed, and if there are numerous abscesses, this also happens with the inflamed vein and abscess; and if one knows that it's due to an artery, then these abscesses should be long and deep; and when you feel resistance with your fingers, that means they're pressing strongly; and when it's due to a vein, pus is prominently appearing; this is foolishness to treat such abscesses, and similarly when there are other sores and swellings around the neck and in other parts of the body, and they are very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, it is necessary to avoid the iron cure, and one should also avoid it for the head. In that which is swollen from an artery, cut through the skin as long as you can above; then proceed with surgery up to the oncines, and meticulously extract the artery from the tissues until it's fully exposed; then insert a needle under this area, and pierce it up to the other side, and firmly tie the artery with a double thread as I have taught you in extracting two arteries found in temples. Then pull out the body located between these two threads using an introducer tool, ensuring that no pus escapes from where it is, and free the abscess; then apply the ointment that suits this one until it heals completely. If the abscess is due to inflammation of a vein, you should dye your hand as much as possible with pus on the skin before you pull out the needle you hold in your hand, pierce it again, and ensure the double thread is secure; then tie up the abscess while cutting off all excess matter, leaving only that which is tied. Then apply a dressing soaked in wine and oil until it heals completely, and continue with bandages and ointment applications until it fully heals.
des apostemes des ners	removal of abscesses or nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Just like an abscess can form in the artery and vein, an abscess may develop in nerves when they are injured or due to excessive work, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this often happens to shoulders and elbows and in all places where joints are found, it is the case of abscesses, and its color resembles the color of flesh, and can be in many positions without pain; and when it is squeezed forcibly, the patients feel great pain and does not match well with the body but just under the skin; and moves very much from all directions, neither forward nor backward, neither up nor down, and what is jointed cannot properly cover with iron: by chance there would be a contraction; and that which is on head or forehead makes the skin hollow.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, and you have forceps, apply them at its base; and if it's large, hold it by the wrist, and scrape it off, then expose the bone, stitch up the wound in place, and treat until it heals completely.
des grosses boces pendans	And for large tumors, they are suspended
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	No instance occurs within the belly or elsewhere in this fashion, and it is a disease given the name "fungus" by its appearance. It has a fine root and big seeds; there are also small ones of various sizes. I knew someone who had two bellies that appeared more like fungus than anything else, and there was no difference between them. They were white in color, with thin roots, and were cut open, and they corroded due to moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I measured and found that in the first one it weighed eighteen ounces, and in the other six. The organs are as follows: when you look during incision, if you notice that the tissues are moist, their color is white and wet with a fine root; if you touch the spume area widely, then apply the fire cautery to them.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For in surgery there are often many times too large hemorrhages and if you do not stop them, then quickly use a cautery; and when you see the patient scared and fearful at the metal incision from the iron, then take a well-made catgut thread and tie it around as we said, and leave it for two days; and then tighten, and continue pulling on the catgut until it covers the metal tool without any struggle; and if the roots are large, get them scared by the stomach's pull itself but you can tie only half properly first, then cauterize so they don't reappear; then treat the wound and make sure not to tie up a slippery thread of dirty color and poor feeling and milk smell.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess that has opened up, and I will come to the treatment of gangrene next.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the elbow bone twists
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	When it appears like a boil comes from the wound cautery or tear in the intestine, and this is on the belly and there are some boils elsewhere, as happens in other wounds, or bleeding which comes from veins or arteries according to what was mentioned beforehand, or due to windiness; and if this is by the tear of the intestine and through the exit of the pus, then its color resembles that of blood, and it has little feeling with little pain, and opens up through different exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it's due to the opening of the intestine, then it becomes more varied, and when one presses it with their fingers it comes back and then returns, and by chance it might tighten up and enlarge much at the entrance of the bath and through hard work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it's due to moisture, it's a simple matter, and opens well when you press on it with your hand, without restraining it; and if it's due to blood, it will open through these signs: the abscesses are large and hard, and appear following a quantity; and if it's due to wind, it stings at touch, and the symptoms are that you observe whether its appearance is due to the blood of an artery, or a vein, or wind.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	It is necessary that you allow the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear about it, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding arteries and veins.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if its appearance is due to the intestine or the bladder, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to bleed their body, and have it stretched completely straight, then cut all around the belly; then order them to treat with vinegar between your hands, then go into the area where you indicated on the body, and remove half of the abscess above the largest part of the belly button; then tie that half of the abscess onto a strong thread or thick silk string firmly, and secure it tightly; then stretch out the other half of the abscess over this bandage, and bend your index finger, and pull on the intestine; if you find it caught in the bandage, untie it, and pull the intestine to the outside of the belly; and if you find the bladder, take hold of its tip, and remove any excess; and if the artery or vein goes against you, or goes well into it, then return to your work and take two needles, and tie two strands of thread onto it, and place those two needles in cross where you pierced previously; then pull on the abscess in four places through the needles, and if you see that it is ready, remove the needles, and let the body heal itself, and remove any dead flesh by itself; or you cut it when it has become tender and ready, then treat as we have said; and drain out the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the body according to what needs to be done, and shave off the abscess.
dou chancre	towards the sore
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have discussed the appearances of gangrene and how to treat them with medicines, and how to avoid iron treatment. Let us say that gangrene grows in the armpit, and great caution is needed when treating it. The old ones said that if gangrene appears where you can scrape it off, such as on the nipples, in cooking areas, and similar body parts, then you should remove all of it at the beginning; and when it becomes large and old, one should not approach it at all because I have never known anyone to heal from it. Nobody has ever healed under my care before.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And in the operations, when it's in place or can be removed, as we have said, you should cleanse the patient of any black bile once; then let the surgeon know if there's clear fullness, then treat the wound properly so that the operation can take place. Then remove your tumors or ulcers from all sides and ensure nothing remains; leave all the blood to flow freely, clean the area well with your hand or without anything touching it, and when blood drainage goes against the incision of an artery or a vein, cauterize until the wound is dry; then proceed with other treatments until the patient is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have spoken about the appearances of typhoid in division, and on how water assembly takes place, and the signs for each appearance, and the treatment done through medicines, and that which is treated by iron: this is solely described; it is not necessary to use iron for these two appearances: knowing them being tympanites and yposarche as they are lethal things; then when using medicines for this typhoid appearance known as 'cliques', if the patient doesn't improve from medicine, observe whether the body is weak or another disease apart from typhoid exists such as abdominal pain and other related symptoms; iron should not be applied in these cases due to uncertainty; and when you see a very green body, and it has no other disease aside from typhoid only, and its neither too old nor too young, then do this procedure: lift the body straight above your hands, and have assistants press on the abdomen while pushing water down towards the lowest part of the buttocks, then take the thorn spur according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And divide into two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	Make a point, and ensure it doesn't go too deep so that it might reach up to the intestines when you insert it, without being able to bleed; then check if there is dropsy extending towards the intestines: in case this applies, cut along the III inches above the belly; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, make your incision on the left side of the III inches above the belly; and if it's due to pus, make it on the right side, and ensure that the mucus doesn't settle in the wound so that excesses don't flow into the weak area; then puncture all the skin with the tool, and pull, and lift your hand through the entire fat tissue layer as thick as a nail or its circumference; then puncture the fatty tissue until the fat comes out for about an inch, this is the stage of water. Then perform forceful incision, and remove this instrument which is described here:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it resembles a fine silver bar, or a piece of thread or rope, and in the middle part one small notch; and on one side three notches; and two on another side, and one more on another; and cut the shoulder so as to resemble a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that the writer cuts the feather according to:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the head are the nerves, such that when the instruments come to the water, it descends now on the instrument. Empty then half or a third of it; for if you empty more than is appropriate at this time, by chance the patient might die due to the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he may faint, or he might approach death. But in accordance with its quantity based on her virtue, and according to what the dispositions of her virtue signify, and her pulse; then pull out the instrument and retain the water, and it is retained now for the treatment that numbs the notch that is above the scrotum, which I have mentioned, that you pierce in this manner; then start using the instrument again another day, if you see that the patient is suffering from this, and draw a small quantity of water. Do this no other day, and keep from repeating too much as long as it does not remain but just a little bit of water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the illness, and leave a bit of water there, then cleanse with sepulchre or sand ash, by some sweat or bath and under sunlight, and it should turn to heal; and drink something that darkens. And treat with drying medicines until it becomes sane, and cauterize on the stomach and liver after removing the water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Of the stopping of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born without bumps in the penis, or if the bumps are small, or if they do not occupy their place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it suits to pierce immediately so that there is an abundance of very subtle pus according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	Then apply or place the delicate bump of plaster, and secure it in place for about three to four days. And when it wants to relieve itself, open the plaster if necessary, allow urination, and then put it back on. In case this does not happen by chance, because the urine that comes out will not leave the one closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	These of whom their blood is sluggish, if it has medicine from the root of a poppy, as we have said, so that it will spread.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	These who do not have their kidneys in their body are blind, for none is born with the kidneys at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate before lifting their penis upwards; and they cannot copulate because the matter cannot reach the anus, and this is a male disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method of treating such is that the patient lies on their back, then the head of the penis and the testicles are positioned as large as a feather's width, so the parts to be treated are in the middle, just like it should be; and guard against bleeding which occurs frequently, and if it happens, stop the bleeding by the one who stops blood flow, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	pimples of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times blisters appear on the penis, and there is an unpleasing appearance; among them are benign and malignant ones. It's necessary that you take samples of size one-twelfth part each, cut them all up, then apply Egyptian ointment on cotton. Then treat with diafinicon ointment until it heals completely.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the bath is malignant, with its yellowish discharge and pus, it is necessary that you apply the cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have treated it, and if the bath is within the penis and has part inside the skin and part outside, it is necessary that you remove the pus that is inside first; and when it is healed, you clean it outward.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it together, make sure the head of the member is not pierced, and comes blackness and corruption in its length and on the pubis; then cut away everything that is black and corrupted, after which bind with a dressing made from the peel of pomegranates mixed with honey and flour. Then continue other treatments until it has healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And when bleeding occurs, if you apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The lunar cauteries are in two arrangements: this means when bleeding occurs and corruption happens; if the head of the member is corrupted and removed, it's necessary that you beat or guide the member with a stick of garlic, and let the patient urinate amongst them. And when hair is above the head of the member reaching to those who have not been circumcised previously, or due to wound or abscess, then it's necessary that you sear the foreskin at the tool for shaving, until all ties are released and the foreskin of the male is freed from everywhere; if this seems too difficult to explain in detail, you should sear near the tip of the head of the member and on the skin; then scrape thoroughly between two, and apply a thin linen bandage soaked in cold water, so that it does not dry at the tip.
de la circoncision	Concerning circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not merely a continuation of other diseases; still, whenever we perform this act of our own will and for children, it must be done with the best work, and in the gentlest manner possible for health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the old ones did not mention circumcision of their children, for they do not use it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	But I have wanted the majority of masters and lords who performed circumcision between the first day and one week, and during all infancy; it was the best because there are two layers there, and by chance, if one leaves this above and the other remains below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	They recover with difficulty and the pain is doubled, and at the operation where the body is cut open, it's not clear exactly where the injury lies; and in the amputation of a bone by mistake the surgeon cuts the limb, and proceeds with the work, often performing amputations when they're unnecessary as I have noticed.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the operation which is performed to strengthen everything, I found that there are advantages to experimentation, because strength cuts as well above as below equally well.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	When you press your hand, if it is cut in 'I' shape all equally; but let the child's hair be well intertwined among the skin; and do this manner of the first operation so that you make him think of a child, if he hears, that you are only tying his hair around his penis just like that, and then let him move freely in all the ways you can; afterwards put him straight between your hands, and apply force between your hands or under your feet that the child does not see nor any instruments; then push your hand down on his penis and blow or whisper, and pull it up until the head of the penis is immersed; then clean it well from the dirt that has gathered, then tie a small signet to him with a double thread, then tie it under each of the knots; and hold it apart by two inches with the second loop at the pouch and the right index finger, fold between the two loops, then remove the poultice quickly and pull out the head of the penis; then let the blood trickle slowly for some time because this is nature; and put powder on it and on the powder a wetted strip of an egg yolk boiled in rose water mixed with fresh good oil, leave him like this until tomorrow evening, and continue treating him until he heals.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The shape for the cleaning is this: let both ends be held and be sharp, and have the ends as large as the fingers evenly.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of world creation happens when the kidneys inside are disturbed during incision; therefore, it is necessary that you extend up to your fingernail, in such a way that they make an abscess; and do it evenly, and if you cannot hold up to your fingernail, then use tweezers, and then proceed.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they penetrate for three days, and the one which is beneath the penis is swollen, let him wait until the abscesses around it are alleviated, and gently scrape it; do it as much as you can move, and avoid touching the part of the penis, for it will not harm it.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the inner part of a sore wound with powder, as we have said or treated powders, and if you scrape beyond the knee excessively, and it goes too far, it will do no harm; then treat it accordingly, just as we have said, until it heals.
dou retenement de l’urine	holding back of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The withholding of urine results from stone formation, or blood freezing, or bladder stones, or dead fetus, or similar conditions as we have explained in the division; and if the urine is not relieved and you see it is due to a stone blocking either inside or near the urinary tract, then the patient should be supported on their knees. The feet should be placed under the back, and spread the abdomen from above towards the back. Then restrain the patient to breathe as much as they can; thereafter force the neck of the bladder to express stones above it, causing urine to flow out; if this does not happen and the patient feels great pain, then you should administer extraction using all parts of an instrument called 'syringe', which has this form: it should be made of delicate fine silver wire, like a bird's feather. The length should be approximately half a palm long, and must be fine at its tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the method of draining urine is as follows: take a double thread, tie it to the tip of some wool or cotton yarn and insert this thread into the urinary system; cut off excess yarn leaving only the end of the thread within the siphon. Then cover the excess yarn with oil or butter and egg whites up until the top of the siphon; apply oil and olive oil, as well as water to the patient before using the siphon. Then place the patient on the seat, having them push their bladder and genitals with moist oil and olive oil. Afterwards gently insert the siphon into the penis till it reaches the root, then lift up both sides of the penis towards the opening; next fill the siphon ahead to before reaching the bladder, letting out urine until it has reached an empty state. This process does not follow this sequence because whoever controls it is twisted; afterwards take back the thread little by little from the yarn and let urine follow the thread; then squeeze it properly allowing urine flow; repeat these actions until the bladder is emptied and when the patient is relaxed.
des maladies de la vessie	On diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When burns or blood come to the bladder, or putrefaction is assembled there, and you see distilled waters and medicines, then have all the instrument called 'clepsidra', and it has this form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and if it has three parts: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and through which medicine can be applied so that it numbs the penis well without addition, if one may cure the moisture, and replace when necessary; and when you see your medicines flowing in the bladder, place the chief of the instrument near the moisture, and wait for the attendant who is there; if you draw out the moisture with the instrument, and then firmly set the attendant again; if moisture enters inside now and comes to the bladder, so that the patient feels it; and this is the form of a subtle cistern into which one performs catheterization: it is like this.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is made of silver or copper, and the shoulder joint is higher up; then at one side you insert your fingers. Take a sheep bladder and put in the moisture that you see used for catheterization. Then place this between the two breasts formed by thick twine, heat the tip of this moisture on fire; then hold the tip of the catheter to the penis, then squeeze your hand on the bladder until all the moisture is inside, so that the patient feels it has reached the bladder; and if you don't have a bladder, take a piece of parchment paper, make a circle, pierce it roundly in the middle; then hold this twine firmly at these parts, then join the circle as one would join a needle, put inside whatever you see from the moisture and water, secure it with the tool. Do it similarly to how you made the bladder, pressing your hand until all the moisture is within the bladder.
de la piere	from the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have discussed the methods of stone division and extraction together with medicines; and we have spoken about the difference between indwelling stones and those in the kidney, as well as all the signs, and when one should operate on a stone; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will clearly and briefly tell you.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that stones which are indwelling in the bladder occur more often among children, and this is a sign that the infection jumps from the bladder akin to an infection that manifests through subtlety; they open the urethra, and rub the patient's penis, and he urinates many times, and then it gets caught. And at these jumps of the stone, its base can be found; and for several months, children's healing is light until they reach four years old, it causes much discomfort in the elderly, and occurs in middle age, to those who are between adulthood and old age; and the treatment for those with large stones is lighter than for those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient through sweating, in order to draw out all the pus from within their intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	And it impedes every time when one seeks to cut into the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take hold of the patient with their hands, and pull them down backwards, so that the stone descends to the bladder's level and emerges nowhere above him; then have them sit between your hands, with their arms under their thighs, making sure that the bladder is fully lowered downwards; next, search for it internally; if you feel the stone in the space, now hurry to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it doesn't pass out from all over during the touch test, moisten your left hand's index finger with saliva, because if the patient is young, or your middle finger if they are a bit older; and pull at the stone from its base, and search for the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, draw it up to the neck of the bladder; then press forward on your finger, and pull outwards along where you can see to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and instruct him to extend his right hand upwards above the genitals, and place his left hand on the skin that is over the genitals in the area where cutting is done; then push out the urine, of which this is its shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And make the division between what is in between the hips and the foundation, not mid way but at the edge of the left snowbank; and be straight upon the stone, and your hands either to the ground or the foundation, and be the size deep through such that it is wide outside and narrow inside, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large; by chance if presses the hand which is on the foundation, make it jump out easily with no effort; and know there are parts of rock where there are angles and edges: if it gets stuck coming out; and if at part below, resembling a walnut, and round, where its outlet is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	And in the places where there are angles and edges, make the hole larger; if it does not jump out, you must press with the tongs that are as sharp as a file to force the stone so that it does not escape. Or you can use your fine curved tool inside it; and if you cannot engineer it like this, widen a little more than half the thickness of the rock, and if it breaks when emptying, force it with vitriol; and if there are multiple stones, first break the largest at the neck of the bladder, then work upwards, then apply force strongly, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are any.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if she is very large, then it must be opened, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: or he dies, or his urine starts coming out immediately as soon as his legs cannot join; but still strive to drain or remove it with forceps until you can extract it piece by piece. And when you have completed your task, cover the wound with incense and aloes and dragon's blood, seal it up, and place a moist cloth scented with oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, over it to soothe the inflamed area; then restitch the patient onto his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until at least three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, make sure to sit upright from the oil and water well, then bathe with dyacina ointment and basil ointment until they are healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses become infected in the wound and blood clots form in the bladder, and then urine retention occurs as it is known to do, force your way into the wound then extract that blood, because if it remains, it will corrode the bladder and ruin it; then raise the wound with water and vinegar and salt, and help him in every way you can until he heals; and when you treat him always, tie his two legs together, and apply medicines to the neck.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small and it's located where the penis leads, and stuck inside, causing inability to urinate; if this is what you treat as I described, you should repeatedly cut it several times, considering the loss due to this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already gained this experience.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one piece of iron according to this shape and have it pierced at three corners in one point:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take the thread and tie it around the penis near the stone so that it doesn't come back into the bladder; then pull out the needle gently in the penis until it reaches the stone; and turn the needle with your hand in the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side; if the urine comes suddenly, then press your hand on what is stuck inside the stone which is within the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it breaks suddenly and the urine flows out with force, clean your organs; and if you cannot do this for any reason preventing it, tie the thread around the stone and another one above, then place the penis so that the stone is between the two threads, then forcefully pull out, and remove the thread, cleaning the congealed blood in the wound; and treat until it becomes clean.
de la piere des femmes	From the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It happens that stone is found in women, and if it occurs once, the treatment is difficult, and is prohibited for three things: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows how to expose herself even when she is pure.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third method is that by chance it may not be possible to find a woman well versed in this art of hands; and the fourth method is that the stone of the woman is more pronounced than the stone of man, so one must make deeper cuts, there's great fear involved. And if necessity calls for such actions, then you should seek out someone who knows well and take their advice on where to cut within her body. If you can't find this person, don't hesitate to consult a subtle surgeon; and present a skilled midwife in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, command her to do as you instruct regarding the examination of the stone; and look very closely if that woman is a virgin: thus she must press her index finger against or on the stone; and when she finds it, restrain her with this index finger, and advise her to press her index finger onto or in the diseased area, and press her left hand firmly upon her bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, she must move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder until underneath; until she reaches the root of the thigh; then cut into the bone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the knee joint, where they appear, and feel the bone in that area; and do not move your hand above the bone or below, and make a small incision first; then push out the kidney with pressure at this size; as long as you can feel the bone increase the wound until the bone can come out forcefully, and know that many types of stones are: namely, small and large and hard and smooth, long and round, and those that have furrows.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	If you understand the symptoms to know its outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if it doesn't frighten him, then apply vitriol to the wound and hold it for an hour until the fear subsides; then return to your work until the stone is out, and have the tools I told you about in removing stones to assist you in your task. And if it doesn't frighten him, but what was cut off is from the artery, then apply powder to the wound and tighten with threads and binders, and do not repeat this again, and leave the stone alone without pulling it out, for fear that he might die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of blood has been calmed and your limbs are recovered, return to your task until the stone becomes soft.
de hernie carnouse	of fatty hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	A watery hernia is nothing else but a gathering of moisture or white yolk, which is found in the area around the kidneys, contained within the egg; and it's called "yolk", and one cannot properly find it on the surface of the egg if one thinks it's another egg; and this is the skin under the kidney containing the white yolk that we have mentioned; and this doesn't have any hole.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the formation of such a watery hernia is due to weakness that affects the kidneys, and this spreads that substance.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And never does it come from percussion on the kidneys, and this moisture has many colors: or it is a declining color to jaundice, or it's without redness, or black, or aqueous white. And this happens more; and these are signs to recognize this assembly. For if it is pure white as we have said, then pus will be present, lasting as long as the kidney's figure is an egg, and doesn't open the kidneys, because there is moisture everywhere inside.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if he has moisture in the proper tissue, then there will be pus with part of an egg, and because of this we think it's another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the kidney and the pure white, you'll feel it well; therefore when you know the color of the moisture, test everything inside carefully, as described here.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this then, who comes after the introducer, judge of what is inside him.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we heal it with iron, the patient must be treated according to our ability and the restoration of their body; then they should be laid on their back, slightly elevated at one point, covered by a cloth. Then they are seated on their left side, and command the attendant to sit on their right side, stretching one arm over one of the ribs near the kidney area; then take the wet sponge, clean the skin between the kidneys with it from top until under the knife, making sure the incision is straight down to reveal white fat tissue, and gently remove the surface layer; then pierce through the fat tissue completely with a sharp needle, drain all the liquid out, and then place bandages, stretching the kidney area upwards; and do not touch the kidneys but only the fat tissue. Remove everything or in parts from his rib along carefully, because if you don't do it properly, water will return; and if there is an egg left undone on your work, finish it by putting back into its place when you've completed the task up to this point; then join together both flaps of the kidney area with a stitch, then treat them as other wounds until they are healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find that the egg has been corrupted by another illness, it is necessary for you to tie the ligaments that are suspended, in case of blood flow; then cut the membrane all along the suspension, and remove the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the wound is gathered into two parts together, know that these are two branches; so treat the other half as you did the first equally, then let out the blood, and place oiled, moistened wool in the wound. And put another piece of oiled, moistened wool next to wine and oil on top, and place this over the two parts, then cover with folded cloths, and bind it all together according to this form above the entire bandage.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths, and use them to wrap it with frayed wool according to this appearance, so that they are assembled by sewing at the waistband of the trousers. And one part of the shoulder takes place on the foundation up to the back, and the other near the base of the thumb; and another pair between the two angles, and let all be assembled with the tightening in the loop of the trouser gaiters; and each time this cautery treatment of the stick is done in the size of iron, and you take this small surgical knife called a cultellum, and cut the skin of the joints, and heat it up as we have said, so that the white wax that contains the water is revealed; then take the cautery according to this shape, and pierce that wax seam with incisions, and burn it off with this fine cautery until it becomes red:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the operation in all the ways that you can do it, as long as you are doing everything properly; and make sure the fire does not touch the egg; know that this work is more successful; and keep away from the bleeding, and be careful with your cuts. And if anything goes against you, or pus appears or bleeding during procedures or any other thing, cure according to what was previously mentioned when things go against you.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the pus is foul-smelling and can't endure this operation due to its ugliness, then you should perform a perforation, as I have said. And when you are sure that the watery root is there based on our explanations, make the patient sit up; cut into the abscess at the point where it's over the part of the body and in the middle of the swelling; and make the incision long all the way down to the core; and if your cuts are large, so that every drop of pus can come out. Then place cotton on the wound, tie it up, and let the healing waters flow through, then cure until the wound is healed. And if the white cloth doesn't allow the water to leave from the mouth of the wound, you should plug it with a feather or an instrument used for draining dropsy patients; which shape is as described above. Then widen the cut on the wound and know that pus will return, coming together after about 6 months or slightly longer. And when it comes together like before, this is how it would pass through the diseased person's days.
de l’aposteme des coions	regarding the pus of the ears
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the part of this branch there is fear for multiple arrangements, so I believe movement would be better if one were to leave it; and I will tell you about the operation and the appearances of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Therefore, it is known that many abscesses can occur on the body or limbs; and this happens due to various reasons.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	This is to know about superfluous acidity and mucus which spreads among the joints or due to percussion; and the color of the abscess according to the color of the body; and there is no pain, it's a diseased abscess; and occasionally there's a pungent and stone-filled pus, with a reddish color, and it never comes from a vein or inflates a wound.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it's due to a vein, if you recognize the position of the pulsating abscess by pressing with your fingers; and it's not advisable to touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Those made from swollen veins are known by their arrangement in the expression upon touching with two fingers, and can be done very well on this resemblance, and on other organs; and when you palpate the testicles, then is it at the top, and the vein close to the white tendon goes downwards, and free the retinaculum from all sides of the testicle.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the testicle is already bound with these veins at birth, then you must remove the testicle and palpate it; and if it's close to the tendon or within the veins, then you should free all that veinage, and palpate in a rounded manner.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birthplace of the heart is behind where it usually is, then you must take all of it and remove the egg, just as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your operations are finished, apply the wound with moistened wool in oil and wine, then continue other treatments until it heals.
de l’aposteme des coions	regarding the pus of the ears
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess enveloped in a seeming scrotum covering, with the softening of the testicles, and there's severe pain when it ruptures; and the treatment for this illness must be closely comparable to what was done before, although still we will inform you about this work according to how the old did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It is necessary for you to have the patient sit upright on an elevated seat. Then, support them with a loop around their shoulders and stretch out all parts near the pubis, and guide the surgeons, stretching them properly; then cut across the vessel trenchantly wide through each vessel, until they are exposed, and then cauterize from every side as we have described in the extraction of arteries which are within temples. Then pierce with a needle or thread that is double twisted, and attach it to the first place where blood flows, and secure it directly to another part; then cut centrally straightly, according to the length of the body, removing all corrupted fluids; then treat the wound as for others where one ties a bowstring, so that no vessel leaks past any part of the artery. For this causes no harm, and if all vessels carry blood, you must bleed the parts through all vessels; so that the body doesn't lose its nourishment due to cuts in the vessels, dry up and are unable to help each other.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the rupture of the syphilitic sore
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	Events of this rib's position are due to the section that comes from underdevelopment or from stretching over the abdomen in the area of the ribs, causing the intestines to descend through this passage into one of the lungs; and this passage is either where underdevelopment occurs or from stretching it out, leading these two ways of cattle causes: by percussion, or jumping, or bellowing, or heavy lifting, and similar actions; and the signs when it's due to stretching underdevelopment, show that they occur gradually, over a long period, not suddenly; and this abscess is even up until towards the front, because underdevelopment forces the intestine.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the symptoms are when it's from the suction of the intestine, it causes a sudden pain at the beginning, and there are various pus appearances near the skin, because of the exit of the intestine and the body under the intestine.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And none of the loops descend with the intestine, and they are held back, causing suffering great pain to the patient, even when they are pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron-wounding cases, because one must avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	The method of the operation is that you instruct or guide a sick person to remove the intestines from their hand inside the wound, if it can enter; then cover it around their neck. Between your hands, lift the thighs; then set the stomach above, and cut off all the skin from the hips along its length; then force the intestines inside the belly according to what you need for opening the wound, and make sure they can exit; then scrape off the underdevelopment that is underneath the skin of the lungs, until all parts of the white underdevelopment are exposed; then insert your index finger into the area where it protrudes from the lung, between the white underdevelopment which is under the egg's skin, and between the second underdevelopment, and remove what is behind the egg, and between the second underdevelopment; and then move with your right hand inside the cavity of the lungs, lift the white underdevelopment to the top of your left hand, and lift the egg towards the belly; and instruct the attendant that they should extend the egg upwards, and release whatever is behind the connection; and check with your hands if there's any part of the intestine wrapped or hard white underdevelopment, and if you find nothing, leave it in the stomach inside; then take a needle with thick thread made from X threads, and place it in the back part of the underdevelopment which is after the skin of the lungs; after the belly, cut off the visible parts of the threads until there are IV threads; then join them one above the other in a cross-like manner, tie the underdevelopment in a strong band of II strands; then cover the threads with the skin and bind them firmly into two strands, so that no openings for the needle can enter from them, preventing an abscess from forming; and fasten the band according to the first long band around the length of II fingers, and after these two bands leave a space of underdevelopment that is inside the belly's cavity about one finger; then adjust this space according to the roundness carried by the egg; then cut in the area where it remains under the skin of the lungs, as long as it doesn't disrupt the chest and bow, as we have said previously; then apply greasy wool in oil, put it on the wounds, and add the bandage that we said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And once the white wound dressing that we have described is burned after the incision, in order to prevent bleeding again.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens many times, and let the bandage stay until it discharges from him; and if he delays in going down, so be it immersed in hot water, and place upon it what we have said, until it discharges. Then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is fully healed.
de hernie carnouse	of fatty hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I never find anyone who dares to perform the iron cure.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the old men said that it is made like a branch that is assembled with the bow, in such a way that you tie up the vessels after trimming them lightly over the wound. Then cut it open and treat the abscess of what works, until the vessels discharge; and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	No time comes rupture in anger as we said, and open their wounds; and no intestines should fall out of the sides during childbirth, if they do, it is rare, and you repair them immediately. And all the while that remains too long at this point, then the wound or syphilis occurs until the intestines fall out; and this happens due to the extension of syphilis in the abdomen as we said, because it is extended, then the flesh becomes soft and swells the wounds and opens them; and you treat it with a cautery as we have said before; and no time is treated by iron in this manner: and that the patients lie supine on their back between your hands, then open the swollen area of the rupture to the full width according to the size of three fingers; and then extract the syphilis which is under the skin that follows, then take hold of the ribbon and place it over the visible part of the syphilis; and press it fully down onto the abdomen, then cut the two visible parts of the syphilis on the front of the ribbon, and cut one by one; then extract the tip of the ribbon, and do not treat or extend the egg or any other thing as I have made known in the treatment of the branch of intestines; then you treat it with the wound treatment.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you treat the wounds, if you cleanse and heal the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The anus is restricted and does not show any signs in the process, and the cauterization is performed near this area, closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	from the softening of the skin around the kidneys
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin around the kidneys becomes soft in some people, because the substances inside are being softened and can be seen; when one wishes to treat it, one must make the patient feel better on their back, and pull the softened skin towards the natural skin. Then join the two halves of the skin at a stitch, and if needed, sew the excess soft skin into three or four stitches firmly; then cut between the stitches, and treat the wound like any other, until it heals, and leave the thread in place.
dou chastrement	of chastisement
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Know that castrations are forbidden in our law, and for this reason I would prefer not to discuss it in this book; they are only necessary for two reasons: one is that a skilled person should be able to respond when asked about castration and how to treat it; and the other, because we often need to castrate some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep, cattle and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	So I say that castrations can be done in two ways: by attraction or through cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In this method, which we do through attraction, make the animal sit in hot water, until the testicles become soft and start to rise; then grab them with your hand, until they are returned and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	In the practice of castration: it is necessary to dye the animal, and press its genital skin with your left hand, then tie the scrotum suspension, and handle each testicle one by one as you are pruning them; and do not leave any small orifice such as that which is found among the vessels; and this method of castration differs from that done through attraction because with attraction there might inadvertently remain something of the skin, causing the animal to crave for lust; then treat the wound until it has healed.
des hermofrodites	Of those who are hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermafroditism can occur in two ways within humans: one way is that between the two openings they resemble those of a woman's body shape, or if hair grows there, sometimes along with her urinary function.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	The other way is in women, and it has at the belly button like a penis and two openings.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment of fever and illness is that you apply all warmed packs, and treat them like other wounds; in the second way, for men whose urine jumps off the skin of their kidneys, there's no treatment.
de la tentigene	Regarding the text you've provided, it seems to be a medical treatise from medieval times written in Old French, which unfortunately lacks context to provide an accurate translation without knowing more about its content and purpose.
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Tuberculosis is a deformed wound in the natural part, as long as it's too ugly to see; and some women also have it as large as a hand, and that is its treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	It is necessary that you dye the excess of the tentigene on your hand or nails, and treat it gently; and don't go too far in cutting, so as to prevent bleeding complications, then proceed with another treatment until it heals; and to one other wound that comes out from the mouth of the married woman, the belly button, and by chance fire, and follows the appearance of a knot, for which they called this ancient disease "the sickness of the knotted belly".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary for you to use it, just as we have said about the application, and the treatment until it heals.
de erratique	Of wandering.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic if the nature of the woman is not discernible, or if her parts are small and hidden; it is naturally occurring by birth, or incidental through illness that has occurred; or it's due to sexual excitement, or from subtle or dense semen, and is spread outward during intercourse, or in the ribs, or under the abdomen, wherever it may be. And how to conceive and give birth, and accidentally bear flowers; understanding this requires observing a woman's behavior.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the marks are closely visible, look at your hands or at your ears.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it's from subtle semen, and the marks are close to his two ears, if you hurry, do this: place your two fingers together, and have the woman lie on her back, spreading out her legs; then form the two ears until the subtle semen is inside, covering the marks. Then take wool, mix its grease with oil, and place it over her head every day, so that it can't fuse together.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the boil is hard and full, it is necessary to squeeze at the leafy appearance on the gallbladder.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wounds are of new flesh, apply them to the ointment resembling a mint leaf. Use blood-stopping medicines such as garlic, dragon's blood, incense, mixed with plenty of egg whites; then apply a wide bandage so that the wound cannot heal, and do this for a long time, and cover it with a linen tent; then perform other treatments until he is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when there's new flesh in the sore, if it needs to be covered according to this manner, then if it's abscesses that are treated.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an abscess in the sore, one should not touch it with fire.
des emorroides	Of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Bleedings are incisions of veins which require special care, and when these bleedings get old they become sluggish; and we've mentioned the parallels to these conditions in our division and their signs, and I will discuss those that yield healing here.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that bleedings and sluggishness, when treated in maris water, do not show in smell, except for the cure by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those at the mouth of maris water can be smelled and those that can be cured are them.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore, you should place the woman in a cold house, then set up the altar by her side, and use the roots for it. Then apply powders of medicines that restrict bleeding such as comfrey, dragon's blood, and incense and similar things; afterwards bathe her feet with this concoction for an hour, then cool them with water; if bleeding occurs after this process, have her sit in a decoction made from sumac, peel of apple pomegranates, and wormwood along with other remedies. Then take barley flour, mix it with honey and basil, and apply it as a poultice on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops bleeding, that's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, apply suction cups to the back and breasts without piercing; then take wool, and its milk in the juice of plantain or in the juice of agletier with old wine, and apply it to the wound.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess settles, treat the wound with ointment until it heals. The one called 'albathir' is red and resembles a sharp head, so cover it as I have described for the thyllos; and then continue to heal it until it has healed.
des apostemes de la marris	Of abscesses of the anus
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many types of abscess come into the mare's nest, such as gangrene and pus-filled abscesses, herpes, intestinal ulcers, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and other diseases that I mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	So then it is necessary that I speak in this treatise about the boil that comes to the mare, which is not among the boils that swell; and if you wish to know how to handle iron work, look to see if the boil is hot at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and if it turns red when you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	So do not hasten to pierce it at once, but wait until the pain is relieved; and then have the patient sit on the stool, with two small stools placed under his elbows as he leans forward, supporting himself against his back and gathering his legs towards the parts below the leg; and let his knees spread out, place his arms under his thighs, and bind them firmly together with a good bandage; then direct him to breathe towards his right side, guiding the tool used for the operation of the boil from its mouth, which comes afterwards in this form; it is necessary that when you see this tool being guided, you set about measuring the depth of the boil, so that what enters through the instrument does not go any further than it should and cause pain to the patient; and if the instruments are too large, cover the depth of the boil with cloths, so that the tools do not bother the patient; it is necessary that he place the funnel of the tool above him and cut the tool.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess opens, and you do it by hand gently, if it needs to be covered at the head, over the pus exit hole; and once the bowl is emptied, it's necessary that you put in the wound wet tents in rose oil, or in green dry oil; place the tent of the wound around the margin of the ashes, then place the ashes and the blade of the blade cleanly wetted in water or vegetables have been cooked; then treat it for two days with ointment following this method, until it heals; and without lifting either the ashes or the wound by leeches of water and honey, and then of water where the root of the onion and aristolochia long have been cooked; then revive with the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is healed by the ashes, you should avoid cooking with iron but treat it as we have instructed in the division.
de l’enfantement	Regarding childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	The profession starts with knowing the form of natural birth, and indeed recognizes these signs: when you see a woman laboring intensely to deliver and longs to smell something fragrant, then the baby will soon make an appearance. This indicates that the birth is proceeding naturally, from her head, and secondarily through him; when you observe these signs, lightly press her abdomen so the baby can come out promptly. For when it descends from its head, it brings along the afterbirth, which is cleansed of its excesses by good postnatal care; anything else that occurs otherwise does not happen naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it comes not at all upon its knees, but rather to the body or shoulder and hands, or upon her belly, or stomach, being turned by chance over her neck, and through other evil shapes; it is necessary for childbirth that she be wise and subtle in these matters and aware of errors and deception, and I will show you all the appearances on how one should assist them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	When the child emerges through her head by natural issue, and the woman labors intensely, and her strength is weak, she should sit on a stool or have women hold her; and from that nature where fenugreek has been cooked, then put the midwife between her fingers to hold this small spatula shaped object as follows:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	And cut the second part, and remove up to his moisture which is inside until it's out; and keep the woman's belly as her baby descends, and if it doesn't descend, then you should treat the woman with fennel seed and sesame oil; afterwards have her drink and snort pepper mixture, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: at this point the baby will come now.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if her two hands are out, you should gently guide them back and forth; and if they can't be inserted, then place the woman on a seat, and lift her feet up; then pull the seat to the ground, and scrape over the woman so she doesn't urinate during delivery; and if her hands can't be inserted, and the baby has died, then cut her hands with the knife that was placed beforehand, and remove the child, guiding them equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	Of the birth of the child above its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes up to its feet, it suits him to push upwards; and then twist little by little, until it is even; then grasp his feet and extend them slowly.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it can jump up to the thighs, then command to catch and have it snort with consideration; if it jumps further, may God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it doesn't jump as we have said, if you turn it little by little, until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	So then make it lightly.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not jump as we have done, say that you take a piece of althea and aloe oil, and molten gum, and grind everything in the mortar; and place this ointment inside and outside the woman's body, then make her sit in hot water until she comes down to her ribs; and when she is thoroughly moistened from there, have her apply myrrh around, and put it on her, and leave it for an hour; then have her sit on a bench, then have her snort and restrict her mouth and nose, and press her belly gently, as the child will jump now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From the child's exit above its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, if you put your hands gently on it; then be careful on its neck, and let it hang by its feet down, and let it lie there by the bed; and bend its hands gently, and then hold its hands under its belly, and lift its knees forward until she is hanging down below; and if the child does not jump, take its feet and shake it vigorously, then shake its belly up, then put your hands in; and guide the baby gently; and instruct the woman to pray as long as the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the issue of the child that comes out with one hand stretched out.
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	It's necessary to attempt to bring the hand back: if you can't get it back, make the woman stand up and move around; if she can't move, make her sit on the bed, and lift her legs forward. Then prepare the massaging technique that I have described; and if she doesn't give birth, make her sit on a chair, then try to bring the hand back; and guide the baby according to its natural form, and make her sneeze, and instruct her to pray as long as the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the birth of the child at its neck, and it spreads out its hands, and its face turned towards its mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	It is necessary that the healer treat his hand first, then gently turn it a little by little and ease it slightly; and when it's equal, place it on the muscular tension of elevation and oiliness, as we have said, then command her to move a little bit at a time; and once you have done this, make her stay seated, and command her to pray; and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In this same manner for all the rest
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it proceeds in this manner to complete the second part, if you have finished the second part up to her nail, until all moisture is drained; and if it can descend on its face and neck, make sure she doesn't get caught in the mouth, and let the child not be retained, causing death for the child; then extract the baby inside, until you've placed it correctly, and command the woman not to pray once: and then gently relieve her.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the birth of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	You know that twins are born many times, and sometimes they are born three or four at a time; this is not an unusual occurrence, it just happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two things are removed and do not live, if you ask; I know this, that they multiply and are exposed by the syphilis which devises them, which is bound to the blood; and all times issue naturally like some others below, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they come out painfully, as we have said in the treatment, and it is with the subtle boy, do immediately and lightly what she does; and do this justly for the sake of health.
de plusors enfans	Of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	None are formed in the marriage I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more than up to XV, and they are all formed in the shape of an infant by the measurement of their glory, and it is necessary that the boy knows all this, for such a thing might happen; do according to what is fitting.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman for the dead fetus or abdomen issue, as I explained in the division part earlier, if it doesn't come out, and you're compelled to operate; then one must know whether this woman is healthy and hasn’t experienced any accidents or fears of death; so that it's necessary that the woman be balanced on her back, and have her shoulders inclined backwards, and her legs lifted; and when the doctor applies a pinch of II parts, if she's bound to the bed such that she doesn't move during childbirth; then rub the woman's mouth with moist olive oil using a mixture of rosemary and fenugreek and linseed; then grease her hands with these oils and these mixtures; then gently apply them on the patient, then take Ile to place or adjust her position as you see fit; make sure that this child is properly dressed such that it can descend onto its head; if you insert the child into her navel area, neck or mouth, or near her palate, or under her beard, or at the chest bone, and if childbirth happens on her feet; then she needs to use a tool like scissors there, and in between her middle rib areas; it's necessary that you hold the needle with your right hand and place the curvature of its blade between your fingers of your left hand, then apply pressure lightly with all your hands onto this area, and insert the needle into none of these areas we mentioned until the process becomes void; this is the shape of the needle:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	Then find another vein or artery where you need it if required, making sure the extractions are equal; and then move them equally from one side to the other in order for the veins or arteries to properly drain, and ensure that the veins have teeth-like shapes to hold the drained fluid.
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part remains, if you have any of your fingers on that area, and place them there, then pull the other part; and if no part remains, place this vein or higher up, and do this until everything comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be pulled back due to squeezing, you should wrap it under the wrist until everything is out; then cut on the joint of the sole or at the cut line, and do this in the other hand, and for both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the head of the child is large and it's stuck in exit, or it has a sharp point assembled, then you should push the spinous spume between your fingers, press on the head and extract the sharp point; or use the tool called 'almidach' which comes with instruments after this chapter, from which the structure comes. And do the same for children who have large heads naturally; and then pull hard on the bones with tongs, if they jump out due to force and get stuck at strength level, until the moisture is issued out; and if it doesn't come out, cut piece by piece when possible; and if there's swelling in the abdomen or under the ribs, you should pierce as much as the moisture goes.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if it is born on its feet, there's a light attraction, and the connection to the mouth of the umbilical cord is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it's stuck in the belly or the udder, if you should extract it to where the skin is stretched over your hand; and press on the belly or the udder, until the moisture has gone out. And if any other member is affected by osteitis and the head remains there, then push the heel of your palm straight down, and pull it up until the end of the teat; afterwards bring in 1/2 or 1 full unit and pull forcefully; and if the mouth of the teat has been narrowed due to pus that came out from an abscess, you should not try to work on it. Instead, it's better to administer moist and fatty things; and apply plaster treatments. Apply them in a liquid form with soothing properties and moisturizers, and let them be placed on the teat area.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the child is on his side and you can make it even, then follow what we have said about live birth babies; and if you cannot do that, so handle it piece by piece, and leave nothing of the second part.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And once you have done this, follow what we have said about dealing with abscesses that appear in the groin; and if there is bleeding discharge, then place it in water for restraint, and apply other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose child had died in the womb, then another one was conceived after that, and it also resulted in death for her.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came up in the throat, and grew so much that it opened, and started to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was summoned to treat the wound, and I waited for a long time, but could not secure the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied strong plaster bandages, and in came one bone, and afterwards another after some days.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was greatly amazed, for the belly does not have any bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I want the wound to heal, and work with my hands until the woman is in the best position; and then I would undress the woman for as long as this has continued, and it was only slightly swollen at that point; and I remember having dealt with this chapter only in relation to what happens when, whenever the masters find something strange, they must know how to give assistance.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to guide the womb back to its place.
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	After this comes the form of the presser, which is written in these books; and to two parts out of two heads from two bodies.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	In every way, the horns should be more delicate than a restraining device, and should be made of ebony or boxwood. And the mouth should be as wide as the body is two inches long, and the edge of the trees must be that length, and each half is one and a half palms; and between these two beams there should be two attachments of this same rod, which are solid in both, about half a palm or slightly more from end to end; and these two attachments are bolted into the mouth of the mold for opening when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, resembling it more delicately and lighter, should be made of rod from ebony or boxwood according to the appearance of scissors; and have at its two ends two attachments as you see, each one a palm in length, and each is two inches wide. And when you observe the opening of the mold with all the instrument, make her lie down on the bed with her feet hanging and her legs spread out, then place the two attachments together into the mold, hold the handle of the tool between her buttocks; then work your hand on the entire tool as you would do with scissors equally, according to how much you see open the mouth of the mold, until the wax forms what she desires.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is completely mounted and multiplied in its forms; and when you have them set out, the work proceeds faster, and they are positioned higher for their quantity compared to others.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not neglect the instrument until you have set it out, because its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the secondine is retained at childbirth, you must command the mother to retain her urine and then make her sneeze with the consideration of delivering it. And keep your hands on her mouth and nose; and if she jumps through this means, all will be well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If this doesn't work, take iodine and pour it into the bottle or cap, then put in herbs that can open the mouth of the child, such as calendula, rue, anise, chamomile, cinnamon, and wormwood; all these herbs, or any of them, be cooked or steeped in water over fire; then place a reed or cork on top of the pot, and another part of it into the mouth of the child. Continue this until the vapors enter the child's body; then make her sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If its second heart jumps quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this treatment and lacks force, instruct the patient to moisten her left hand with sesame oil or musciggare (fennel), then rubs some in the nature [of the wound], and seeks for a second one; and when she finds it, she should pinch it gently and gradually straighten it out until there is no obstruction during extraction. But you must gently move it to the right and left, and then pull; if this comes about and feels free from obstruction.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the wound in her uterus is too tight, we have described the cure of sneezing and herb fumigation; and if she does not benefit from all that we have said, do not rush into extracting it but instead ensure that you are careful when pulling. However, for the one responsible for the mouth of the uterus, tie them to the woman's belly button, then administer a tetrafarmaceutical ointment enema; she will give birth and regain strength, but nonetheless, if unpleasant smells come from her stomach or head, and irritate the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore, it then needs appropriate fumigation for this: none of the old have proven effective fumigation with wild garlic and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument used to fumigate the woman during the retention of flowers and secondines is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is to see a semblance of a cane, and set the delicate head in nature, and place wide shoulders on the fire; and apply smoke treatments over the coals, and the treatment until it gets soothed, then start another.
de percier lou fondement	of piercing the base
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many infants are born without feeling the foundation pierce, but rather it numbs a subtle sinew: so the midwife must make sure that the child feels this sinew pierce its proper place, and does not let it be pierced by any sharp pain, and guard against making the wound touch; then apply wet wool in wine and oil, then the ointment treatment until it heals.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt it won't stick again, place a small piece of opium on it, and let the hands be steady, and remove it when the child wishes to enter chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And these sudden injuries from cuts or abscesses occur; if this needs to be treated suddenly: if it is cured, as we have said about the opium piece.
de la fistule dou fondement	regarding the fistula from the base
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from the foundation are nodules, and those that come deeper within or in the space between two parts, either for one fistula or multiple; and when this old nodule moves, if it produces moisture of any color or subtle white, then these fistulas are persistent. They are known by whether there is an expulsion or suction when the patient expels, and sometimes it can be sensed by a movement from within.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And there are fistulas that stop just before the bladder, and just at half of the penis; and they extend up to the knee joint, and reach up to the nut of the testicle.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And so one comes to know the sinus present at the foundation, and not present: and this is when you bend your index finger or foundation, and insert a slender needle or spider's leg in the sinus when there is no twist.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is twist or curvature, if you insert a subtle tentacle, or a horse's hair, as long as you feel the tentacle or hair on your finger; and if you don't feel it, and there is no obstruction, suction, wind, or infection, just as we have said: know that it doesn't pierce through; then hurry to treat.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is so deep as to reach the bladder or as far as where urine flows, if it jumps with urine, and cannot be soldered by medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is pierced up to the joint of the leg, that's where the tentacle goes up to. If there is no twist and the pain exists internally, then it remains within, without needing medicine or immediate treatment by ointment; and in these open sinuses, there is no cure other than hard work and the futility of those who interfere with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In this neither Persian nor ancient method, there is hope for health through iron, as I have proven, and it's that the patient lies between your hands on their back; and raise their legs up to their thighs, with their thighs inclined towards their stomach; then insert a tentacle of an octopus, or a snail if there are twists, until you know where the tentacle comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain near the foundation, then you must press your index finger there; if it is felt that the tentacle has penetrated; and find out where you sense sand or flesh beneath your fingers, thus you know she is Persian; if no movement can be made of it then it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	We can still manage to heal some cases, but this happens rarely. When helping them, you should heat the subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula as was explained before; and apply it thoroughly in the fistula until it passes through the foundation. Do this twice or three times, until you know that these hardened parts are burnt out, which resemble a bird's feather; then clean the wet tentacles with butter, until those hard parts come out. Afterwards, apply an ointment to bind and fuse them.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he/she is like this, then it is fine.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If it's like this, no other way can make it right. And if you try to insert between it and doesn't pierce until the root which is at the base, and in that gap there's a thick layer of flesh or fat, and you see the fistula under the layer of skin around the base; so when the operation begins with creating the fistula, push it back slightly before the tentacle, then apply the cautery after, until it reaches the root of the tentacle. And remove that tentacle, and it will exit. Then cleanse those fatty layers that look like a bird's feather pen, making sure not to leave any behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound does not heal, and you cut between yourself and the work (presumably referring to a surgical procedure), then treat with fire cautery or medicinal remedies.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cauteries they prepare two good things: namely, burning of fatty tissues that are attached and bleeding of blood and expelling moisture. Then treat moistened tentacles in butter or ground substances until the fat comes out, ensuring to remove all burned fat; then treat wounds due to rapid hardening of tough flesh, and these are dried remedies.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is healed, if it remains healthy and does not recur.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes just up to halfway down the foundation, and is far from the body core, you should tap your hand or foundation and inquire about it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tentacle, and between II is the net or the syphon or the spout, or it's almost piercing time, but only a path of blood and hope exists, follow one of the III methods for treatment: either cauterize if like we have said, or cut until reaching the bottom, or if you can pull out, apply an incision as first step; don't go too far with your cuts, making sure not to remove the support that holds the base, allowing the discharges to occur naturally; then treat it, following our methods. By chance, if healed, remove that covering and cleanse after it's cut off from the bottom foundation, or through a test or another pointed tool; then clean out that absorbed mass within the wound as much as possible; then study how to heal the wound, and how to manage the fistula in the part below the base: if something easier is for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And there are no times when瘘管 occur in this manner: and when you puncture the tent at the瘘管, and it is where the foundation lies under the skin above, if take a tent pierced at the head according to this form:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And twist two threads together in an interlocking pattern, and thread the tent throughout the fletching until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it's Persian near the foundation margin inside, then extract that thread from the torn one, as you puncture the base or foundation; and pull the head on that thread, and assemble two ends together, and tie one to another, and leave for a day or two; and do not restrain at all times until the threads have absorbed those contents that are between two layers, and excreted; then treat the wound until it is sealed and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not perforate, make sure to pierce it in all possible ways until you can do so without going too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not appropriate to do as we have said previously, placing the body properly first and then treating it, while it remains sound, until it becomes diseased.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spiny pus that is made into a瘘管 is quite small and on one side it cuts; and on another side not, because you do neither should not absorb, as you see here:
des emorroydes	from the wounds
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Exhaustions can occur in two ways: when they are within the base, like resin grains, and there are both small and large ones, and sometimes blood is present beneath them, and if one or more exist and are beyond the base but close to it; but those beyond have little moisture, and even a bit of lemon juice or a bit of blood might remain beneath them, and they appear white in color; the treatment for those within the base involves commanding the patient to exhaust themselves until their bases come out, as long as substances like blood are present, and when the filaments become visible; if you hurry it, use pincers or hold them with your finger nail, then proceed to pull on their roots. If these grains can't be held due to moisture, take them by one of their edges or with thread or a camel's cloth piece; remove them with your hands, cut off the rest, then apply hot powders in place of cautery, and you cauterize them as described in the cautery chapter, treating the rest with other treatments until they are healed. And if the base can't come out, bleed the patient heavily from a purging by pressing vigorously to clean what's beneath it so that it can drain properly; when these conditions are met and the filaments are beyond the base, treatment is easier; you take them with your finger nail or pincers, cut off the rest, then treat them as we have described until they're healed and there's no fear of an incision by blade.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you sew according to this method: take twisted thread, and fit it into a needle, then pull the thread over and make an incision with the needle from another side, and turn both ends of thread around the needle twice or thrice, and ensure there's enough room for blood flow; then tie the thread firmly, afterward secure the thread in knot form, remove the needle, repeat this process for all others and leave some thread to manage excess bleeding; then apply a moist bandage soaked in rose oil or poultice on the wound base, place it over the wound site, instruct the patient to rest; and once they stop bleeding, clean with ointment and other treatments until they recover.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	By drying thoroughly or through the foundation.
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times, dry blood occurs in the intestine, and by nature's constraint, and when the illness is old and medicine no longer helps.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you shave the point of a spatumile or the nail's cuticle above, not allowing for moisture; then treat until it becomes firm as it should be; and if it doesn't become firm, continue to shave more forcefully than before, until it starts to heal and becomes scoured; then treat until it fully heals.
dou fremit	with trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Anterior to the body is a little visible form, it goes throughout completely; and whenever one touches it coldly, and feels it too like death tremors, and comes through the entire body, and more in the hands than anywhere else.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the treatment is that you take a twig from an goose feather, or a strong vulture feather, and place this stick over the tremors, until the purplish circles encompass all the tremors; then turn your hand over so the entire twig covers all of it, and put it right where the tremor starts, and remove its roots from the source.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see this, make it in the form of a needle or iron rod according to this shape, and be fine underneath and tapering above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not pierce it, for you must hold the tip with your thumb and index finger, and apply pressure. And if you see this, use a cautery to burn the twitch as shown in the section on fire cautery techniques.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the gallbladder
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Never make a gallbladder of silver or lead, or of melted spider or pewter; and never make these small and large instruments according to their intended use.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	And thus, when dealing with the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful, they should be small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the gallbladder is both small and large, or how the belly is tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and if the stomach is so linked that you can see it and the intestines are pierced through; and there is a defect on one side with two parts missing, and only one on the other; and the stomach should be filled with medicine from a beast's bladder or parchment, all piercing through many small defects. There should be an equal distance of about one finger between each hole, then weave in one thick thread twisted into a braid for several turns around each hole and stitch together the stomach like that of a goat; when the medicine is inside, tie it with the tool ahead by a strong string before sealing, then perform a cathartic process; this forms a circular shape.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine be neither too hot nor too cold, and smear the head with oil or yolk of egg ointment, or something similar, then gently rub it in. Then the physician ministers to his two hands together, as long as he can see all, then remove the cyst, and lift up the patient's legs towards the surface, and if the medicine seems to be coming out, pull it out as much as you can; and if he sleeps through an entire night, this is a greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you give it to someone with the illness of abdominal distension, and the medicine starts to come out quickly, then continue giving it until it is relieved.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhage is from the root or base of an abscess, or from a deep lesion, and if it is as subtle as for an infant; and this is the form of a subtle cyst under which the skin is constrained:
des plaies	from wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have spoken about the treatment of wounds in the division; now we will discuss treatments for hands and medicine according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I state that wounds are diverse depending on how they were made, and where the wounds are located, and why they were caused.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things that result in injuries are through the breaking of bones, and cuts from a sword or dagger, or lance or staff, or similar objects; or those done according to the parts of the body, such as an injury at the neck, or on the head, or stomach, or belly, or liver, and similar organs; and I will tell you how each wound is treated, beginning with simple wounds of the head, for this knowledge will come up in my chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I state that when a simple wound occurs or bone is damaged, and the bone isn't broken, you must be cautious whether it's due to stone or similar things, and even if the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt slightly about pus formation: if you perform immediate surgery on the cephalic region precisely when there is little blood from the wound, and then heal in opposition to the affected part; let the patient replete with wine and consume large meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if they do not want to undergo surgery, reduce their meat intake, and do not drink wine or eat large meats; instead place on the wound, if pus is present, moist cotton soaked in rose oil or in a收敛ive wine; and if there is no pus present, apply on the fresh wound as long as it has all its blood without being disturbed by air, then use powder which I will explain shortly; and if it has been disturbed, apply some remedies until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like from a sword cut and similar injuries, and the lips cannot be stitched together by tents, then stitch them together, as I will explain for wounds of the abdomen, in stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound exposes the bone, and might, and can only hold for a bit, if you can manage; then treat the wound with medicine, restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat large meats, like cooked tests and wheat, as well as cooked chickens, and similar items.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find or discover rotting skin, and it doesn't reach the bone, then remove the rot completely, and drain pus, then treat; and if there is an artery inside the wound or vein, without a cut, and it cannot be stopped with medicines, then tie the artery, and if you notice dislocation, tie it with a thread; and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, their treatment is light: and you should apply this powder which will stick together in such a way that when the fire touches it, it heals.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the way to make the powder is as follows: take one part of incense; dragon's blood two parts; live charcoal three parts, and finely ground it all; then spread this over the wound and press it firmly until it dries well and joins with all its blood; and then tie it properly and leave it without loosening it if it doesn't swell; because you don't remove the medicine until it heals.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	Only this is done with salt alone, when one doesn't have the incense or the blood of the dragon, but only when the art has healed the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient has healed the wound, indeed in this state, he should not apply this powder at all; but instead use some well-prepared ointments, or oats flour mixed with water and honey until it no longer oozes. Then continue other treatments until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the bone breakage comes with the wound and it is small, then try using subtle needles; and I will tell you about bone fractures later.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound at the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	This wound comes from the neck and it is simple, if there is no difference between it and those at the head, but if a nerve in the neck or an artery has been cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it's in the nose, if there is no other tool but to let the cure alone, and not put anything restraining on it, as it harms the nose and makes them recede; and do not put anything cold on the wound, as the substance of the nose is cold, and its continuous use involves the head which is the highest member; but apply the medicine underneath, such as rose water mixed with mild oil, and cooked lettuce rinsed in gentle water, and other earthy minerals according to this method, and wet bandages.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, bind it with strips and then treat it until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deeply cut and filled with blood, then pierce them or lower down. And if an artery is severed, and bleeding occurs, then open it up, clean it out, and cauterize; and if the spine of the throat, or ribs, and the passageway is cut, guard where the meat goes, so that when you set the rib on top of the neck bone, don't touch the throat but place it according to its natural shape; and then adjust the setting, leaving it for a few days. Then treat with dried ointments until it heals; and if there appears to be an impact in the bone, seek treatment for that; and if pieces of bone are present, remove them all you can, and those that cannot be reached, let them stay until the wound becomes healed and drained, then dry out its source. And if the wound is fresh, apply powder as I have said on top of the powder.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as instructed in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	from lance or knife wounds
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it's a lance or knife wound and the injury is deep, then look at how the wound is healing: if there are signs of wind escaping from the body instead of the patient's blood alone: this means that the injury is fatal; and if it isn't deep and the whole area still has fresh blood, then don't apply any powder or bind it until the first hour passes. Let the blood drain naturally outwards rather than stopping completely, allowing the heart to take over and ensure the health of the patient. But instead use an attracting ointment and bind it twice a day; if you have no ointment, put old cotton into the wound for soaking up moisture. Make the patient rest on the wound for three days or four, or more if necessary. If there are no signs of spasms or trembling from the heart, then the injury is saved when you see improvements in healing conditions and can ascertain that the injury has been resolved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat with various remedies and other treatments until it heals; and if it does not heal or work properly, know that there is a fistula; treat it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut and it's simple or worse, at the front; for large wounds use stitches; and for small ones, powder. If the wound goes through bones and breaks them, and if there are pieces of bone, consider how to treat the wound along with the foreign objects inside; and if they are exposed, leave the wound to fester until they can be removed; and if they aren't exposed, allow the wound to heal naturally, facilitating extraction procedures for others. For wounds on other body parts, make judgments accordingly as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	from the rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The operations on the belly are large, medium and small; from a major wound, an intestine or pieces of intestines may be cut out due to the insertion of objects; sewing is more complicated, and in no case is it worse than the smaller wounds compared to larger ones because if we try to reinsert them too soon after surgery, they might not fit properly; as intestines swell when they feel cold, making reinsertion difficult, which means that smaller wounds are better off. You should know that the rupture of the belly can happen in four ways: the common two types of stitches occur during a belly operation, and the other stitches for other body parts are also used but with operations on the belly; however, they are more precise when dealing with belly stitches, and I will explain each one separately.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small and no part of the intestines is involved, and if there are only minor injuries requiring treatment, this can be done through one of two methods: either because of the size of the wound as we've explained, or due to the intestines being swollen from cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm him in this manner: soak an sponge or a cloth with water only, or cook them in boiling water with quina and thyme and spices, and expose the intestines until they become hot; and after doing this several times, let him cool off to help reduce swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you notice the swelling subside, moisten the intestines with water or broth from cooked vegetables, for this helps in allowing food to pass through easily; and if it doesn't enter, cut a little bit more of the wound using the tools used for cutting stitches; and the first cure is cooling off, followed by surgery, which should only be done when there's significant need; and these are the tools used for cutting: you cut inside along the curve and not outside, and then follow this form.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines have jumped out, if you can, put them back according to their natural shape in their proper place, for this suits a return.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	When the wound is broad, and it's in the abdominal region, it should be that you make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head. And if it's in the abdominal area, then place their head and bottom above the abdominal parts, and similarly, when the belly wound is in one of the two areas, put your understanding so that the part that has been cut off is higher than the other; and thus you should follow what I'm saying about large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, use what you are provided with, then take the surgical tools that cut completely through the wound with your hand, and stitch together the edges; this is the common way of sewing, and it involves using one or more needles according to the size of the wound. Leave a space from the edge of the wound about an inch, then insert a needle at any point where you think the thread will hold well, followed by thick strong thread; and pierce both parts through the skin with both ends of the sewing tool which is inside the skin, until it pierces that part, then gather both ends of the sewing tool together into three. Then sew through the skin twice, leaving about half an inch from each stitch, then insert another needle; and tie this thread as you did for the first needle, without ceasing to do so based on your need of needles until all the wound is secured; use needles that are neither too fine nor too thick, because very thin needles cut all the flesh, while overly thick ones don't fit well: thus they should be medium-sized; and don't make the stitches too deep into the flesh and skin, as this will cause damage during healing. Afterward, tie off the ends of the needles so that they don't irritate the patient at night, and place cloths or bandages over the needle parts to hold them down while letting the wound heal; and let this sewing process continue until the wound is joined; and this way of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, as you join both skin ends and both flesh ends together into one needle where there's a medium strong thread; when you've pierced these four parts together, pull the needle back to where you started, in the manner that you sew clothes. Leave space between each stitch about an inch wide; this stitching heals the person, and I once stitched a wound of someone who was cut by a knife, which was over one palm long, and had intestines nearly two palms thick, and was in the middle of the abdomen.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back his intestines until it had been 24 hours since its removal, and the wound was sown up till 15 days later, and I treated him, and he recovered.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And when they had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle; I did not treat him with ointment, because I was in an area where none could be found, nor any medicine. Instead, I placed two layers of old cloth on the wound each day, and washed it with honey water until he recovered.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you two proper ways of suturing: take the needle and pierce from the outer side until it reaches inside; when it has pierced through the skin straight in and out, then place the tip at the siphon or where you have pierced the skin with the needle, and make another hole on the inner side until it reaches the outer side again. And the principle of this stitching is that you sew as a mole does with its fur, leaving an opening on one side and picking it up from the other, until the entire suture is completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second way of sewing, as Galen properly stated, is such that none do it, who join the two parts together naturally, and apply one edge to the other edge like this: pierce with a needle or an edge near the thread, just pierce the left part only, and leave the two edges of the thread. Then turn the needle and make it pierce from below forward until into these parts as far as the two edges of the thread; then pierce both from below forward until into these parts in two other threads that are at the opposite side. And this is the way of sewing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen said this word, and none testify it, that one should stitch the abdomen with two needles or threads in each; and one should pierce one needle from one side and the other from another, like those who sew joints. Know that when the rupture is within the abdomen, the stitching is worse than among their others' of the stomachs.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgments concerning the wound are such as those for other wounds: and thus when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, just like you have let the heat of it go out, then return the intestine and the lip; afterwards put on the stimulating powder on meat. And if you have let the heat of it go out, then apply no ointment at all as long as the wound is bleeding; and change the bandage, stitch up the cut, and treat the skin and the flesh; then heal the wound like others until it is healthy; and if you don't have medicines, when it starts to stop bleeding properly, use old cotton, and stir it twice a day until it becomes healthy.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you need no other medicine in various situations when the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound might cause dislocation among major limbs, it is necessary for you to soak thin wool in an oil that has a temperate heat or rose oil, and put it between the layers, and cover them tightly; and if there is pain or gangrene throughout the body, and this happens repeatedly, then give it black wine enemas until many times, and especially if gangrene reaches up to the intestine; and pierce from within, and know that when it's the large intestines, it is easier to heal than the small ones.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine which is called 'youthful' cannot heal when it's injured, and this is due to the location of blood vessels that are there, and due to the subtlety of the entire body, and its closeness to nerve nature.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the gallstone jumps out of the wound, set it back as you would with an intestine when it is fresh; and if it's old and turned yellow or black, you must tie up the black part to prevent any blood from leaking through because there are veins and arteries in that area. Then cut out what lies between this connection, and hang both ends of it under the part below the wound until they come out beyond for easing the removal when the gallstone drops, and then the wound closes.
de la routure dou boueil	From the rupture of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestine is torn, and the wound is small, it can sometimes be repaired in some places, as I have seen when someone was hurt by a lance or had stomach damage; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and became a fistula, causing malabsorption and flatulence; I treated it according to what seemed reasonable, not stopping until the healing was complete, and then sewed up the wounds.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it fused together, I wondered if the patient might have pain in his belly; but there was no harm, he simply stayed better off, eating and drinking; and an experimenter said that should there be a small injury inside the intestines, it must be bound like this: take hair with large roots, then join the edges of the wound together, and when the hair has opened its mouth, place it against the two edges if she constrains her mouth over them; then grasp the head, maintaining it so that it cannot loosen, then place another hair in the same manner as before until the whole injury is covered; and thus the wound heals.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If any part is diseased within the intestine and causes no harm to the patient, it can be tied with a fine thread that has been cut from the intestine of an animal. Do this: take the end of this intestinal thread so that most of it is shaved off, then tie one strand of the thin linen thread around it, then insert the thread into the needle and sew through the intestine, then fasten it in the opening; and this method of sewing with hair does not differ from the way of marriage and hope. And if the injury is large and extensive, especially when it's within one of the intestinal loops, there should be no obstruction or stagnation since it is fine.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	regarding a sinus or if it be so
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that every wound or abscess, when it matures, is universally called a "fistula", and even when it's covered with hair and hardens.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is characterized by a hard and white swelling deep inside that does not cause pain, also covered like the feathers of a bird; and it either breaks clearly open or else thickens; sometimes there's little discharge, and at other times quite enough; I've spoken about this already in the division of wounds - any non-healing wound that doesn't produce pus can only leave the body via one of the nine causes: namely, due to a small blood clot or clotting matter; or through malice; or because there's hard tissue inside not allowing pus production; or because there is too much pus; or as a result of decay becoming a form of infection; or due to the nature of digestion being delayed and recovery being slow, eventually expelled by natural means; or because of open veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, their signs, and the treatments in this division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	So it is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of fistulas which are done by handwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas which come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or at the glandular organs such as the kidneys, bladder, or any part of the chest, or spine, or joints of hands or feet. And if it happens within the domain of the main limb, or has the appearance of those parts.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas of this kind are due to a lack of healing and not through injury or ignorance; and there isn't any other type that doesn't involve reaching up to where I've mentioned. If there is no fistula that does not extend up to what I've said, then you have taken care in your treatment, and when you see it clearly, take an arachnid's web or a metal wire tool; if the fistula is straight, use it accordingly; if the fistula is crooked, seek it out with a delicate fishing hook since fish can bend to follow its curvature. And if the fistula is loose in parts and hard to locate through tools, flush it by one of those parts using a catheter because moisture travels from one part to another, then clean it; afterwards, check it carefully as best you can to see if there's bone or nerve present and whether they're pierced all around, ask the patient precisely where she feels pain when your hand presses her body, and tell which part it is. And when you truly know the part and that it is far from joints, nerves, arteries, veins or any of the parts I've mentioned, if it's in accordance with what I've said then remove the pus-filled tissue within; and then treat until she has healed properly. And if the fistula goes straight into its correct place, make sure you cut it precisely as much as possible, then wet cloths in a medicinal solution and bathe them until they reach the tip of the fistula, to dissolve whatever remains at the bottom with the medicinal corrosion; afterwards, apply healthy gauze dressings until she is healed. If she has not been healed properly like this, cauterize her as we have said before, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, cut it accordingly.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If the vein or nerves are not obstructed or cause issues with main limbs, as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there's decay and darkness, then the king should do it until all decay is removed, then treat the affected area with various remedies until it heals; and if it has healed, proceed as before, knowing that you are not yet done. Keep uncovering and cleaning until you reach the bottom, removing all the decay, then restore the limb; and if it has healed in such a way, this is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If it isn't so, you'll realize that the decay has spread too far, and cannot be undone. If there's no other choice than to let it heal naturally; and if there is a small corrupted bone, you can extract it with forceps, use an appropriate tool for this task, and if there are multiple bones, remove them all, don't leave any behind; and if moisture causes you trouble, leading to hesitation or fear, mix the fluid with flesh and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you can't remove them within an hour, place a putrefying substance on the wound instead, and leave it until the flesh around the bones is fully putrefied, then they will have lighter bones afterwards; and if it's a large bone such as in the leg or thigh, only perform the corruption process up to when all of the black part has been removed, then heal the wound; and if there is a significant part of the putrefaction, coming right down to the bone; you should remove everything up until the point of corruption, and then treat it until healed; and I will tell you about a case where this happened in a man's leg, so that you can take an example and help with your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was once a young man around thirty years old, who experienced pain in his leg due to something that came from within the body. This made substances travel to the leg and resulted in an abscess forming, which couldn't be opened externally. But through their foolishness, they cut so deeply that even though the abscesses were opened, they corroded much of the flesh, resulting in a fistula. A great deal of harm came about due to the body's heat and moisture; and many doctors treated this for two years without any knowledge or skill in the art of healing until I was called upon. I examined his leg and the medicines that were being used on him, as well as what corroded through the wounds causing significant bodily damage. The parts of the body near youth turned red, and had a golden yellow color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I set up a tent in one of these bumps, and then searched all the bumps, finding that some came against each other from every part of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hurriedly proceeded, and explored one of the bumps until I discovered a part of the bone within. I found that the bone was corrupted and pierced through; it seemed like the corruption had reached inside the bone up to the osseous tissue; what appeared to be the part of the corrupted bone to me, I assumed there was no other corruption besides this one; I then began treating the wound with medications for a long time, but couldn't heal it; and then I started again, rediscovering the bone as before, and found that the corruption continued within the bone. I treated it accordingly, took out the corrupted part, and tried to mend the leg; but I was unable to do so completely because I could only explore up until halfway into the bone, and then I would proceed with medicating the area; and it healed rapidly, and there was no need to restart the process besides due to the weakness of the patient who couldn't bear it, and due to fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For during blood evacuation often occurs, but it was completely healed, and in the place of the bone birthed out a hard flesh, and it was well arranged and had no harm or opposite to all throughout, neither outward nor inward.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, should it be treated like this: take a string, and stretch at the opening of the bone, commanding that it be extended upwards; and tie another larger cloth string than the first one, and tie it above the flesh coming out of the bone, stretching it to make the rotten flesh come off, exposing the flesh where you need surgery, ensuring not to damage the flesh; place a poker or board under the bone to prevent touching the rotten flesh; do so until you can see and feel the decay, also doing it again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is rotten and does not open, and rot has spread in or within a part of it, reveal all flesh. Then place charcoal over it, then let the corruption spread from one side to another across it. Ensure you remain there until the entire length of the corruption is dealt with; as we have mentioned before; if the rot spreads at the joint, cut out and remove the corrupted joint, and insert bone from the other side; should the rot be within the continuity of two joints, use nothing else but to cut through them; should rot appear in the knuckle of your hand or foot it becomes particularly difficult but you must still inquire about this corruption according to how you access its spread. Clean everything in all ways possible, so long as you do not interfere with the tissue or nerves. Remember that knives and tools to deal with bones come in many types depending on the structure of the bone and its appearance, size, subtlety, grandeur, smallness, hardness; for this requires appropriate equipment tailored towards each aspect of surgery. The work will show you which tool is necessary according to knowledge of this art and the testimony of disease patterns; simply think about what tool suits your needs based on that description.
dou feu	with fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The joints swell either due to internal reasons or external ones; and when you have treated that corrosion through medicine without any improvement, it is necessary to cover that limb up until the point of corrosion comes. So as long as the disease escapes from there, either by death or from malice, which is greater than the fault with the limb. And if there are signs then the member turns black, making it seem burnt like fire, and after the darkness, because this corruption spreads member to member across the body; so you must hasten in covering, and if it's due to the percussion of some poisonous beasts such as sea scorpion, snake and similar ones, when corrosion is at the head of the spine, then cover them too and do not give it space till up to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes up to the hand, when you cover at the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach up to the elbow; and if it comes to the elbow, when you cover the wrist; and if it passes the wrist, then it's time for death and no other means are useful than the quantity of its virtue; and do this way whenever there is a corrosion or any sign: if it comes in the first joint, when you cover after the other joint; and if it appears anywhere else, then cover all that area; and if it ascends to the leg, when you cover at the knee joint; and if it extends above the knee, there is no other option than to let the patient die; and the way of covering or treating the limb involves tying it up top and bottom, stretching one thread from below under each link, and another thread from above along each link, and you remove the flesh that's between these two threads as wide as a coin size until bone is exposed; then cover or treat, and place one linen bandage from each side, so that the treatment does not touch the healthy part and cause further disease and pus.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if blood flow comes when you work, if you cauterize the wound immediately or place some restraining powders on it; then return to your medicine until its completion, and bind the limb tightly with a suitable bandage, and heal it until it is sound. And I will tell you what happened to a man in his left foot: there was a burning that seemed like fire damage, and this corrosion came first in his left foot, covering all of it; and when the patient saw the corrosion, he wanted to cut off his foot, and became well. After a long time later, the corrosion returned on the second toe from his right hand, and he came to me, and I put things that reflect sound after cleaning his body, but could not stop the corrosion; and he insisted that I cut off his hand, but I did not agree until I had hope of reflecting matter; and doubted also that if I were to cut his hand, he would die, for his body's virtues were weak. And he completely lost hope and returned to his home country, cutting off his hand, and became well. And I only relate this story so that others can use it as needed.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	No time for pus to form in the raw meat's interior, and stays so long as it creates a large pool of blood; then spreads and pierces, and the blood jumps, remains within the body, like in vessels; and the skin above is also delicate like silk, and doesn't extend all the way to bone or nerve, and such disease is called "clean", not "fistula"; but if it extends so far as into bone from within, then it's called "fistula"; and the skin is such that you can peel off this skin completely, even when it's delicate, like silk; and doesn't grow due to corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you have noticed that the skin is getting heated up and there's no corruption inside, and if the skin contains a lot of fat, then here's how to treat it with cathartic medicine: Check if the breasts are large, and if the body that they're attached too produces smelly odor, then use Egyptian cathartic medicine as follows: Take some oil, oil, and litargy (a type of metal), and heat them together in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and thickens like honey; then take this concoction according to your need, mix it with water and honey, then apply it on the breasts and wrap them tightly. Leave the medicine for two hours each time before draining it off; do this several times until both breasts are cleaned up completely and all pus has been removed; if you can't use water from ashes when there's no such medicine available, mix some ash of vine wood with water and apply this mixture on the affected area. When applying this treatment for too long might cause irritation to your skin or to the Egyptian medicine or the water from ashes, you may mix it with honey and a little bit of litargy (another type of metal). Alternatively, you could use a mixture of honey and wine which have properties that cleanse and wash off impurities and wine makes pus 'dry up'. Once you've done this and you're sure your breasts are well cleansed, prepare to apply on the affected area the medicine that makes fat produce. Then apply plaster made from it with oil and wine; or you can use various medicines and ointments whose properties I have described or mentioned about ointments. If the hole of the cathartic is too small for the cathartic body to enter, then enlarge a piece of iron slightly, put some Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment on it, until its width fits perfectly; if the wound is too wide and there's no place for the cathartic body to enter from above, you cut it open so that only the mouth of your cathartic can enter. If pus is inside the hole when you're doing this, then cut higher than where you are cutting now.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bowe is in perfect condition, do not let it swell with pus; and if you cannot cover its bottom as you see fit, arrange things so that the bowe aligns at the lowest point of the body which exists. Because when the bowe is in perfect condition, do not let it swell with pus and if you cannot cover its bottom as you see fit, arrange them like this: for the bowe to move slightly downwards, and leave nothing of the bowe; take consolidating medicines to place inside the healthy area, and they are on the linen covering all the healthy area; then cover in the strongest part below the chest about a bit wider than the first, put ointment sulfur on the other sheet according to the size of the protrusion, and set it on the protrusion of the health for easing the bowe, and remove nothing of the large sheet except after many days once; and that which is under the protrusion of the chest, often take off in order to ease the bowe, and know what comes from the bowe, if it's venom or pus or enough, or digested, or undigested; and take care if the patient feels pain or no, and if there is pus or not, and when your medicine has been spread like this and you see its nature that jumps on the protrusion of health, you know that the chest is now healing, and draws near to health; and then release the wound in the morning, or on the third day, and when you release the wound, change another sheet, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if your chest is full of undigested food for many days, know that your stomach is not working properly.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if venoms penetrate deeply after long duration, do not despair of recovery for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are individuals who take longer to heal their wounds with ointments and those who do the opposite; if indigestion persists for many days after springing in the womb, understand that the breasts have not yet matured. If the breasts take a long time to lactate and remain distant, adjust your medicines as dry and moist substances by nature and virtue respectively, such as ointment diafinites, since there is a large amount of vitriol involved which is the last medicine; take ointment diafinites, mix it with rose oil, then soak it in old equal wine by substance; then stew and use it. Do the same for cooked thickened honey when ointment diafinites isn't available or you take myrrh and aloen along with incense, grind them, add them to the honey which is on fire until it turns into powder; then bind it as a paste and apply it to the breast, and do this treatment for many times. If your treatment lasts long and cannot be cured using these methods, know that corruption has spread internally, affecting the bones or hard parts of the body, or internal organs; if you treat pus-filled ulcers correctly as we explained previously.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	From the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that forms under the nail of the little finger on one's hand, or foot, or by chance occurs in other fingers; and when it gets old, and you don't take care of it, if the abscess grows outwards, and runs and spreads as far as its root reaches the nail, and by chance it touches all of it; and comes corrosion up to the bone until there is intense pain, making the joints around the finger swollen, and causing the color to fade.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have instructed in the section on treatment, and if the cure does not benefit, then it is necessary that you remove all the excess material remaining under the nail. Then after this, cauterize the wound.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The fire cautery is very helpful when the bone is healthy and the nail is in good condition. However, if the flesh presses on the nail bed and begins to pierce it causing blisters, you should place a wire under the nail just above the flesh, and leave the top part exposed. Then cut this thin and gently, removing all the affected tissue. Place hot and corrosive medicines on the dressing thereafter until everything has been eliminated. Finally, apply ointments as long as the area is healing.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, you remove it and use force, for as long as the bone decays like that, it can't heal. And when you see that the nail has decayed, you remove it immediately as before described, then cure until it heals; and if it's hard, broken, and hurts a lot, you should first cure it; then cut under the nail with a sharp tool in a crosswise direction, and be careful not to cut into the flesh underneath the nail, for that would cause too much pain; and if this happens, place something above that eases the pain.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The pain deepens in the hand.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	You must adjust what is born in the hands of some people by chance and are very muscular, and by chance it has bones or it lacks a nail, and none of them are born at the root of the joint, where birth occurs at any point on our fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	Those that are born in no new noise do not move, and those that are born at the joint of the foot, by chance might move; the size of the one who is thick is so light, in this manner: cut it from its root like a small blade.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	This which is born in the root of the joint needs to be cured: if you hold onto this, it will become a cure for you.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In the one that is born or should be at the end of the leg, it's necessary to first cover with soft flesh up to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable length for it. Then treat it until it is sound.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The injuries that come together through birth, or by accident in wounds, or from the cautery of fire, or from similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	It's necessary to cover that seam, so that it repairs according to its natural shapes; then place between two wet cloths or oiled draperies, so they don't stick together. Or you place between two pieces of finely ground tallow, until the parts are joined, as is appropriate.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If soldering occurs at neither of these points with the palm, then remove that soldering job as it should be done.
des vils	The villages
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	The towns are thick with bloated veins full of melancholic superfluities, which come from many members on the body. More appears in the legs of those who walk and work, than for others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	So you should then give him or her an emetic once, and afterwards heal from the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The iron treatment has two ways: one is where you clamp them, and draw out black blood; and the other way is that you open the vein, and pull it all out with force.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The bleeding procedure is as follows: first heat the leg with hot water very strongly until the large veins become thin. Then stretch the leg from the disease above the knee to just below the thigh; then make an incision in the vein either at I, II or III, using a wide blade. Next pull out and remove black blood by hand from one end of the cut to the other as much as the virtues of the disease can bear; and then close it up, instructing him to apply meat juice that darkens this color. And repeat the evacuation and cleaning when the veins are full, which is harmful to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The treatment procedures are carried out in this manner: raise the leg from the bad side, if there is hair present, then immerse it in hot water. And while raising the leg into the hot water, let it turn red and expand the veins; if you don't have hot water, heat it with fire, and then place it where the vein runs longitudinally to the hip joint or the section below the knee; after that peel off the skin layer by layer, and burn the vein from each side until one feels it; when seen it is red and black, and when it seems like a white thread when cut through the skin, then pull out the artery right away. And while pulling, ensure not to lift it as if you do so, you might not be able to pull or lift it again which can harm the patient; once all the procedures are done, after placing it on the spot of the wound, apply wet linen soaked in wine and rose oil; continue treating until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the face is constricted and twisted together in one bundle, and it isn't straight, as we have said, then you should cut through forcefully, but don't cut into it; and guide it as we described beforehand.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The shape that one cuts the iron bar into when cutting the screw is bent, and does not cut through, so as not to cut the vein; and it has large curvature because if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but being thick as we have said, and this is the form:
de la voinne civile	from the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein ascends in legs, in warm areas where no herbs or trees grow, and on earth where there's no moisture; and it sometimes arises elsewhere than in legs, and this happens due to corruption that comes from under the skin, just as it occurs inside the body in snakes and worms, between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that there is a very large inflammation in the leg, then it changes the blood, and the vein starts to exit, just like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the shoulder is opened, it should be wrapped internally with a piece of leather from one and a half to two feet until all are done, then tie it, leaving the leather on the leg. And every time if there's any remaining outside, you should wrap around the leather again, and tie; and if she's too long, you must cut off part and wrap it back in, without wrapping her root, until she is fully extracted; for if you wrap her, it enters into the body, causes abscess and putrefaction or death, a bad disease; because this thing should be treated slowly and gradually until completion, and not leave anything behind. And there's no time when this vein when it's treated of five palms in length, or ten, then one hundred days have come to me, from which she extends for ten palms, and when you wrap her, if it loses one or two raisins, and pierce until the bottom, so that all can exit; and make her empty of the matter inside, and administer medicines against putrefaction each day, then treat him as abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And never at this vein, and similarly when it opens in the joint of the foot, or ankle, and much damage happens, and one loses strength; then treat accordingly as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	worms that arise between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "the cow's illness", because it often affects cows, and it is a small worm that arises between skin and flesh, and travels throughout the body up and down, and one feels its presence from member to member, until it reaches the skin where it was heading, and then it escapes; and it is infested with putrefaction of various fluids, such as coming in and out like snakes, worms, and roundworms or in the stomach; and one wonders about its evil nature, for when it travels through the body, and ascends to the head, and reaches the eye, by chance it enters, destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it being treated and drained, one can only say until completion: so then it becomes necessary for you to bind the head above and below with a very tight strong rope, then cut upwards and drain forcefully, and if blood is not found, should then cauterize with fire until it stops; and all major damages that it causes, are when they run into the eye, as we have said; and should you see it approaching or nearly to the eye, should then hold firmly underneath him with the eyelid form, cut upwards, and drain forcefully; it is necessary to use the aid of purification through body fluids of medicinal solvents for the ailments caused by humors, and watch out for meat spoilage resulting from fermentation.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	The pain that comes from winds.
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This illness is called "vakirir" in our land, and it's a pain that comes to any limbs, and then moves from one limb to another; I've seen the case as I told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to attend a sick woman and found her arms exposed. I noticed a small swelling in the arm vein; shortly after, I saw it rise as if a worm was entering the shoulder, faster than any other object, like quicksilver being poured from one hand to another; the pain left that hand and lodged itself in the shoulder. Then soon afterwards, it spread throughout her body until it reached the other arm; she then told me that the pain was looping within her body, just as I had observed.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled much how she moved from limb to limb in this way, for I had never seen this disease carried out like this before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	To conclude, I have wished for many times that the pain could move from one place to another, but it was not done like this before what I observed in her. And I thought that this happened because of the woman's dry body and exposed veins, as well as due to this constrained wind; yet they do not appear thus according to this reason among those who are healthy and have moist bodies with covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see the treatment for this illness, and the patients feel that pain, if it opens up as we have said, then press on it quickly both above and below, and then apply pressure until that constraining wind strength escapes from the place; and cauterize the area; and if you do not see it at your ears, treat those who debout the winds, like stinking pills, serapin pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows vary according to their shape and the location of their impact on the body.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The variety of arrows is such that there are those with large points, and small ones, and barbed, and soldered; and those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those where pieces exist. And the way these arrows exit does not follow any particular pattern: some go out at the main body parts like the head, brain, heart, liver, stomach, intestines, bladder, and other primary organs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it comes to any part of the body, and the signs of death which I will tell you later, they appear: so it is necessary that you prepare for the extraction of this arrow, because death follows in various dispositions; and when that bad sign does not appear and the arrow has not been fully extracted, then remove it and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign for the brain when the arrow has penetrated and pierced the bone, there is bleeding from a faucet that's under the head, and if blindness, deafness, inversion of vision, red eyes, inflammation and red tongue, seizures, confusion in understanding, vomiting of bile; and perhaps loss of strength through nostrils or ears; and sometimes loss of speech and voice; and pus appearing like a boil at the wound; and also as burned flesh. And if these signs appear, then take action on treatment, extract the arrow if it's not yet done.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the arrow when it leaves or pierces the heart is that it's close to the left breast, and feels like it might be stuck in something solid, not empty; and sometimes the arrow remains silent just like the pulse, with black blood and cold sweat coming out, and a chill sensation: knowing this without doubt means death is near.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that never leaves is that there's no foam spill from the wound, and the throat swells up, and the patient's skin changes color, and they sigh loudly with a chill in their breath.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow closes in the thigh's covering, it affects the small bones; and there is great pain and great distress, with sighing; and they move all their limbs from the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow penetrates or touches the stomach, by chance it leaps out of the wound without digesting any substance.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow penetrates or touches the belly, and leaps out without passing through any intestines, then there is no hope for treatment, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow pierces the bladder and urine flows out and escapes, causing severe pain to the patient: you must know that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other body parts, such as the arm and neck and throat and shoulder and shoulder blade and elbow and collarbone and ribs and back muscles, and thighs, and similar limbs are safe according to many dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the muscle or artery and it's not poisonous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because when you do something else.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to one house where an arrow hit him in the thigh at the root of his leg: I tried it and pulled it out from another side through the fat behind the ear, causing no intense pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And pulled out an arrow that had hit him in the fat around the eye, near the paper skin behind it. The arrow was stuck, and only reached half way towards the shaft, measuring as large as a Turkish bow's length without any of it visible; the game was done quickly, and no ill accidents occurred to the player.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And try to extract an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and there was an Arabic arrow in his ear: I pulled at the arrows, made them thinner as I pulled, and saved the Christian.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And try to extract an arrow from the body, which was stuck in either his chest or abdomen, and I thought he would die; and then after thirty days had passed, if his condition did not change, I cut into the arrow, pulled it out, and there were no adverse incidents.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you find a person with an arrow that has fallen on or behind them, and the wound is sealed up; and the arrow stays inside, and does not alter its natural disposition, nor finds any harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And to another man, who was hit in the face with an arrow and had the wound stitched up; and he suffered great pain ever since; and many others were similar.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And an arrow hit the home of the princes' king, who was in the midst of their battle zone, and it leaned slightly to the right side; and the arrow was fully embedded. I was called for the treatment after it had been embedded for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound significantly constricted.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I tried to remove it with great subtlety, and did not feel it; and there was pain and discomfort spreading across his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I applied a therapeutic plaster and digestive aid on him because his ears did not swell; and it appeared that there was the arrow in his ear.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the healing poultice for days, and quickly resolved the wound, then let the patient suffer long henceforth, until they felt the arrow inside their nose; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I placed corrosive blood-purifying medicine on the wound for days until it opened, then tried it out and felt the tip of the arrow moving towards its socket. Then I aligned the opening of the wound with that medicine, up to when the head of the arrow became clearly visible; and pressed through well for about four months, afterwards stretching the wound so I could grip the clamps from both sides and not be able to pull it out; then did not stop refining and inventing ways with tools until one day I grasped the arrow in properly made clamps, according to what its shape will look like by the end of this chapter's treatment, when I pulled it and left the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And they judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I will restore it thusly, and once the wound has been sewn up, and the patient fully healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or I have told you about the quality of extracting some arrows, so please apply your skill to what I am not saying, because books cannot cover everything; but wise masters compare well on a few small matters and on what is current or lacking, they find new work, and new instruments, in dealing with the events that occur in this craft.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I state that arrows penetrate the limbs at their entry points for two ways: either through the upper part where they enter or from another direction; and if it is through the side where they entered, then the arrow goes into the flesh, and there has been no penetration so far.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it doesn't jump now, let it grow until the chariness is thoroughly treated internally and relieved; similarly if it's implanted in bone, and can't emerge, leave it like that for some days, and remove it each day; then it will jump. If it doesn't jump, drill through all the way inside with a very fine tool as long as the lungs are expanded internally, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if an arrow is implanted in the bone of the head and extends up to one of the lungs within the brain, or encounters any of the incidents I've described clearly for the patient: do not remove it immediately, but let it grow until it is even after some days, because should the arrow reach this far, it's a death sentence.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is only implanted in the bone and does not extend to the sinus, and remains with no adverse incident for any days, then proceed with the extraction.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is so deeply embedded and cannot come out, then administer warm baths internally, as I have told you; then treat the wound until it heals properly.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is returned to its original position within the body so that you can't see it, then seek it with all your senses; and if you feel it, try to pull it out with any suitable tool; and if you cannot due to the wound's constriction or the depth of the arrow, and there are no bones, nerves or veins involved, then cut as large an area as possible; and when you can pull the arrow out, remove any flesh stuck in two parts from both sides that moves along with it, and then break or bend the ears on the arrow while trying to pull it out; make sure not to break the arrow, so you could pull it out more tightly.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you can't do it all at once, if until the middle of your arm is still sore, then try again, because the extraction will be easy.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the bleeding from the wound causes you to contradict our previous advice about treatment in this chapter, then follow what we have said regarding care; and be cautious of cutting near nerves or arteries, and do it gently according to your ability to pull out the arrow without risk, whether quickly or cautiously, firmly or gently; and treat the patient according to their original condition when they were hit by the arrow, for this is their greatest assistance, and if you cannot do so, then place them in a position indicated by the sign that shows them.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another side, where it opens some part of the body or swells the skin visibly in place: cut up there, as long as the forceps can take hold, and then press: if jumping occurs now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if she is caught in the bone, twist your hand around it until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, let her stay in there and then continue the extraction as long as she lets go; and if the arrow is inside her, hold it with all the shaft; and if it is a bullet, when you see how to administer pressure, if you give direction of administration, if you offer the tool with the point entering first, so that the tip of the arrow enters into the opening of the tool; and then force her, and if she shoots out, then use the tool with the point entering last in order to facilitate extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow touches it, you should take all of the flesh around where I come in, if possible, then treat the wound according to what is fitting.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow hits or pierces somewhere in the leg, belly, bladder, or side, and it is close to vital organs, you should cover up there, if possible; and beware not to cover the vein and the nerve, then remove it, and then stitch up the wound when necessary; and treat until she/he heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used for arrows is similar to the beak of a bird, and here is the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And in terms of size they are as follows: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the arrowhead is also like the feathers of a bird, meant to pierce at the tip of the arrow, as shown here:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape for gripping and pulling like tongs is thus:
des voinnes dou cors communes	from the veins of common horns
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	The veins from which we drain are thirty-one, of which there is or head sixteen. This means: Two batans located after the ears, which are called "two 'herbech'"; and the two arteries that are in the two temples visible; and two veins that are in the two eyelids of the two eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is at the tip of the nose; and two jugulars located on the neck; and two veins that are above the lips of the mouth, these are the veins called 'augeherich'; and two veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins that are commonly treated are V in each arm: one is the cephalic vein, and it's at the left rib, and they call it among laymen "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "faster", and it's made up of the cephalic and basilic veins, and they call it among laymen "vein of the heart"; and the basilic vein is either at the left or right rib, and they call it among laymen "vein of the belly", and it's above the clavicle, and it's the one that gets treated, which opens up clearly on the belly.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	The arm vein is the vein that's between the thumb and the ring finger, and it exists in two parts; and in the leg and where the foot is, there are three veins: one of which is beneath the bend of the ankle at the left rib, and the second is sophene which is at the ankle at the right rib; and the vein that's called "ness", which is in the ankle on the other rib; and in the other leg, there are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The healing of veins after the ears aids in catharsis and migraines; and on the qualities of a surgeon, as I tell you, and how you should pull the head of the illness, rubbing around where the veins are with a coarse cloth; then tighten the diseased area’s neck with a thread until both veins appear behind the ears for two lengths of their heads: then hold onto your tool, and at the pulse point under your hand, pinch it; then take the lancet, pierce it just through the vein to the bone, then lift your hand up to all parts of the vein upstream, cut and remove the skin and vein as far as you should go, making sure they are both pierced through, and let blood out until you see it; then pull it tight and secure it, until it is healed; and I have already explained the incision and cautery or in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The healing of the two arteries located in the two temples, if you're using an ancient method, and applying it with precision, and getting used to it, and dealing with the tears from feverish diseases; and the quality of this surgeon is such as I describe: and when the patient's body constrains their neck until both vessels are clearly visible; and feels a pulse under your fingers, then waits till they get stronger; then lifts the vessel up on your index finger, and pushes the lancet down, then lifts the vessel up high, and secures it, similarly to how you would do with two other vessels, making sure the blood flows as needed; then releases the patient, places your hand on the vessel for an hour, then covers it with cotton; and then secures it tightly until it heals; and we've discussed about this process, including extraction of any material and starting this book's description.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The sanitation of the vein above the forehead is as valuable as the sanitation of the cephalic against diseases of the face in old times, and with migraine, and with congestion; and its quality lies in causing the patient's neck to contract by twisting it, until the vein begins to move; then take the instrument called 'drill', which has this form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand or some other object, allowing a little blood to come out according to the quantity you see; then relieve the neck of the patient and tie the vein until it is healthy and there are no more operations with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Every vein, it must not be too close with the flames; and the cut should be clean from side to side, because bone is nearby, and by chance the flames could break when they are thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	Sanitation of the two veins that are in the two eyelids helps with tears, and congestion, and with redness, and around the earlobe on the ear, against diseases of the face; and its quality for sanitation lies in causing the patient's neck to contract by twisting some link, as before. Then heal it, and make the sanitation through the middle, a little bit along the length of a small flame that is somewhat wide, because there is no tissue involved.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle and should break by chance; then make correction with blood, as much as you need to, and then bind it with cotton, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The treatment of the nose bleed from the nostril is done by blowing out, and in sudden removal, and for diseases of the face, such as migraines and redness that occurs in the face, and also when it's old; and the qualities of this treatment are to pinch their necks, then squeeze their nose into your left hand, take a subtle flame long, and place it inside the lip area between the two nostrils, since the nasal passage is not properly open and yet, blood flow will begin now to correct; do not push too deep inwards, make the correction according to the amount of blood needed, then let it rest for a night as she heals very quickly; this is the form of the flame.
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The treatment of the two inguinal glands helps in tightening the lymph, and initiates the process of mixing, and many diseases, including phlegm and corrosion, and herpes, and cysts; the quality of this treatment is that the patient presses their neck twice, as we have mentioned; and let the experts be located on the tip of the gland, and the glands are placed on either side of the seat, then treat the lymph for a short while more widely longitudinally, then drain blood carefully, or as much as necessary; then repeat elsewhere in another lymph node, then release all the strings, and gently constrict the veins so they don't strangle; let it heal until morning, so that the wound is cured.
de la sainie des leivres	On the healing of the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the veins in the mouth helps to form within the mouth, and leads to gum deterioration, and裂s in lips, and nosebleeds.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the quality of healing involves having the patient face you, restraining their neck as I have said; then turn the cheek and look at the two veins, one being on the right cheek and the other on the left. You recognize them by the fact that they are black, and because inside them there are small black veins: therefore clip both of them, and if you do not know them and are in doubt, clip the larger one from each part, and proceed with the same method for the two veins above and below, since it is the same manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	On healing near the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The healing of the veins near the tongue aids after the healing of the cephalic region, and this is done in the narrowing of the throat, and for diseases of the lymph node, and for mouth diseases; and the quality of a surgeon requires that the patient's blood flows between your hands under the sun, and lift the tongue, then look underneath on each side: heal both of them, but do not go too far inward, because near are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the arm that are commonly treated are treated according to two methods: or by placing them in total contact with a large, fiery metal instrument like steel, or by using a slender olive-colored tool such as a surgical knife, and these tools are wide and slender depending on the width and tightness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of the mirthin flame is much renowned, and it is quite wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it requires to open the veins filled with large visible blood, and those containing large blood and disturbance; this is in the form of the olive fire.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more delicate and pointed, and it is for purifying small veins or minor blood that is yellow.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The treatment of the basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that affect the throat, and in the neck, and around the ribs, and in the abdomen; it requires for the healer to treat carefully, and he must be cautious of the artery that's nearby.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if it touches the artery, and there is a bleeding, shouldering it needs to be stopped, as I have said; and should not be touched with fire but cut as before.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilica does not open clearly, you must extract it, and use another one. Or if you wish to avoid any blood from it, or you pierce through to a vein under it in your arm: it will open clearly; and you should apply the fire there as before, just like we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you can identify the location for bleeding, it is necessary that you extract your arm, touching only the area until you find the pulse; then mark that spot with an "enche", and then secure your arm, and apply heat to the vein where you've indicated. And take care not to pierce the artery when you see the area inflating, for that is the artery: be cautious then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it protruding from above as much as urine from a child, and the veins are red and delicate, know that they are veins of the artery: hurry then, place your finger for some time, then remove your finger when the bleeding stops, which often happens; tie up the arm, and leave like this, do not move the limbs; and be in fear, and do not move them until they have healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the wound does not stop bleeding and it takes time, and you lack the medicine, if you detect a blood vessel that is open, do so because the head retreats; and stop the bleeding on the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a bark of dogwood, and cut it, and take one half and bind it tightly until the other side; if the bleeding stops, that's good; if not, then heal it using powders which stop bleeding as we have said, similar to those that stop blood flow. And for smaller wounds near the hand and strength in the connection of the arm, consider various positions during bandaging.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The healing of the vein occurs in its middle part by which it treats blood from the head above and the heart below, because it is made up of the basilica and cephalic parts, as we have said; and it's the duty of the healer to be careful about the nerve that's there, and if they don't go far enough down, and they find the nerve, and it swells and injures the health, and by chance cannot heal; and this nerve opens many times, and if it doesn't open in any person due to its subtlety, then it is necessary for you to have the healing of the tool antiseptic; and listen to the nerve with your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two legs, make a cut long through it.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The healing of the cephalic vein assists in treating blood from the head and aids at the eyes; it is fitting for a healer to prefer the olive oil lamp or the mirtin lamp as this is the safest among all veins, because neither near the eye nor elsewhere does one find nerve or artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Always aim for the lightest touch, and do not fret if you need to try it first time, just repeat as necessary; and by chance swell some limbs in certain individuals when trying it for the first time, but there should be no discomfort.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of health is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you should know about hygiene is that hygiene is practiced solely to maintain health and to avoid future diseases; and hygiene should be performed through one of the three veins: which are head, fast (aorta), and basilic vein; and it should be done at the beginning of prayers on your knees, in autumn and after meals during winter, when signs of fullness appear; and it should be done on the first day or the third, after two hours or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	Hygiene against diseases has no determined time, but it should be done when needed in the morning or after meals at all times; and it is not advisable to practice hygiene on children until they are 14 years old, nor for pregnant women only during their first quarter of pregnancy up to seven months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Neither should one heal an old person who has passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when someone seeks to be healed, no matter how they wish it, if it is fitting for them to expel the intestines with a gentle cathartic, if they have any internal waste that is held back, so that veins do not draw excesses from the intestines into the main body; or else does not heal him who is excessively full of meat, nor one who is drunk, as long as he can be strong, nor those who are nauseous; and avoid healing after a colic attack, vomiting, stomach emptying, multiple menstruation periods, pregnancy labor, sleep and excitement, and things that hasten virtue or by means of an injury or to the body; then refine your humors, if they have excess due to food and drinks and medicines, as long as you can handle it. Then bathe him, unless there is any defense against it, to refine blood, and heal from within the lower half of the third, as we said; and guard yourself that day of labor, of pain, of indulgence, and things like them; and be tied and joyful, and let your healers be higher than those who are healed, and rub his limbs twice or three times, then apply moderate pressure on the tie with both hands, for when it is too tight or loose, he cannot correct the flow. Then rub your limbs to feel the veins swell, until you can feel them; then oil his healers in a little of old olive oil, then place his right hand’s palm under that vein slightly above where you wish to heal him, so that the vein does not burn and fail upon being pricked.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that behave like strings under the surgeon's touch, and some that are full of windiness, such that when one sets them on fire they retreat from heat, and cannot open the vein, and thus belong to this group; and if they burn the vein, the wound is too narrow, for which reason the surgeons must be knowledgeable in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein starts working for the first time, that's good; if not, it can still be attempted again a little around the same spot or suddenly, provided that the limb is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the limbs are swollen and the veins appear red, let it be for one or two days without binding the arm: by chance, abscesses may form. Do not enter water or take baths, then restart surgery if she prefers; and if the opening is small, or the vein is too subtle that you doubt whether as much blood will come out as you see, so pierce it directly in the opening with all the flame; and operate a little hastily, thus making the limbs swell. For this happens many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the neck inflamed, do not start a new treatment, and put a little oil on it, because oil lightens the body from blood, and makes it moist in this place where the oil is; and thus apply the oil each time you heal veins to stop the flow of blood; and do the same with garlic and thyme when you apply them on that spot; if delicate it heals and spreads when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there comes a large abscess, which happens frequently, even when it is not treated for only one time or the opening of the vein is small, you should hurry and soak an sponge in hot water and vinegar, and place it on the neck for an hour; and it's necessary to do this after the blood issue from the veins. And if it stays on the neck for some days without any blackness or verdure, it doesn't hurt at all. And if you see so, put something of myrrh or aloes dissolved in calamus juice, mint oil, or similar substance.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And many times an abscess would develop and show signs in the area of healing: therefore put your hand there, and if you find that part soft under the pressure of your hand, then this indicates an unhealthy condition.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, do not apply any of the things we have said, for by chance they might damage an artery; but make it once again with dry plaster to harden the area, then treat it with another treatment until it heals.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And treat each person with blood according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	And if the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see it large, let it remain until it becomes refined; and if it's too hot, let it cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for the one who has strength and endurance, requiring extraction of blood, to make a wider incision, and have the flames wide; and for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and this serves better physician lightly and frequently, and must be treated by cutting across rather than directly; and this method of treatment saves from bleeding and compression of nerve damage, and it's more effective than long treatment without width.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for those whose body requires a healing process, it is necessary to give them a potion made from the juice of pomegranates; if they are hot, let them drink three or four times as blood flows. And for those with a cold constitution, have them eat before the healing process a moistened dish in a syrup made of honey, or an aromatic syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and ensure that the syrup is well fragrant.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if it fails at the surgery, after a small amount of blood comes out, it should inhale broth of mutton and a fragrant syrup of subtle aroma, and use other things that we have said in the section or chapter on syncope for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wishes to sweat his arm and cleanse it again, if necessary, when he is weakened by much cleansing, he should cleanse gradually, according to the amount of its strength continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if someone wants to sweat their arm after the first cleansing and they have strong veins, then they should cleanse seven hours after the first cleansing, or after the new hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if one wants to cleanse another part, then one should cleanse on the second day or on the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there's much blood inside the body which has been heated up, causing fever; then it should bleed generously and widen the aperture until it chills in the chest. Then you need to ensure all conditions for surgery are met, place your hand on his pulse when he is healing, so that death does not occur instead of the chill, and this happens many times when surgeons are negligent; and it's inappropriate when you see blood being released from the arm for a second time, and the aperture is closed, if you press heavily; or if it's broken, if you stretch out your arm immediately, as that would be wrong; but leave him until he heals for the second time. Then you apply to the tip of the flame so that the blood congealed in his heart can flow out from under the vein and place a small amount of salt submerged in water on it, gently pressing down upon it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it alone without compressing it until the abscess subsides.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if you need to bleed again from the blood, should it be healthy in that place itself, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein is healthy in the place of the main vein because it is made up there.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the method of healing is that you immerse your hand in hot water until the veins turn red. Then bind them moderately, so that the wound can be seen clearly, then now heal through it, neither wide nor long; and make it slightly wider at the sides, and heal closely near to the joint of the hand, and if there's no way out, then immerse your hand in hot water again and let the blood drain into the water until you have enough; and if it remains like this, don't reimmerse your hand in hot water as you would in winter rather than summer; and healing from this vein is safer than any other veins because there's neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The treatment for saving the right hand from all diseases of the liver is as follows: hold out your hand and immerse it in hot water until you see the veins bulging; and if it heals across the palm, and if there's no discomfort or pain felt; don't overdo it too much because nerves lie under all layers of flesh. Then reimmerse your hand in hot water if it has frozen in the wound and can't be pulled out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have treated for the blood as much as your skill allows, place on the vein, oil and wax to quickly fuse together, and thus proceed with each patient.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The cure for one in the left hand corresponds to the disease of the mouse; and do exactly as I have instructed you regarding the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The healing of the skull is valuable for all diseases that affect the body, such as disorders of the heart, retention of urine, and illnesses related to kidneys, hips, old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of its healing is such that the patient should bathe their foot in hot water, and rub it over the leg until it gets red, then apply this to the joint at the ankle; and if the leg vein lies above the ankle bone, part of the blood will travel upwards; thus heal from larger veins or those closer to the ankle than from a higher position.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal it at the ankle, beware of the nerves that are nearby, and heal from there as when cooking; and let the fire be in front.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if it cannot come out without help, you should immerse the point in water, and let the vein drain properly.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if it's the first time applying the healing process, then start a bit higher on the second application because the muscles are salty. There should be no doubt about nerves as we have said; thus perform the healing treatment on the other leg equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The thigh muscle of the sciatic vein is at the ankle on the back side, and its inflammation corresponds to pain in the buttocks when it's due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its healing is such that the patient goes into water and strains upon the ankle for four days by twisting it, because otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, you heal it in all possible ways you can, and from side to side; and be sure to manage it well, because the veins are free, and it responds greatly to manual treatment.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you don't find it, heal none of the veins that open or behind a lump, and go towards the little toe, and beware of nerves; and make sure the blood flows as you see fit, then untie the knot, place cotton on it and tighten it; now it is healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of suction healings
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Blunt suction cups are made from horns, or spiders, or leeches; and suction therapy is performed in two ways: by piercing to draw blood or without piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this suction therapy which can cause injury is done in two ways: either at any heat or without heat; and the suction done by causing injury and drawing blood is done in fourteen parts of the body, from which one is completely under the head; and the other is inside the neck; and two others on each side of the neck; and the suction below the chin; and the suction over both shoulders; and the suction over the hives; and the suction inside both arms; and the suction over both legs; and the suction over both ankles; and the suction does not involve treating blood, for there are small veins that are scattered throughout the flesh, and because of this it does not weaken anyone as in blood treatment; and it should not be administered anywhere or without heat, in any illness caused by overfilling, until all parts of the body have been emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if ventose is needed due to illness, or by habit, we must administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at its end, and during and in every situation; for there are those who, when they need to ventose, become heavy-headed; and there are those who find congestion and redness on their face, and head, and neck, and blackness on them; and those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, have fainted tongues, and cough up blood; and there are those who think, see through the nose blood and ashes and death-like things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, especially during the first month, we command to suck after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The treatment of the nose aids in alleviating a headache ... when it affects the eyes and should not be done after the elimination of all in the body; this ventouse treatment is for the remedy of the head ailment, and should not be used by those with cold complexions, or who have catarrh, as it causes them much harm; indeed, such individuals should refrain from using it, nor those who have cold head illnesses.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And the one who often bathes in it, becomes oblivious, and because of this, you should place the suction cup slightly further down due to the risk of becoming oblivious.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	Ventosation at the neck is in harmony with the health of the head and basilica. Because of this, it benefits towards tightening the waistband, and making a cut into the channel of the heart, and overall, and for repletion; and here comes to play that one must gently do it, because if she holds too tightly, then it could cause suffocation or stomach ache and heart ailment.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	Ventosation at the second costal cartilages of the neck relieves head pain, eye inflammation and toothache, as well as in strangulation, and pain at the roots of teeth. It aligns with the health of the basilica; you should instruct your surgeon to move their hand carefully, not to compress the artery, and not to allow bleeding.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The ventilation over the chin is associated with illness in the mouth and gum decay, as well as similar diseases that occur within the mouth; it involves the health of both lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Ventilation over the shoulders is associated with illness that comes from heat and congestion.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	Ventosations of the ribs are as effective as three veins of the arms because they drain blood from these major veins; instruct your surgeon not to press too much in the underarm area, as the skin is bare flesh and there are nerves and arteries below.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup on the shoulder is useful for hemorrhages from beneath and various diseases nearby. It should be large and made of animal hide since it needs to be well treated. By chance, if it were too fine, it might break and cause significant injuries.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	Leg suction cups need to be applied directly as they draw blood from the entire body, and they are beneficial for old pains in the kidneys, bladder, and urethra, and they alleviate swellings; they are placed at the knees, ankles, and sometimes they weaken the body after long use, causing emaciation in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying the suction cup is as follows: place it initially while empty, apply a steady suction, quickly apply it, move it evenly, and keep doing this until you see the skin turn red and swell up. Then stop when you perceive the reddish hue due to blood; afterwards remove the suction cups, and take care of your body placement since some individuals have thin flesh with clear pores: one must pierce once only in such cases, make cuts wide but not too deep, and apply gentle suction.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the artery is large, it's necessary to make two cuts: the first time to delicately clear the path of the large blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the artery is very thick, it's necessary to make a third cut; and when we wish to drain little by little from the blood, it suffices to do it only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want to avoid some blood, we often do this; and if there is no blood, press firmly, and the ends should be such that the ears are pierced suddenly. This is suitable for those who have thick skin and hardness, and who have contracted diseases, you must apply suction cups for venting and dissolving: if it's in a reddish state, of violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; and if it's yellow, of watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or another similar kind.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the swelling is large and cold, take oil of myrrh, or balm, or aniseed oil, or similar items.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the wound is for stretching flesh and wide diseased areas, there should be no oil applied but it should be washed after using rose water, or cold water, or lily water, or pumpkin water, or porcelain water, or another similar type of water.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And for those who have moisture, they should be lifted with eucalyptus water, or sumac, and other similar substances.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large excesses should rise from old wine, or water of sulfur, or decoction of nettle or chamomile, or other similar substances; and they do not suit well to be treated with suction cups before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath one hour or two. And they should not sleep afterwards, and it is necessary for him to sweat when he should be subjected to suction and when he has been suctioned.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And watch for those who are being treated and are choleric, if they become too heated and inflamed; it is necessary that they consume cold things, such as pomegranates, endives, lettuce in broth, and similar items; and they should eat young rabbits, and pork, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those with cold complexions should consume a honey syrup and an odorant half-fermented wine, which is between old and new, and eat small portions and young rabbits, as well as young birds and chicks; on the day they are to be suctioned, they should drink more than they eat. It is recommended that for some individuals, they shouldn't consume any triaical or muscat before or after suctioning, to strengthen their main limbs; and tighten the stomach, but it's not advisable for those who are hot to drink anything.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The suction devices that are placed for injury are those that are placed on the liver, and on the lungs, and podagra (gout), and on the belly and in the mouth and kidneys and hip. For this limb does not suffer from being injured by poisons, and one forces it to be done only to draw blood from member to member, as we place them on the nipples when newborns; to remove viscosity which is within the limb, as we apply suction devices to the belly and in the mouth to diminish the size of the limb; and relieves pain, if there's inflammation or stone, it removes by its attractive power unexpectedly the inflammation, or evacuates the stone from its place; and thus does it when placed on the liver and on the lungs when there is retained viscosity, and these suction devices are administered empty to suck only in that manner. They are not administered together with fire at any time, nor filled with hot water like certain diseases of pleurisy, and in this manner one fills the suction device with hot water or water where herbs useful for this have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the heated suction cup applied is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And the size of this tool is two and a half palm lengths across, it has its edge located at about halfway along its center like piercing an eye, similar to sticking a needle in, so as not to harm the patient when placing it on limb; there is also a middle part that is a crosswise piece from spider or iron, for attaching a candle, and they come in large sizes and small ones according to different illnesses and the conditions of those who use them; because children's suckers are different than those for adults, and for skinny people compared to fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And when to apply this suction cup to the limb: take the candle wick or the thread and insert it through the hole in the suction cup which is located at the center part, ensuring that light is at the bottom of the suction cup so that it does not burn the patient; then place it on the limb, put your fingers on the part we just mentioned, such that if needed, when the vapor goes out and removes the suction cup; and take the thread as before, repeat often if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the suction cup then, which is administered in the illness of pleurisy, there should not be any length or defect at all, and it should only be applied when it is full of water, and placed solely on the body member; and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Without doubt they are administered only in limbs where one cannot place suction cups due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas; and on their dry skin, like elbows or knees, and other similar conditions; and the quality of their use is that when you find suckers that are in sweet waters without pollution, you take them; and you place a nut in sweet water until they become accustomed, without having anything in their guts; and then cleanse with bloodletting and suction cups, then rub the body part until it turns red, and place them on the suckers; and when they are full, and start to withdraw, if there is a part where one can place a suction cup, you place it, because this works quite well afterwards.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, lift the limb in cold water, quite well, then heat it; and if the limb is not fully healed after a while, apply damp linen cloth dipped in cold water, until the skin becomes moistened; and if there are many blisters, apply powdered glass or vinegar, until they dry out; or you put half of peeled beans on the limb and leave them until they steam up inside it, which will stop bleeding now; and if you need more, take other blisters.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the blisters do not form again, rub the limb with fresh blood or stick an awl in it until a blister forms. Then leave them there, and as soon as they start smelling of blood, they will dry out; and when you see that they are discharging, sprinkle a little aloes and powdered flour over them or ash, which will heal now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine, and restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know that the young man, among these chapters, he finds nothing as such in the old books or letters; and because of this reason, the knowledge was taken away from our land, for I never found anyone good; and I know nothing myself, having studied through the knowledge of old books which I have spent so much time on, and through experiments, and according to my life's habituation; and I have described in this chapter what is contained, abbreviated it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the tools used, as done in the two chapters before these.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	So it is necessary that we outline or introduce the main points of this book in its preface and chapters where the senses engage understanding, and remain truthful, so that those who have experienced it may know and learn this noble craft, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when fractures or dislocations or twists or swelling occur in any part of the body, you must quickly cleanse the patient from one side to the other without any delay. If something is missing on either side, such as weakness, children, elderly people; or if the wound is too tight, or too cold; and if it contains cold juices, meaning cool joints and bile, and not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill up too much with meat that fills veins of blood until you are certain there's no pus formation in heat, nor spreading of matter into the limb; let the patient recover as per their initial commandment until they have used it.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that you consume meats which cause heavy digestion or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and leeks, and kidneys, and pies, and beef spleens, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar items.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For this kind of digestion causes motion and more quickly the breaking (or disruption) is resolved.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that a broken bone in old or decrepit people can't be repaired or joined properly according to its nature due to the drying of the limbs, nor for those that are too tender like small children's bones; but in your care, set the broken bone back with the larger tendons that come forth and unite the limb together, as long as it holds firm as before; and don't leave off his work entirely, for this requires nourishment from large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	Know that fractures occur in various ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For a fracture of the head is different from a fracture of the foot, or leg, and in this chapter I will tell you all the ways of fracture.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are breaks that go to the arm, and others when sharpening, such as sawing through a feather for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And in case of breakage with wound, and breakage resulting from a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And in every way has its tool and proper instrument for restoration, according to what memory brings to his mind; and he recognizes the breaking of the bone by the twisting of his fingers, and it opens well through them, and is pressed by hand; and when there is no twist or rubbing on his finger, and the patient does not feel much pain, if there is no breakage; but he may have a twist, or crack, or small break.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it is not suitable for you to move it by hand, but apply the following remedies, and then gently correct it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that when the break occurred in motion, and those two parts were separated, they now need to be brought back to being equal, just as abscesses would heal; and if abscesses are left bleeding, you should not allow them for any day until the inflammation from them subsides; then set it level at its proper place that you can move lightly and wisely. Know that restoring this is easier than restoring those with pieces. Then hold it tight, as described later on.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if the bones have pieces broken, and they are divided into two parts, whether it's hands or feet, or by your hand if it's a small limb, or in case of two tendons, or one tendon and by your hand; place the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken limb are freed, you remove all additions from their places at the part that moves as you can, and be careful not to cause any injury or pain to the patient with your work; adjust both ends of the bones properly according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel it well with your hand if you think it is not quite right: do it beautifully in position, don't pull too much, and apply pressure as those who bring about discharge through a wound and muscle contraction do to the member, as we have wanted many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limbs are in place, do well to restrain the patient so they don't move them, whether awake or asleep, turning over or in any other way; and make sure that the limb is securely set so it doesn't feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	And when they do not feel any pain, it is not properly in place, and you should arrange them so that they do not feel any pain at all; and take care to put them back straightly, so that no twist occurs when they are restored; and the quality of the broken limb follows as I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are various in size and degree, and in shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	And for small limbs, such as arms and legs and alike: it is necessary to envelop them with soft and fine linen cloths; and for those that are large, such as thighs and calves: it is necessary to wrap them in a wide and firm bandage, because the wider bands embrace all of the larger limb, and restrict it equally from all sides, so that there is no unevenness; then tie the bandages loosely around in three or four rounds according to the limb, and press your hand slightly on the entire bandage, then go above the breakage point and apply less pressure, so that the breakage can move away a little bit; and soften the bandage gradually until you reach most of the healthy part, then repeat with another bandage, and tie them together tightly around the broken limb; then return to the area below the breakage point, and apply moderate pressure, neither too hard nor too soft, as we said in the previous section; then place linen or cloth bands between the tied bandages until they are all even, then secure everything above the bicephalic part with a bandage, and then place your well-made tacks accordingly, if there is no pus or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, you should place something soothing for the abscess above it and that reduces the swelling. Allow this state to continue for a few days; then begin treating your stars with these tools which are half the width of a thick reed, or parts of a staff used for making arrows, or palms' leaves, and treat them according to this form:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it is necessary that the stars you place over the dislocation are slightly larger and wider than the others; they should also be as long as required for the size or scale of the limb. Then apply them to the stars in the same manner as at the first application, then tie on an additional thread above them like you did before with the dislocation. The threads must become tighter now, and later less so. And it is necessary that the thread be of medium thickness; neither too thin nor too thick, made from soft linen. For if the thread is too thick, as in operations where they tie on cords made of twisted linen during their applications, this is a great mistake, because the application cannot be equal if it is too fine, and it should not have less than half an inch between each star.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patients are injured by the rings after tightening them on their healthy parts, then put linen or woolen bandages over them, so they don't blister.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is swollen and the joints are broken, I will describe the treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not proper to strain all broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it is not fitting to use iron balls after seven or eight days or more depending on the condition of pus appearing; and here is how the old plastering method restores fractures, dislocations, and twists: and you take flour that stands at mill walls, mix it with plenty of eggs, and make this concoction neither too thin nor too thick. Use this mixture properly and it is a common way to restore fracture with several variations, and similarly for women and small children, because it is not excessively hot or cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method of plastering for restoring fractures and dislocations and twists: take three parts of each of these ingredients - garlic, dill, rue, and asafetida - mixed with three times the weight in powdered gum arabic and myrrh; add five parts aloes. Grind all together into a fine powder and mix it with plenty of egg; if the mixture is warm, use this plaster, for it has a good composition and rapidly heals broken bones, and it is beneficial to many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another plastering method for twists: take mugwort and valerian root, each in IX grams; myrrh and aloes, each in IX grams; stonewort in VI grams; Armenian balm in X grams, grind well and mix with water or plenty of eggs. Apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another way to plaster joints and bones in their places, and alleviate the pain that follows, and when they use bone, and the scrape: take new wool, and its fat in broth and oil cooked, and put it on top of it.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	Poultices do not heal completely, but they are better for soothing abscesses and properly treating bone pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of plastering that heals broken bones: take dried fig leaves and terrestrial oak leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method for plastering regarding the break of bone and for alleviating the removal process from the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of valerian, chamomile, violet flowers, ground almonds, from each take one part; and grind, mix with wine, and if the limbs are warm, mix it with wet coriander water, or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another method is better than the first when pus comes to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of visnagia, and flaxseed, balm, melilot, and marjoram, and flowers of violet and chamomile, from all take one part; and grind and mix with salt water or sweetened water or wine according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	In his book, Ispocrates says that for restoring strength to a broken limb, only balm made of beeswax and oil should be applied, and no other thing besides. He states that it should be soft enough between two fingers without being too sticky or too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen that we should apply to the broken limb for restoration, things dried but slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, just as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another way to plaster for injury and pain: take mussels and offals from slaughtered animals, or bird feathers, and vervain, and milk of equal measure. Crush them, make a paste, and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then, after a little while, take care that the patient doesn't feel any pain, nor is his bone of its place moved; if you don't let it heal by hand and if pain comes to the limb or itching without rest or swelling, then hasten, and let it heal, and apply the plaster now; and take a light cloth, and a wet sponge, and dip them in water, and cool down the limb until the itching stops and the pain is eased; then leave the member to rest for an hour, then put on dry wool, moistened in water or oil, and fix it with a bandage, until you are sure of the presence of pus heat; and cool down the inflammation of the member, and relieve the pain, then restart the delicate healing process, and a little plaster, but don't press so hard as before; and proceed delicately until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that pus and redness, pain, swelling are present throughout the affected area, and you need to apply plaster and bandages, then restart as you did initially, in exactly the same manner.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if nothing comes to the limb from what we have said, if it is not freed until after three days or four, five, seven; and let it not stay for any more than twenty days, according to this we see, as long as the healing progresses, approaching the fitting of the flesh up there; then you must tighten the restraint more than before, let its meat grow larger, just as I said previously; and if you see the skin dry too much than is necessary, know that maggots cannot come; take off your gloves with hot water each time you release it, and every third day, clean a little bit of the wound; through this work then cut out the maggots from the limb, hasten all that the amateur doctors do, that make the member remain twisted: this is bad, and these are unpleasant operations, and I see nothing else than to rest and operate straightly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	through various methods of breaking up
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many ways of fractures exist, and various shapes. Their causes are distinct; for there are fractures made by the impact of a sword, and necks break all the bone up to where flesh begins over the bone, like in axe wounds or pike marks. Thus, this way of fracture is named "axe-breaking".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	Or when the sword cuts through the bone from above without piercing it, this kind of fracture is called "absolute" or "clean"; and these are either large or small injuries caused by such fractures.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is sequential impact, or crack in the bone, or through stone, or on stone, or other similar cases.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a fracture that reaches up to the ligament surrounding the bone, or above the bone, and this injury can be large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there's a wound that goes deep into the bone as thin as hair, and has small fractures, this kind of fracture is named "hairline"; and when there's an injury caused by striking with stone or falling or something similar, causing part of the bone to break off inside it, like blacksmiths do during hammering on the pots; if a piece of the bone comes out internally.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	This happens more in people with wet bones, like children's heads; it occurs through all these ways of fractures where small fragments are released, such as in cases of explosion injuries; I will speak about this in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all methods of breaking through by taking away from them, and the examination of attempts, and by the putrid matter which is upon.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair appearance is known when one has exposed the bone and rubs it inside, for then you open the black breakage.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In treating the breakage, beware of the bad occurrences due to the malady, and if you see no harmful accident such as vomiting bile, loss of appetite, stretching, dizziness, fever, or other symptoms in various conditions, then there is no certainty for recovery.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an alarming accident and hope for salvation, then start the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the knuckle first comes to you, and it's in winter, then you should remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the start of the month that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it's in summer, then hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the flesh around the bone becomes rotten, and accidents occur as we have said.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the breakage of the bone reaches to the membrane that covers the brain, it is necessary for you to cut the broken part like this: and when you take hold of the unbroken side of the skull, and uncover upon the bone in all ways possible, and upon the appearance of injury as much as possible, and if blood discharge aids in revealing the bone, or pus accumulates, use whatever is appropriate to assist, and ensure that the area is filled with moistened cloths in oil rose. And let the wound rest until the pus accumulation subsides, and until you are sure of no further blood discharge; then begin to cut through the bone as follows: one method is that you shape it from a narrow trim ahead, and this is its form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make another incision larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have several sizes of incisions, some narrow and others broad, all with points, made from metal and work them gently, making sure not to injure the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is out and hard, it is necessary that you pierce inside it, in such a way that you apply cuts with needles, not completely but so that they do not penetrate beyond the bone at all times; and there should be an opening or circumference of about 1 inch above the point where no part of the needle can pass through the bone. And you must have more than one, so that each goes into its place of the thickness of the bone, in such a way that you have needles for all sides; and this is the form of three types of needles:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The quality for piercing through the broken bone is that you place one needle on the bone and turn with your hands until you know that the bone has been pierced. Then move the needle elsewhere a little after, and do this throughout; then cut along the incisors of the gap between the bones where they are apart, and do it more finely than possible and gently, as we have said, until you can pull the bone to your hand or any tool you have like forceps, and be sure not to touch the brain or spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and cut through the bone, it is fitting for you to remove the bone which was left in the hole from one piece of metal tool resembling a fang, but this tool should be more rigid and finer than another fang; and if there remains nothing of small bones or no scales, gently scrape them with these tools. Then treat the wound using ointments and remedies that we have mentioned.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another way of operating is this, as Galen stated, which is safer; and the knife should be quite strong, for it's his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	Firstly, you should uncover a portion of the bone, where the fracture opens and moves, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place under the tip of this lens-shaped incision, as described here.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side only, and let the area be divided into two parts, so that you are cutting towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer somewhat above, so that you gently touch all of the bone, and take great care of the cloth which is around; if it sticks to the bone, touch it lightly as well because you will not cause damage or pain when touching the bone.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone break does not go all the way through the membrane, and only part of the bone is cut above, with small fragments remaining, it's necessary to clean up any roughness afterwards. Use a thin razor for removing scales that you should have in different quantities, so as to apply the most suitable treatment in each case according to the treatise and the nature of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you're facing large razors and then even finer ones, don't stop doing this until it's done well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In every other kind of hair trimming and fine breakage, you must apply the treatment according to its location; this is something that cannot be left to anyone who has devoted their studies to this craft.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the scab is revealed, then it's necessary that you apply a linen cloth according to the size of the wound, and soak it in olive oil, and place it on the wound; then take another double cloth, soaked in wine and olive oil, and place it over the first cloth; do this as gently as possible, so as not to weigh down the scab, then apply another bandage from above, without pulling too hard that it only touches the wound; leave it like this for one or two days, until the pus has calmed down, then remove the bandages and administer medicines such as lily roots, wheat flour, incense powder, and wormwood, and similar things; make a powder from these things, apply it to the wound, and then administer further painless medicated substances; and guard that the wound is always clean, do not leave any ointment on it, nor let it stick together in clumps, because when clumps of clotted blood accumulate under the cloth near the brain, they will spread and infect, causing great harm to the patient; for when you place something pungent on the scab, it irritates from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Then take care, so if no accidents happen to the patient, as we have said, if there is a doubt it should not be doubted.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if nausea only comes out because of the medicine we have put on, and that virtue is as expected, then it should be that you take part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and one drachm of glue, and you place this mixture on your stomach; then you should treat with treatments as they are supposed to be treated, until it becomes healthy.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that neither of the two nasal parts above or beneath which is broken once, or only one by itself, because they are two bones; and this lower part is cartilaginous, it does not break at all, even if forced or twisted, then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, it should be that you pinch your little finger or press at the inside of your nose and place the break equal within your index finger, and outwards through the nostril, until the nose regains its natural shape; and do this gently, and beware not to cause pain to the patient with your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the part above the nose, and cannot come to the nostril, you should place it even with the tip of a reed slightly thicker.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is of two parts, redo this procedure, and hurry to restore it on the first day if you can; should that not be possible, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has settled down, then pinch the nose tip with linestitched cloths, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you should bring up two others from the other side, if the break is there; and make them so large that they fill the hollows of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And they say no restorative requires us to anoint the wounds with butter, and change each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	I believe it is not quite right, but it should be that the wounds are moistened in the preparation of an egg yolk mixture, and with powder from a mill; then leave the wound until the bone is hard and the cartilage is toughened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And in each instance use goose feathers instead of tents, and if you have one egg worth of dressing to cover it completely, then keep the wound clean, letting air pass through; simply do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses come up to the nose as you work on them, then apply a poultice or wet cotton in oil, or a pinch of lavender oil.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the abscesses break out, then apply a plaster to the outside, made of silk meal and incense powder, mixed with egg yolk. Then place this on light cloths, do not bind it too tightly; and if the bones are broken into small pieces and are broken in many parts, then use tools suitable for that purpose, then cut along the wound, and treat everything that can harden or join together, like plasters and ointments suited to this task; and if there is no wound inside the bone, then treat the wounds, and put onions on it until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	regarding the rupture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is fractured and there's no wound at the surface, and only the breakage is outside completely, not broken into two parts but rather split internally within, one can easily identify it.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary; if the breakage is in the right part, you should bend your index finger into the mouth towards the sore area; and if the breakage is in the left jawbone, you should bend your index finger of the right hand instead, and gently press on the breakage internally, and then proceed to the other hand by pushing it outward, and place them evenly.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the breakage of the jawbone extends for two inches, then it is necessary that you apply an extension of two inches until they are even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if the movements of the teeth occur, or rupture, then you should restrain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk. Then place on the broken mandible plaster, and place on one piece two folded cloths; and place on that cloth a large flag made well, or a piece of leather equal in size to the mandible, and stick it on as best you can, and command the patient to rest, and consume light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	And if you notice that the figure changes, or that it loosens by the third day, and then set back what has changed; and apply plaster, mixing with powder from the mill with plenty of eggs or flour of yolk, after you have removed the plaster; and place on the plaster light wool, and if the plaster hardens, and the patient's condition does not change, let it be until they are healed. Many times heal in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses appear, then apply what we have instructed many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a breakage and wound together, reward any piece of the bone that has been removed; so much skill is required for the extraction tools suitable for this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and there remains none, if it is large, cover the wound with one dressing suitable for this purpose to promote healing until it is healed.
de la forcele	by strength
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The force breaks many times before reaching the shoulder, and the break occurs in three ways: when it is broken and removed cleanly with two parts, and there are pieces left, making it easier to restore; or when there's a break accompanied by an injury.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the veins are such that when there is a break accompanied by an injury, you have two assistants, so that one feels for the shoulder where force has broken; and the other extends to the neck towards the affected part. Then equalize the break with your hands, so that the shape should be as it should be, without any appearance or movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, place a round sponge under the shoulder and towards the hairline, it should be large according to your needs; stretch out the force (possibly referring to surgical instruments), secure the sponge in hand, so that you can equally apply pressure with your hands, as necessary.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head from the strength at the back due to it coming in front, then it is necessary for the patient to lie on their shoulder blade and put half an armpit under them, and push the shoulder down until the bone of the strength lifts.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then place the break in your fingers, and if you find debris inside, it is necessary to cut through it; and pull the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join with any leverage, cut into one of the incisions you have made. But place this tool against the strength so that it can ward off the syphilitic affection:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	It appears like a spoon, and is not found inside, and it is as wide as it should be, according to the size of the bone and the power of the operation; and has two heads, as you see, and one is broad, and the other narrow, just as the wound would look when you have treated the bones; and once you are certain about extracting pus from each, if you cut the wound, and if the wound opening is small, or if you doubt about pus extraction, you should fill the wound with bandages and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if there are several incisions, moisten them; apply oil rose and wine, and place them.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The breaking of the bone, when it involves injuries and cutting operations, is as follows: you place on the bone the plaster of the powder from the mill and some yolk of egg, and put light cloths above, and if needed, place one pole under the broken area; then take a very large band about a palm wide, and place this double cloth above the poles, and plaster it. Then take a small rod about three fingers in width and length, wrap it around the bandage so that only its ends are hanging down; and place the stick over the fracture site, turn the bandage upwards to join under the collarbone, and right above the clean spot, also above the broken spot; and then tighten each part of it, once you see that the ligament holds the fracture tightly in position, and you clearly see that the stick does not move on top of the broken bone, then give it a break for each day, and when the stitches are removed, keep it tight; have the patient lie with their back towards the wound, and if they sleep, place the small pillow under the collarbone to lift up the shoulder; to alleviate the pressure from muscle power onto the force of the injury, or if you need to tie the arm around the neck, do not release them unless there's any bad accidents happening, until at least 20 days have passed; then reapply the plaster if needed and keep it tight in this manner until it heals; and it usually takes about 28 days for healing, but less time might be needed in certain cases.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of the breaking of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	A dislocation occurs when the shoulder breaks or is separated either at its end or in the middle, and it remains dislocated only due to impact; according to the shape of the breakage you align the shoulder and reset it according to its natural form in all possible ways. Then sprinkle on the shoulder with a flour from the mill mixed with plenty of egg whites, apply light ointments, place two layers of bandage over it; then place a large and subtle stick slightly wider than the shoulder, such that there are no parts of the shoulder underneath it. Cover this stick entirely with linen needles so the stick sits evenly; then bind it tightly into one large bandage, ensuring the stick does not move from its position, check on each day; every time it loosens, you tighten again and keep the stick even if it is displaced by force, place the patient's side under them; and the shoulder is restored after 20 days or 25. And when this number is fulfilled, you let them go loose, be sure as it is not bone that is put lightly in place.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone comes forward before the socket and is not under its usual place, you should do this for the shoulder dislocation to ease abscesses that are bursting.
de la brisure dou pis	Of the breaking of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The bones are broken at most once in the middle, but this happens rarely. But they often break at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, if it bends away from its original position, the patient experiences great pain and lack of movement, dizziness, and suddenly, and by chance, vomits blood, and opens up the joints in the broken bones, and one feels this well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And for the restoration, it should be that the patient lies on their back, and you place one and a half cushions between their shoulders, then press the shoulders, and unite the rib cages of both ribs with your hands, and skillfully fit them in all possible ways until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then place plaster and bandages over the subtle salted point, or another light substance, and wrap it in a piece of cloth, and secure it on the broken bone so that it does not move. Then turn the bandage around to fit the back and tighten slightly, and reward each hour with the string, and if it loosens, then tighten; and if necessary, remove it due to corrosion or itching that occurs at the site, or pain or abscess, act quickly and remove it, and dress as you have come with treatments for this situation. Then redo the plaster until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	On the breaking of ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the breaking of ribs occurs only in strong blows to the back and within the chest, and they break due to their flexibility; and one feels this well during interrogation at the side.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And for restoration, you should place the break equal, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster, and hold in place with one hand, if needed.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the break of ribs is located inside, the patient feels extreme pain and sharp stabbing sensations, like tears, because the bone presses against the muscle; they have a fever, vomiting and sudden large bleeding, it's distressing health-wise, and the old ones used to apply strong remedies.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that it is appropriate to administer meat which inflates the belly, in order to drive away the indigestion externally.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not follow this advice, for abscesses and pus do not come about, if they have not already occurred.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has already happened, then heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And they say that none of us uses suction cups on the body, in order to draw out forms, and this is similar to reason; nevertheless, there's doubt whether the suction cup draws away excesses from the body due to the weakness of position.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that when covering the wound with wet wool in hot oil, and set strips between the ribs to make even the width inside, then do the treatment with the mustard poultice, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that cannot be endured by the bone piercing through the skin, and there is doubt with the patient, it may be necessary to cut at its rib under the broken bone, and one must place an instrument inside for support; then you must cut into the bone, gently drain, and then stitch the two edges of the wound, if it's large, and treat with plaster until healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if they come to incisions bleeding, place wet cloths in rose oil over them, and place this on the head; and cleanse as necessary for incisions, and have guards standing beside the affected area where it should be, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	Regarding the breaking of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	No breakage comes to the bones of the neck, and there is no bending; similarly with the spine in the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will heal or not, be on guard if you see their hands softened, swollen, and dead, and cannot move or extend them, and when you prick their hands with a needle, if you don't feel anything.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	You know that death can occur in many ways, and if they are silent and feel well when you hold them still and not, you know that the bone's joint is saved, and that the wounds have been healed, provided a cure has been applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if something like this happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is sound or not, take care that its joints are softened, and that the events happening in touch with them, and upward wind and expulsion against will on the back; and when it has been observed on its belly, then an expulsion happens against will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is sewn on its back and it wants to rise, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that they are mortal: if you do not care for them in their treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if such events do not occur to him, then it is a simpler matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is such that you should remove any abscess if there is one, if you place oil on the spine or on egg yolk, until it eases; then place one of the restorative plasters and let it dry, and bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not sleep on that part where they feel pain, until they are healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bones are dislocated, it is necessary to cover them with the elbow; and remove the bone, then align the two edges of the wound, if it's large, with a stitch, then treat with an ointment that binds well until it heals; and if there are dislocated pieces of bone, which are called "dislocations of the knee", you should place your left hand pouch over your right hand, and hold them evenly at your power level, then apply the plaster and heat as needed; then compress, and if any bones have been dislodged, place them again, and set them, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	From the breaking of the bone of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if this occurs, there might be a slight pain at the thigh; it extends longly, declines towards the knee, comes to the patient's discomfort in their leg, pain, and makes what is broken swell.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And in the restoration, you should extend your hand upwards as long as it is over the broken part; and understand where the break occurred and its shape. If the break happened only at the thigh, apply an even breakage there, until it reaches its natural position.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break extends along the leg or inward towards the body, guide the patient so that they lie on their belly, as long as it takes for you to properly heal this break.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it even, place it on a plaster, then put on a stick or a reed stand, and hold the wound steady so that it doesn't move; and apply the skin over the ribs until the wound is evenly aligned.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if the abscesses drain themselves, do not disturb them until the abscesses have drained fully, and then apply what we have previously mentioned. Then return to the treatment plan, and hold it accordingly without any bad accidents happening; this is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	regarding the breaking of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The assistants are those that are between the blade and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, you must restore it according to one of these two methods: of which one is that you take a solid stick of medium thickness, according to this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie two pieces of cloth together, and bend them up, then place the patient's broken arm on top of one seat; then pour the broken part over the stick until it reaches the elbow, and has made half a turn with the length of the stick, then bend over any heavy object or let assistants hold it downwards; then put the pieces of cloth so that the break is evenly between their hands, until the broken part returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that you place the patient on their back, and tie their hand to their neck, then command two assistants such that one shaves the area where there is the break with their hands, and the other cuts off any excess at every inch, and extend each person to their own side.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is more forceful, then restrain it during the operation and during the operation itself, and extend each of your assistants to their respective positions.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the operation is near the head of the shoulder, you should place one band in front and the other towards the knife during the operation, under the wound; similarly, if the operation is opposite the knife, you should gently place your hands without effort until the wound matches up on both sides. Then evenly cut the wound, as it should be, and hold it together, unless pus comes out from the bandages.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if pus comes out, do not restrain too tightly for up to seven days, and place wet wool in a comfortable position with rose oil, until the pus at the bottom is relieved; then restrain it, and the way to restrain should be that you place the plaster over the cut. Then join the arm to the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or chest; apply the cloth, and hold tightly on the shoulder and arm, so that the arm is in its usual position, without anything preventing it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt whether the bone is moving, use elbows and place a larger and stronger wedge between each cut than the others, leaving an inch of space between each wedge. Each wedge should be large enough to pass three inches on each side of the cut; then hold the wedges in place as I instructed at the beginning of this chapter on cutting, more strongly without pulling away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the base of the nails and the constriction, as we have said, when you restore a broken limb, and if there is doubt about discharging pus, leave it to be bound for seven days, as we have said; then examine every three days the binding, ensuring no itchiness spreads or grows at the site, or that ulcers do not come upon the limb because it's too constricted.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If there is the address, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such incidents occur, or if the healing takes longer than three days or more, and the patient feels better lying on their back, with hands on their stomach; and place beneath the shoulder an inch of wool evenly spread, and every hour or so during the day, observe whether the shape of the broken limb doesn't move or isn't softened by the bandages; if the address, through the virtue of medicine, and gives meat as we have placed before it in such a manner that the meat becomes at first refined; and when they begin to recover, if it is full.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and leg must be in place for 40 days; and then one should loosen them, take baths, and administer ointment medications to sooth the area.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the constriction is ugly and tangled, it must be left to loosen for one day or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the break of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is made of two bones which are called the 'foscile' pair. One bone is small and it forms the socket; the other is larger and it is beneath the small one towards the back of the hand. By chance, only the large foscile might break, or just the smaller one, or perhaps they both break together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, the restoration is light, and the healing. And when the large bones are broken, the healing is bad, and more painful than when they were broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it's only the small bone that is broken, then it should be allowed to stretch slightly and be made even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it's the large bone that is broken, then it should be pulled more tightly; and extend on his left side, and elevate the sleeve of his hand higher than the others, and the small bones lower than the other bones, and let the patient bend towards himself, with the left side in front of him higher than the others so that no discomfort arises to the body; then spread out the assistants' arms below his shoulder or elbow, and another set of assistants above on the other side.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then place the eyes evenly, according to their best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the breakage into pieces, you place each back in its position, and if there is none of them that grabs the knee, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut through and the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if in case of injury during surgery, I mentioned this earlier in detail; take care of the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if during the beginning of the restoration pus comes out, then prepare a bandage made from roset oil and white beeswax, ensuring it's neither too hard nor too soft; and tie this bandage skillfully upwards until the inflamed pus-filled areas have calmed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then apply the wax, and place the plaster of the powder from the mill mixed with plenty of egg. Then insert the pins, and make sure that one pin is slightly more pointed than the others, and a bit larger than the rest; you must know that there should be six or seven pins in various positions: either if the wound is in an osseous region, or in two areas; and keep the wound covered with more plaster than elsewhere, as I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter; and ensure that the bandages covering the wound are soft and moist, but not hard or abrasive; and use threads made from linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the limb and the ligament after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad events come to the limb, for example itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you immerse the limb in hot water until that itch is relieved; and leave the limb not to remain in rest.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then continue the reduction process, and if the ligaments are torn and the bones are exposed, and in such a case, administer treatment.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if precautions are taken so that no injuries can come to the limb because it is too tight, it is necessary for you to soften it with oil, and leave it like this for a few days, until the pains subside, and then resume compressing it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, or the loosening does not happen up to twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	Otherwise, around about, then put their hands on his neck, and make sure the necks are level, and watch for movement or agitation, and sleep on his back; know that this wound will heal in thirty days or forty, and by chance in twenty days, according to the compositions and complexes of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	On the breaking of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	You should know that on the back of the hand and in our fingers, there are few breaks, and they only occur multiple times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the heel of the hand or finger is broken or sprained, it should be treated by applying splinting, keeping the hand straight in front of them as well; then place their hand on an extended surface and extend the fractured bones, putting them even with each other until they are properly aligned; and put a plaster and bandages if there's no pus discharge, then apply a pillow according to the size of the wound; and wrap it loosely in one linen sheet.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the breakage is in between the toes near the belly of the foot's sole, then make a strip of cloth and instruct the patient to apply it to their broken toe; and then wrap it tightly with a long piece of cloth, and place the pillow so that its width matches the size of the hand's palm, and secure it properly.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is at the front, it should be that you place an elevation above and another below in the heel, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind them all together with the hand, and seal the connection between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the break occurs at neither of our fingers, if it is in the joint, as is fitting; and bind with the heel, and if you see, place a small upright stick to raise the break, and don't move it; and if the break is on other fingers, like in the index or one of the others, place them equally, and bind with the healthy finger that comes after; or bind all together holding tightly, so nothing moves, or place a stick as you would hold; take care in the restoration and positioning of each wound, and deal with whoever brings it to you, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bone of the elbow is often broken, and one can see this when it turns in front and behind; and the restoration involves binding over the breakage .i., above the fracture, and .i., another underneath.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the injuries lie on her face, then extend each minister his link to his equal part; and this is when the breakage enters the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is close to the root of the nail, then one of the threads towards the finger, and the other threads under the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And also if it is close to the knee, then you should place the threads on the knee, and make the extension forward; then fix the plaster at its two hands, as long as it conforms to its natural figure, and then apply the plaster, and if abscesses do not come about.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess around it, let it heal first before returning to your work and treatment; the healing process is carried out in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary for you to wrap around the wound two or three bands tightly with a double layer, and discard any excess. Then lift up the leg until the heels reach the root of the knee, then secure the thread long between the nail and the leg, under the knee from below, and attach the head of the thread above; then adjust on the leg and on the nail, place an earthenware vessel over the break and place one over the bone of the leg; then spread eight layers of cloth under the leg to make the pressure uniform, then start binding in three or four turns around the wound; and when you go beyond the wound, and bind less tightly; then adjust with two threads that you have inserted between the leg and nail, secure three earthenware vessels above them, then return under the head of the thread as far as you can see below the foot; and tighten, so that it does not move from its place, then leave him like this until there is no more swelling or abscess or any other sign.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if such a thing occurs, reposition it and guide the treatment according to what we've said many times; and should there be pieces of bone that are caught, cut them out if possible; and if not, you must cut into the wound and extract the force; then treat as we have instructed until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is the flesh broken when these needles are inserted like in the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, no discomfort arises with the patient during this treatment.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	Know that the flesh is restored within one day, or somewhat less, or somewhat more, depending on the variety of constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the alley of the kidney
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the knee area there is little breakage, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it's only a crack, or it gets lost, and comes to every wound, and felt wound, and one feels this very well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that one should place equal what is round at its ends, until everything can move together. Then put plaster on it, and you can put a round stick if necessary, and then tighten as needed. Then redo all the preparations we've spoken about in other fractures, whether it's discharging pus or any similar situation; for each incident, use what suits that specific case, until everything is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the breaking of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, one of which is called straight by some as "mustels", and the other is called "foscile"; and they have all injuries and breakages like those to the arm, and thus the recovery is similar to that of the arm, and the operations are all alike. And if both these bones are broken together, then the leg turns in every direction.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the delicate bones are broken, twist them in front.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain and sees it well; and it twists around.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then apply extension, and make it even, and tie the stars evenly; but still, if there's difficulty breaking down, and there are many fragments, that the extension should be smaller and more gentle; and adjust according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your task, take two ropes of wood that strengthen the leg on both sides and should be as long as the leg from the knee down to downwards; then wrap these in two layers each side, binding them up and down and also in the middle, and ensure that the leg cannot decline either right or left. It will be well done this way; and no one administers a plaster as long as it is made of wood and placed on the leg to prevent movement. And do this carefully at the break where there is injury; and move the leg each day to see if there are any abscesses or other complications; treat until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	From bone fractures due to impact
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle it does not come from fracture but from bone impact; there is no once-only fracture and the bones can be displaced. There is only strength depending on multiple positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there occurs a fracture in the bone impact and you see these bones rise over each other, lay the injured bones on the ground like they want to move away. Also do this when the patient is lying down; then press them as much as it takes until their senses return; then apply plaster and bandages on top of that. Place a small table under his feet about half a foot high, then press him onto the floor up to the ankle bend, then wrap cloths around it, and do other things you need to do.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, if the bandage is removed, because you will find the bones level, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if there are any of the two broken, repair them, as we said about the fingers of the hand; then place a stick over each broken finger according to their length, and make it slightly wider than that, then put under the foot that board I have mentioned, and tighten the addition against this; and if there are two or three or more, break them, so place on each finger a stick according to its quantity, wrapped in one layer of linen, and tighten the table under this. And stay seated at the top of the table facing the stomach under this, so that it touches well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you should not forget the other things I've said about other injuries, as we have discussed; and treat each incident according to how it should be.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	regarding the breaking of the bone in the hand
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of nature is broken in a woman, have her lie enlarged for some time, then tilt her towards the lower part of the back, and hold her from behind; next fill the break with cotton as per nature's arrangement, and place it similarly to how you are, large. Then stand up the woman little by little, and then jump out the cotton until it reaches the entrance of nature, moving the bone together. And when she wishes to urinate, remove the cotton, and once she has urinated, reinsert her as before; do this for seven days or a bit more: after which the break will heal. If you can see, take a goatskin bladder, bind it at its narrow end with straw, fill all the bladder in natural place; then inflate into the straw forcefully until the skin is full inside: nature will return to the broken area. Then fill with cotton and leave as such for a few days, until it has healed fully.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the hand is broken or that of the woman, if it is restored in this way as we have said for the thigh bone; and these nearby fractures do not escape notice by those who apply their study and use, and heed my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the breaking means in multiple arrangements the right path of restoration: so understand it.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the case of the penis, if it is broken, take a goose’s throat and fill the penis with it; then wrap it in linen or cloth, and let it be for three days or as long as necessary, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	Regarding breaking with injury
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a break with an injury, even if it's large, like in the case of the shin bone or shoulder blade or any similar injuries, that they should be treated now. The procedures we have mentioned shall attest to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healed, you can reapply vitriol to it. If there's no other option, then continue with restoring the break in that same hour or day, or even on the same day, provided that abscesses are not coming out.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if there are abscesses coming out, leave the restoration until the next day, as long as the abscess has subsided. Don't touch it on the third or fourth day either, for you might bring about bad accidents by doing so.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone breaks and is visible above the uncovered knee, it is necessary for you to place it gently with your hands at a small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extensions are not visible for you to place evenly with your hands, then use this iron tool made of iron that is .vij. or .viij. long inches, and its width should match the size of the wound; for each breakage treatment, it's necessary for the surgeon to hold about .iii. or iiij., depending on what suits him in each injury case; it should be round with a slight thickness so that it doesn't bend under compression on your limb during the work; and may be sharp at both ends, and thick towards the middle ahead.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche" because it requires that the curved shoulders be placed on the head of the apparent bone; and apply it once, until it heals, and be equal to each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the break is subtle and the instruments cannot take the bone well, then it's necessary to hold the head of the bone until the instruments have possession.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot return the bone back, as we have said, if you have access to an appropriate tool for this task, such as a surgical blade or a small saw, with your strength; then remove what is remaining in the bone through hardness and small cuts.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is returned, and after the flesh feels great pain, know that it has not been placed in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	Do so that it is in its place, then smear the wound with a black vinegar bandage, and properly if it's in the right position; and don't put anything like plaster or other substance on the wound where there is oil, to prevent any infection or corruption from occurring. Then administer the remedies after you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover it completely according to the size of the wound, making sure that the wound is not squeezed with force; many times people did this and caused either death or corrosion on the flesh once; and make the compresses softer and more soothing than other injuries.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is deep or large, and you doubt that an accident may have occurred there, as we said, and you find pain in the limb, it does not seem appropriate to apply hot stones; but wrap around, instead of hot stones, hard cloths, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days that the blisters have appeared on the wound, remove what you have placed with all the wine, and apply a healing ointment for wounds, such as tetracrm药物 and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary for you to dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and at vespers, until it has healed and become healthy.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be put together so that the joint moves easily forward.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if the joints continue to do this for days and it cannot be sewn but remains like that with the joint, know that there are small bone fragments causing this issue. Therefore, you need to work on the wound with a tented method, and remove all these pieces of bone that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a sinus tract comes to the limb or any other form of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it according to what he has explained in his chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and open in the limb, like the bones of the knee or shoulder, or other large joints, do not treat it immediately because many die from this. Instead, let it heal naturally until it withers; sometimes it will drain on its own after about twenty to thirty days. Then you can treat the wound if possible. If you cannot, leave it alone.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	The burns that come from sweat
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	The burns often come after rubbing with the breeze, especially near the joints. A terrible thing to see is how the limb's shape changes; and by chance cannot perform its natural actions on it.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care then when it is fresh: if you administer stictch medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, sarsagot, carageen, and similar others, do so according to whichever of these you desire or all together, mixing them with stictch wine or with the yolk of an egg or with honey; then apply it on a nut in poultices, bind it well, and don't remove it with your hands for days; afterwards displace it, and start another poultice until the swellings are removed; or you bind onto a well-made piece of cork because the properties of cork are such that they remove all swellings from limbs; if the swelling has turned into hardness like stone and needs to be removed, cover it with a paste, making the excess visible; or take it off with no one's help until it is removed, and treat it until healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The limb that becomes weak after being garrisoned
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the breakage of the bone is restored, and after that the limbs are weak and subtle, this happens through various causes: because one was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many ties, and could not bring circulation to the limb; or due to excessive bleeding; or due to large movements not in their time; or because they have little blood in their body, if they are weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the treatment is that you should eat the herb in him, and make the body tender until there are numerous effects within him; then provide baths for him, and give him joy and rest. Afterward, apply ointment to the limb, so that the ointment attracts towards the main circulation, and washes with hot water repeatedly until the circulation matches the limb; and restores his natural figure.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	If a limb is bent after recovery
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration and the bone is broken apart, though the form of the limb is ugly, it does not lose its natural function: nor should you believe those who say one must break the entire limb anew. And many foolish people have done this in our land; these practices are condemned, causing great harms and even death. However, if the inflammation and torture are still fresh, then it's right to immerse them in hot water, or to cook mollifying herbs such as leaves of basil, roots, and mallow, among similar remedies; and apply one liter of a moistening plaster, such as well-made yarrow extract, and take the basil oil, mix it with tallow or nut oil, and apply the plaster over that. Alternatively, you can take greased figs, grind them with cinnamon powder, and other medicines that soften heat, and then make a plaster from these.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And no time does one remove the node by rubbing continuously and for a long time with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let there be movement of the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the dislocation is old and hardened, like bone, and requires treatment with metal tools, then it might be necessary to operate up to the bone, gently on the delicate incision; and incorporate patience and careful consideration in the healing process.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book on dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, for this reason it cannot move, and the limbs are misaligned, causing patients to experience great pain and severe injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation happens without a cause and if it is about to occur now, you should bring it back without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if you delay, they will swell and perhaps even pierce the bones at their joints; in this case it is not suitable to move them every hour when they are swollen: it can bring pus and other pains many times. Nevertheless, whenever this happens, send for a surgeon, then leave him alone until the abscess subsides completely. Then immerse the limb in hot water and oil, then gently manipulate it, and treat each member as if it is where you are accustomed to treating them.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have arranged the chapters about the dislocations of the shoulder up to here.
des mandibules	of the jaw
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Sometimes the jaws become dislocated forwards, and the dislocations of both occur in two ways: either they are slightly ossified at their joints and somewhat soft; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the chin, causing saliva from the mouth to escape that they cannot contain it, nor can they close their mouth, and wrap their tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it can return through several positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And when it is complete and done, you must quickly remove the dislocation, without hesitation. Do this with such skill that your assistants cut near the head of the patient, and insert a sharp instrument in her mouth at the root of the dislocated jawbone if the dislocation involves two parts; and the other hand should be used to push the other end out from under the chin, aiming for equilibrium. Instruct the patient to soften her jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And push the thumb until it is balanced, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if bringing it back hurts, likewise when the two jaws are together, use hot water and oil, until you gently reset them; do not overly force their return, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are brought evenly back, and the mouth of the patient closes well after being mollified, place moist cloths in a poultice made from rose oil and beeswax, then tie them loosely with oily threads; have the patient lie on their back, and let their head be between two pillows, so that it doesn't move to either side nor try to twist, but only consume light food until the pains are eased, and the jaws are closed. And then have them eat lightly, without working their mouth open for eating or drinking, until the jaw is well healed and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be properly aligned within an hour and are not yet fully restored to their original position, it leads to fevers becoming habituated and recurrent, and in consequence stomach discomfort or even vomiting occurs.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is a loss; and many times, death befalls the one who encounters this within eight days.
de la forcelle	from the fortress
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The strength cannot relieve from within the ribcage and the back, and it is relieved once outside, and well can one feel this.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And in this treatment, the patient lies on their back and extends their arms. Then press the body into the shape of your palm, and they will return to that position; then apply plaster and bind them tightly together, and strain the shoulder blade. The neck which is opposite the cut cannot dislocate; if it does, one must reposition it back into place, as we have said. Then apply plaster and bind it again, and strain it, instructing the patient to rest until they are healed. Thus similarly, the shoulders of the spine will be returned when it has been freed from its position.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Regarding the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Know that the shoulder is dislocated only in three ways: One way it is dislocated from the part under the armpit towards the back. The second way is at the base of the heel; and by chance dislocated at the top part, this happens rarely; and does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor inside for the nerves; and several times dislocated from below toward the armpit, even in those with little flesh, because at these jumps it happens quickly; in those with enough flesh, a jump occurs and returns within the bones.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance happens to some men from impact or breaking, and the shoulder swells with an acute abscess, and they think it is dislocated due to this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore, you must prove it, as long as you are certain; then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known that when it is directed towards the armpit, there's a distinction between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one; you will find their differences clearly expressed. You'll discover a hollow at the top of the shoulder and from under the armpit to the collarbone, as if it were an 'o'; and the patient cannot bring his hand back to his nose or move it in any way. Also, if it's dislocated upwards, it's not hidden either; because you find it clearly at the collarbone. And this type of dislocation can't be reversed until it's new, or when the child is born.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And this method is that the minister lifts the hand away from the ill part at the top, then places his thumbs on the joint and raises the joint to force up at its place; and the minister lifts the hand and extends it upwards, putting it back in position; if it comes quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it doesn't come about as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and give them restorative and soothing treatment, such as decoctions of thyme, fenugreek, and marjoram in hot water, and administer this treatment. Then wrap the patient's back with the same fabric on which you have placed their head, put a cushion under their armpit that is neither too soft nor too hard; then place the hand underneath their heel, lift their shoulder blade upwards forcefully, pull their hand down towards their body; and other assistants scrape the top of your patient's shoulder blade until it no longer moves; this shoulder now returns immediately. If you see that you have reset it in this way: and know that there should be someone larger than your patient present at home when this is done; and stand straight opposite the armpit, support their shoulder under the cushion near the shoulder blade, lift the cushion up so that the patient hangs down into an inverted 'V'; and other assistants pull the hand towards the belly of the patient as it goes back.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the organs are too light, they can move with anything heavy, and the dislocation returns immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And resetting it can also be done in other ways: and you bury the long stake in the ground, so that the joint is held as firmly as a pistol, but not too thick or too slippery; then place it under the organ, but make sure there's a layer of fat underneath, and the organ remains long along the length of the stake; then extend your hand from the other side downwards, forming the connection will return to its place quickly; and if it does not return with all these things that we have said, then do this cure: take a stick of two arms wide and four inches thick, which has the head rounded to fit through the fat on one side directly into the joint, according to this shape.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then tie it on the end of the rod covered with skin underneath, so that the rod does not hurt the hair, then place it against the skin from where you are to enter smoothly all around; and extend your arm along the rod from head to toe, and tie the shoulder on the rod, and the arm at the wrist, then put the arm on one of two long sticks about as wide, and keep the hand extended downward, and leave the body hanging from another side: the joint will return immediately now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is thus, in whatever way it may be, if need be you should put on the saddle a thread that's even, then place the plastered substance with mill-ground powder, along with incense and egg yolk, over the whole shoulder and around it, then remove from the saddle addition, and tie up the bandage onto the plaster, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let the hands remain in such a way.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	It is necessary that he eats moderately, until the limbs are reinforced, for it will heal faster; and then eat more after five days or seven, and move them; and if it's firm and not softened, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint has moved due to moisture that has come upon it or for another reason, it is necessary that you apply three cauterizations to it, as was explained in our chapter on cauterization.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all of this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint doesn't hold, and cannot lift your arm up, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is either cut or stretched or weakened; and know that the joint would never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Dislocations in the buttocks area and breasts or rearward, are caused by pushing and stretching of hands, and performed at other locations; and treat until they heal properly.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing comes redness to the limb, and persistent movements, then use hot baths many times, until that redness disappears and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	From the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the shoulder has been dislocated at its points, and returns to them; and if it's dislocated from all sides, as well as in front and behind, and dislocations are not responsive because one can see and feel them clearly; and is dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the metal blade with your hand, if you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is thickened, and cannot bend the arm or reach its shoulder in any way.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you must reset it in such a way that the abscesses are closed and heal, for if they were left open, there would be complaint about having to bring them back; and sometimes they cannot be brought back completely, especially when they are at the back; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes more pain, and by chance death comes.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And this restoration is so done when it can be brought about that you extend its hand to your two hands; and its arms are spread out, and the hands are placed in front of you according to the line of the elbow, forward and backward, and hold the joint together with its elbows joined or at the base of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it will return when it doubles its hand to its hand, and raises the bone from the base of the palm that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it doesn't return to its place, apply strong extension; and when you need to administer extension, extend the arm with both hands, and also do so on your own, ensuring that it doesn't move during extension. Then turn the arm in all directions, then wrap a double length piece of cloth around it, long and wide; and when you look at reconnecting the joint to its hand, apply oil to soften the joint, then forcefully connect the joint until she/he feels pain; and once it's back in place, place it with dry plaster on top, along with egg yolk, then firmly bandage it, allowing movement under the arm, and leave it for several days, then remove the bandages.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly in place, release the bandage, and leave it; and if you notice that the joint does not heal well, reapply the plaster and the bandage, and keep it this way for some days until it is firmly set; then remove it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if they feel pain after the return of the joint and it moves, wash them well and rub them beautifully until they are relieved. Or you should put a piece of fatty lamb's wool on the joint, let it for a day and a night, then let the bone in or into a bath; when they sweat, gently rub the joint, then put the wool back on, and then enter into the bath again; do this twice or three times until they recover; if you see that there is improvement, place wet calf fat heated with butter over it, apply it; if it returns to its position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The hand dislocation occurs and the recovery is gentle, more so than other joints. Always bring it back to its place immediately upon dislocation, while in the same state as when it was dislocated, so that the limbs are swollen or an abscess arises.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And in the process of returning it to place, you should put your hand on a board and extend the patient's hand. When doing this, look carefully at where they are placing their palm against the appearance of the joint and keep them there until it fully returns to its original position; then, you must check if it is properly aligned in its place. Therefore, when the patient extends or retracts their hand back on a board during the process of returning it to place, you should observe their wrist correctly.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then place the patient's back of their hand on the table, and have them place their hand on that spot marking the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, then it is indeed well. If not, if the plaster bandages for easing abscesses are applied and left there without starting again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if they cannot bear it, and you are unable to put them in place after some days, if the joint remains bent; and does not harm them so long as their hands are swollen, and cannot lift anything at all: then know that the nerve has been cut, or the artery; so there is no other method than to apply a cautery for this case, and by chance there is nothing else.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hands are in place, set them on the plaster that we have described, then strain and leave them for five days, then release and leave them like this.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is no swelling, then use hot water, and rub until it becomes warm.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Regarding the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	No single time should the shoulder be reduced from the hand towards any direction, nor at the back of the palm or belly; then the shoulder is set, and holds the dislocation in your armpit until it recovers. Then support the head of the shoulder, and guide it towards the part that was dislocated; and leave it for two days, and then place it evenly on the third day; and do not bind it as we have said, and allow the dislocation to heal, and make it move, and bind it again; and repeat this often until it is tight, and do likewise if the shoulder is reduced from the belly of the hand, just like you did before until it becomes healthy; and do similarly when the shoulder is reduced from another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	The process of resetting the ankle joint and the back.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the ankle at the back or neck is dislocated, or multiple are dislocated, without any treatment for fear that death would overtake the patient quickly.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs of this are that the discharges go against one's will, not being able to keep them in check, and it happens repeatedly for some limbs, or both legs, or all four limbs. Or sometimes it becomes silent at three parts; when it becomes silent from behind, it is called "gilbositez": if you cure her, then she should only be cured by the time of gilbositez having been childhood-related: there should not be any cure nor healing until then.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And those that come from childbirth or impacts or similar things, the old methods of treatment said through grand words, they did not yield great benefit in all respects; but I have condensed it according to my intention and formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that when it comes to the abortion before birth, nothing heals or is healthy; and similarly what comes directly towards the two sides, one cannot cure anything except the one specifically which goes backwards, as I say; and ensure that the body is stretched evenly over its belly in this first position, and has some resistance underneath it so that it does not get bruised. Then stick a thorn into the head in the earth, form it up, and place another one at the heels, and tie a string around the buttocks from under the body, then another at the hips, knees, and ankles; and two assistants must know these strings, one with the head and the other at the heels, between the two thorns; they should be well closed, the thorn as we have said, and let her place her palms on the spine, until she revives.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if this remedy doesn't work, take a board of three hand lengths long and place it over the wound. If the patient is on the side, have them lie with the injured part on the edge of the board. Place one end of the board under the spine; put their feet on the other end of the board and press well until they regain consciousness in the correct position; if you see this, do it at the elbow which rotates to the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And if you stick two thorns into the elbow of an arm length on either side, and in between each thorn, at once directly beneath it, take one palm's length of long space; and in each thorn place a part or the bend rotates, and make sure the thorns are firmly in the ground so they don't move; and between each pair of two thorns stick another single thorn coming out from their end where the elbow bends, so that these two bends rotate; and then tie the string passing among the elbows towards the bend at the hand, and for the other string to the feet towards the other bend, and each servant rotates his bend along with this string, while masters set the spine equal as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is equal, put on drying plaster with plenty of egg, then apply the application, and then use a table piece of three inches long, that purifies the part of the gilbositis and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage as we have said, and use the patient's delicate improvement until they are sane; and if anything comes at the end of healthiness, one must administer softening and soothing medicines with the application that we mentioned before; and every time an item is administered, there's no sign appearing in the last spine of the back, and you should be careful it's dislocation; and it's bone that opens, so you shouldn't have any assumption: by chance, this might bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that the joints of the hip and shoulder only bring dislocations, unlike others; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, in front and behind; and more towards inside, less dislocated in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its dislocation is that when you join the diseased leg with the healthy one, it's longer and opens further for the diseased knee than for the healthy one; and the diseased knee cannot bend back as far as the healthy one. And the limbs are swollen from abscesses below them because the head of the shoulder descends into them.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him who comes to the fever, if it is that this event goes against what was before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs for him who approaches ahead, if it is that his legs are well according to completion; still, neither doubles nor moves the heel without pain, and if you try to make him walk, he cannot do so beforehand, and holds back his urine, and swells his ankle, and when he walks, he passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs for him who approaches behind, if it is that he cannot spread his heel, nor double it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and feels pain along the back of the thighs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The understanding of this appearance of dislocation is that you should confirm if the dislocation is old and remains in its position, without any treatment; and there should be no assumption about it.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And concerning the one where dislocation is recent, and there are four ways of dislocation, if you hurry to reset it, and stretch it inwards and outwards, and move it to the right and left; by chance if it returns, no other treatment needs to be done.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it doesn't return in this manner, you must apply great force, and hold the leg firmly with both hands, or one hand linked above the knee; and another assistant extends his hand over in such a way that he presses his hands against his buttocks, then pushes him off with a sudden pull on the rope at his chest; and another holds the head by the rope; and stretches up and down all at once, until the patient rises from the ground once, and stays hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This way of extension is common for four similar cases, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it's correct.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not so, it is necessary to apply treatment according to its appearance. When the dislocations are in the pelvis, it is required that you place the patient on their healthy side, then tie the rope around the root of the thigh, and the one above the ankle, then stretch the rope towards the ankle and towards strength; then command another assistant his arms, and embrace the thick part of the diseased thigh, and extend him backwards in form: if it returns to its place now; and this way of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot squeeze it in this way as we said, then it is necessary that you tie both the legs of the patient together with a strong rope under their heels and under their knees, and ensure that the diseased leg extends more than the other one; then hang it by its head on a pole, and have two long arms hanging above it; then command the priest to embrace the head of the affected limb, and have another priests hanging along with the patient, who will embrace in formation around the affected limb. Because now, the joint is returning very quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocations are at the back, if the patient lies down, as we said in that with glibness, and pull tight the rope on the diseased leg properly, and on the foot too; then place two iron bars, one above the head and another by the feet, then insert the bar between the thighs of the patient inside the form; and have plantains moistened placed around, so it doesn't burn the patient's skin, then extend each priest towards him, and set their hand at equal distance to his dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, that's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, place on an 'ie', or table, and press there as we have instructed in the gilbositivity, and let the patient lie on their healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it should be extended immediately as I have said; and place their pain on the affected arm, then press with the other hand, and extend down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is at the back, it's not advisable to extend the patient from the bottom up or have them stand on the ground. Instead, they should remain in a position as their hip was when it was dislocated backwards, as we instructed for lying on both hips; and they should lie on their stomach, and keep their leg stretched out as previously described, and place pressure on the joint on the table; and it will be correct when the patient's legs stretch out evenly, and they are at equal length. Then adjust the buttocks, and apply the plaster, then tightly wrap with a bandage so that the hip does not move; and rest for three to four days before releasing them again, and keep the plaster on. And if you see their legs are even, reapply the bandage as before and leave them resting for three more days; then release them, have them walk properly until their limbs are strong.
de la dislocation dou genoil	From shoulder joint dislocation
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The shoulders can be dislocated in three ways: this is to say, internally and externally, and behind; and they do not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs for this are that you command the patient to bend their leg at their knee, and if it doesn't lock at their knee, know that they are dislocated; and the restoration of all is that you make the patient stand straight, extend their leg if they can, and put your back against their buttocks, and place their foot on your feet; then take their calf with your palms, pulling between your fingers, then bend both sides of the calf deeply; and another assistant extends their foot as long as the knees return to their place, and the signs are that they bend well their leg at their knee lightly; and apply a plaster, make the leg warm to the knee, and keep them together tightly for three or four days, then release; and don't work on the patients' legs until the limbs have been strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limbs are not completely broken, apply strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the pelvis, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	From the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes misaligned and not fully dislocated, both inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen and pulls forward to the part where it was dislocated: the reset should be quick, and one must gently extend it with their hands when it seems barely held in place.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is dislocated right away, it should be made to lie down straight and held by the assistant's hands behind the leg, over the ankle. Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then again with your left, twice each, after which extend it up high, firmly keeping the foot upwards; do this twice as instructed before. If it returns, that is good; if not, start again with the process, because it will return; and if it cannot return in such a way, make the person lie down so their back is towards the ground and plant firmly between their buttocks, tying it tightly to hold them together, preventing injury to their ankle. Then take turns attending each assistant's hands, or another one cuts the healthy leg above where the dislocation occurred, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it reaches the point, then place the plaster and bandage on top, apply firm pressure, and hold it in place, bind the foot to the leg, and watch that the ligaments behind the ankle are not too tight; let it be for two or three days, and if they loosen, remove them. Then release after three days or a quarter of a week, and guide the patient for another four days; and if he progresses beyond this point, it is not certain that he will still dislocate.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the pus-filled areas have come out, you should soothe them as we have said elsewhere, until they are cleansed.
des dois	From these two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two shoulders are dislocated, if they suit to be beautifully extended in work, and it is a slight matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in neither the neck nor the foot, you must have the patient sit straight on one side or right on a table completely flat, and put your foot on whatever extends from these joints. Press with your foot until it feels relieved; when it's even and nothing pops out, place a stool under the ball of your foot for about two shoulders, then apply firm pressure, and leave it for three days, then release him; and have him rest until he is well.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	On surgery and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation and you need to restore it, many times death occurs: if not being presumptuous in the treatment, if you are not knowledgeable in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and patient, then do not be bold; start by soothing things like pus extraction initially, and leave the patient to God's mercy, if you do not see hope of recovery; when you do see hope, immediately reset the limb in place, just as pus extraction and healing should progress; when the limb is in place, administer soothing pus extraction remedies, treat the wound according to its nature, with dried ointments; and if there are fractures along with dislocation, and small bones have broken off, set them, and do what we have said about simple diseases; be cautious of falling into fear's path as I've stated before, for this will cause you harm according to your Creator, and use your knowledge and body's skills wisely.
Amen	Amen
