O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	To you, my dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical science together with its content, and I have made an end through its explanations and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is strong in our region and entirely foreign everywhere else, the science has perished and been cut off, and nothing remains of it except the small descriptions in the books of the ancients that hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this have come the errors and the vanities, and closed are the intentions and alienated is the science.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I want to revitalize together the arrangement of this treatise according to the method of exposition and clarification and abbreviation; and will come together the forms of cautery irons, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the explanation and preparation of them, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for one who engages in this to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galens says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and has knowledge of the bones and nerves and brains and the number of them, and the movement and the moving veins and the resting ones, and the place of their origin.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason says Hippocrates that the name with the name is much, and with the work is little; and similarly in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously mentioned, should beware lest he fall into error and harm people; thus I have seen many times those who meddle with this science and abandon both knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish doctor who cut into an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of the neck; hence so much blood gushed out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another doctor who extracted a stone from a man's eye, and the stone was large; he carried with it a piece of the eyelid, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if it were cut out he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another doctor who took care of the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound; and the doctors, full of ignorance, bound the break over the wound with strong ties, and left no salve on the wound, and left it thus; and he commanded that it not be loosened; and remained thus until the leg became entirely swollen and the foot came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and loosen the leg; and when I untied it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But if the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and cannot be healed; and the corruption did not stop spreading through the limb until the entire limb was lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see another doctor who bursts the abscess and then inflames it by the malice of his practice.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a chancre, when it is pure of melancholic humor, should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place where one can completely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for that reason, dear son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, work where there is danger in many positions; and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	For this reason you must be careful so that foolish doctors cannot speak ill of you. Take up your arms against them, and treat your patients lightly yet firmly, and use the best method so that by the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised; and leave behind fearful diseases of severe sickness; and remove your doubts about what makes you uncertain, and have faith in yourself so that you can go from this world to the next one of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galien says in some of his admonishments: "Do not take on a bad disease, lest you be called a foolish doctor.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapter is about fire cauterizations and medicinal cautery, and the chapter is ordered from head to toe; and about the forms of instruments, and the iron tools for cautery, and everything that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about cupping and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapter is ordered and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torsions, and similar things; and it is ordered from head to toe, and about the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	In order for us to remember the work, it is necessary that I speak of the quality of the aid and the harm of each temperament.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of aid and harm are the longest discourse and subtlest science and secret responses; and about this many wise people spoke and agreed on it; and I suffice with a little of their words, for I fear lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that cautery universally aids all temperaments where it has matter, except for two temperaments: namely, the hot temperament without matter, and the dry temperament without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the hot and dry temperament together with matter, some debated and said that cautery is great aid; and others said the opposite: that cautery is not useful for diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be treated with heat or dryness for a hot disease; and those who say the opposite claim that cautery provides great aid for a hot and dry disease that occurs in the body of humans.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it to be true by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in any case, do not let anyone else intervene except those who have experienced it and who understand through long use the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of human temperaments, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the occurrences and the space of time; we have no fear of other temperaments, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the physicians assembled and agreed on the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that cautery with fire is among the secrets of treatments, and of greater goodness than cautery of burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not affect any other part except the member that is burned, and does no harm to another member unless by chance.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Burning medicines spread from one member to another in the process of application, and bring to the member diseases with difficult healing; and by chance may kill the patient. Fire, because of its height and the goodness of its substance, does not do this, unless there is excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And this have I found by experience and by the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it was on the truth of things; and for this I excuse myself for the length of speech, for it does not please me to remove from you the secret that is contained in fire, and the quality of the work, how it cures the diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; now receive it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on when the cauteries should be made, and they chose springtime.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cautery is appropriate in all seasons, because the harmful things coming from underneath are removed by means of the cautery; and especially when the cauterizations are for necessary pains that are severe and urgent which cannot wait for the time when greater malice does not come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think, dear son, as the foolish doctors do; for a disease that is cured by cautery has no recurrence; and they say it thus; but it is not as they believe, because cautery is only a medicine that changes the temperament, and dries the humors which are the cause of the pain, and it is worth more than other medicines due to its speed in value, and for the virtue of its work and its power.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease comes sometimes according to the temperament of the patient and the location of the illness and its power; and superfluities are gathered in him by the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered where there is little superfluity and moisture, such as dental cauterizations for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauterization works after medicine, but their understanding is false, and cauterization is the last of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in some disease and they are ineffective, then we apply the cautery, and it does work.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it is clear that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cautery with a golden instrument is gentler than with iron, and they said this only because of the quality of gold and the nobility of its substance; and they said that the heat of the cautery does not cause putrefaction, but this is not true for I have tested it, and have found that it is true in some people; and cautery with gold is indeed better than with iron, as they claimed.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And nevertheless, when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools quickly; and if it is heated too much, it can be damaged by the fire; and thus there are enough hindrances.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use fire cauterization which we have prepared appropriately for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or I have ordered this chapter from head to foot, so that the way may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of the olive cauterization
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is effective for moisture and cold affecting the brain, and there are two that are used due to a disease called "soda," and due to various humors descending from the head to the eyes and ears, and for numerous dreams, toothache, and throat pain, and especially for all diseases coming from cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by a dissolving medicine modifying the head for three nights or four, according to what the strength and age and habit of the patient can endure; and then make the head of the patient bend back.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him sit between your hands crossed, and place his hands on something heavy; afterwards put the root of your palm on the base of his neck between his two eyes; and there will come your middle fingers, so that you bleed from there, then heat the cautery which is called "olivary," of which this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the marked spot with ink, and do so by loosening and tightening your hand little by little while turning it around; then lift your hand straight up, and remove the area if you see a small piece of bone; and if you don't see it, repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I told you; afterwards take a bit of wax, mix it with water and put soft cotton inside, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days; then put moistened cotton in butter on top; and keep it there until the inflammation is gone; afterwards treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrafarmacon," until it heals.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And as the ancients say, when the wound remains open longer, it purges more; and for this reason it aids movement.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some say that one should let the cautery remain so long that part of the bone is burned, and then remove what is burned from the bone, and it should be cleaned.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that one should let the cautery remain on and press so hard that it abates the bone as wide as the thread that women put in their spindles so that the humors may flow out; and one should let the wound remain open for a long time; afterwards, it should be cleaned and sutured.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem entirely good to me in all cases, except in some people where there is a tendency towards fear; and I think I should leave it; for the shoulder is weakened by continuous natural discharges, as we observe in other limbs; and likewise when the shoulder of the patient is weak by nature, and the first appearance of cauterization is safer and more effective for me, and I use this method in such a way towards healing.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When chronic pain comes to the entire head and lasts long, the patient must use collyria and pills which are called "cochie", and cleansing of the head with oils and plasters; and if one does the cautery that we have mentioned before, and it is ineffective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take note if the shoulder of the patient is of a strong nature, and that it is not too cold; then cauterize below that cautery a bit as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After make cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make a cautery at the place called "vasselz"; and these are the places where one puts leeches; and apply your hand so that you do not see up to the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in the others, and I will speak more about it later; and it is necessary that the cauterizations of the horns be finer than those with which one cauterizes the middle of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	For the cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When in one part of the head comes sudden pain, and the illness extends to the eye, and the brain is cleansed with purifying medicines, and all other treatments I have mentioned in the division of diseases are done but do not help: then make cauteries according to two methods, that is to say, with aqueous medicine and by fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery of aqueous medicine is such that you take a clove of garlic, remove the skin and crush it a bit for two heads, then cut the temple where the pain lies in such a way that you can place the clove of garlic under the skin; and when it is placed there, bind and compress it well and leave it this way for twelve hours; then unbind it and take out the clove of garlic, and leave the wound thus for two or three days; then put on cotton soaked in butter until the pus comes out.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment of ointment until he is healed; and if you wish to use some burning medicines that I have written in the tenth treatise on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The cautery with iron is according to this method.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery of which this is the form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the form of a ball where it has a little curve, and in the middle there is a small appearance; and you put it on the painful area, and hold your hand and turn the iron slightly, until half the thickness of the skin is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is outside, and let an abundance of blood flow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After put cotton in the eye of needle, and put on the place for three days; then put wet cotton in butter, and then treat the area with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called «cultellare», at all the point, and beware of cutting the artery in this recent migraine.
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat migraine as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and see that the cauteries previously mentioned from medicine and iron do not suffice for him, then you must heat the cautery called «cultellare» until it is white; and apply it on the painful area a line half an inch long, and remove your hand once, and be careful not to cut the artery and not to reach the bone; and beware of the jaw that moves when one eats, and do not touch the nerve that moves and spasms do not come to the patient, and beware of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or cutting causes great fear especially for those who are inexperienced and untrained; and leave the work halfway. But I will tell you how to stop blood when an artery is cut, and I will show you where it applies in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not help the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you wish, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two blades; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain in the ears from cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain from cold comes to the ear, and one has applied solutive medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery which is called “point,” of which here is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After puncture all around the diseased ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and move slightly above the root of the ear once you have marked the place for insertion; and there should be ten pricks around each ear; after clean the area until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be treated with cautery is only of those that are caused by phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not apply cautery to conditions that come from dryness and spasm of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this form of torture that is caused by phlegm and discharges from the head and gargling, and if it does not work, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little outside the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; and place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make the cautery extend from the top of the ear a little below the hairline, and another in the temple as long as one inch; and leave the cautery for so long that half of the heart is burned; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the likeness of the cautery that we have placed before, but it is a bit more subtle and it is necessary that the knife be a bit larger; after care for the place as I have said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient has no fever, then make IV cauterizations: II on the II horns of the head, and I in the middle of the head, and I at the place which is called «vasselz» as we have said before, and the last cautery on the mouth of the stomach; and let it be treated as we have said before.
de litargie	of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this illness, one must give the patient large figs and brain-clearing pills; afterwards, completely shave the head of the patient, and apply to the occiput the mustard plaster which is written about in the treatise on plasters; and this is the manner of cautery: do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If he is healed thus, it is good; and if not, make III cauteries from the head down to the neck, with I inch of space between each cautery; and treat it as the others, and if you see fit to add, and the patient can endure it, make I cautery in the middle; and if necessary, II others on the II sides, and treat until he is healed; and let the cauteries be called «olivare», as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold from the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleansed of sores and what we have mentioned before; after wash the patient's head, then apply cautery in the middle of the head and on each horn, and two at the back and three on the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is strong, apply four cauterizations on the spine of the back; leave it until the most of the heart is burned, then lift your hand; after treat it until it heals, and let the cautery which is called "olivare" be what we have mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	of the epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics should not use cautery except those who are phlegmatic, and one must first modify the brain with hellebore and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section when the patient is large and suffering from a need for medical purging.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is a child who cannot endure it, make them gargle and chew to often modify the brain with good food; afterwards, raise their head in the middle, and apply the cautery as we have said before, and the cautery on the basin, and on each horn; and if the patient is strong and enduring, apply cauterizations as I said for one who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spines of the back and neck, and let the cauterizations be olive-shaped according to the method that I have described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is feeble, then apply a fine cautery according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When by the cause of melancholy the excesses or the moistures are corrupted and phlegm is thick, then cauterize with such cauteries as we have said for one who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by the cause of melancholy the superfluities tend towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him to drink something by which the brain may be purified, according to what is stated previously in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards, raise the head of the patient; afterwards make a proper linen bandage, just like the circle, and put it on the head; and let the patient sit cross-legged, and be well held on all sides; then apply the liniment, which is worth mixing with sheep's fat from an old ewe; and heat it to moderate fire so that when one applies it he can endure it; afterwards empty the circle inside the head, and leave it to cool; and do this once a week for the patient along with other good treatments until he is healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	For if you wish to cauterize it, make several points all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cautery moistens the brain equally; then place wet cotton on it with butter and goose grease.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eye ointment
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When ointment first comes to the eyes by the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something purifying for the head, and protect it from all moisture, and make him sweat in the bath several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	Afterward, instruct them to recline their head, and apply a cautery in the middle of the head, and apply two cauteries on both temples if the descent of the ointment is to both eyes together, or one if it is to one; and cut all the veins and arteries that are beneath the skin throughout the cautery, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and beware of blood flow, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it with whatever power you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision how to apply caution; and sometimes a cautery or branding is done under the two rear bones.
dou cors des larmes	from the body of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears of the eyes are old and habitual and are on the veins, or near the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outward; and it is seen that they are cold phlegmatic excesses, then he makes the cautery that I have said at the beginning of the chapter directing towards the eyes: one cautery in the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries with branding under the two bones; and if there is need for more, then he cauterizes wisely above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	from the body of tears inside the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient III nights of coiches; afterwards raise his head, and make a cautery in the middle of the olive cautery; and make II cauteries of the cautery that is called «clavilis» on the two temples, a bit below the hair; and beware of the artery so you do not cut it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery that is called «clavilis»:
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery that is called «olivary».
de coi ci est li forme:	of which here is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you want to make two cauteries on the two soles as long as the soles are; and do not leave your hand until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair that stings the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes turn inward and sting the eye, and a cautery is made according to two methods: that is to say, with fire, or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they are born and are equal, then place the patient in your care; after that, draw on the paper over the eyes a figure that is as wide as the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs; then put moist cotton in egg white and marjoram juice on the eye, then heat the cautery tool which has this form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterize on the figure that you have drawn little by little many times, until the keratin is burnt in that spot; and the sign of the health of the work is that you see the paper shrink, and the hairs raised at the edge of the eye; then lift your hand, and leave it thus for three days, then put moist cotton in butter until the burn is removed; after treat with ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if afterwards the hairs grow back and the parchment is softened then restart the cautery on that same place as you did first; and if the hairs are weaker, cauterize until the parchment is lifted to its natural place and is even, and the hairs do not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cautery of burning medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow large and even, then make a shape like a myrtle leaf from parchment; then take French soap and quicklime, one part each, and grind them well together; and do it quickly so that it does not cool, then sprinkle it on the form you have made like a myrtle leaf, and place it over the eye's parchment; and if the illness is in one eye only, then work on that one, and if in both; and put under the eye cotton moistened with egg white; and let the patient’s head be in your hand and place your finger showing above the medicine, and press the eyelid and the puff every time the patient feels a bite from the medicine, for it bites as much as fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, then remove the medicine at its proper time.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the bite has passed, then raise the area of awe, and observe if you see the skin raised as though it had been raised by constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is thus, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, then apply more medicine on the area where the medicine has not worked, until your work is equal, and your eyes are set; then put moist cotton in butter until the pus falls out, after which treat the area of the ointment called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary that you watch closely your work with great care so that no medicine falls into the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the parchment becomes soft afterwards, and the hair pricks in the eye, then restart the medicine on that area which has been softened by the proper parchment; just as you did before; after treat until it is healed; and this is the form of the myrtle leaf:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the eyes of men are different in size and smallness, and according to this be your constraints; and do not revert to the right way for him who is studying this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	on the treatment of fistulas by cauterization
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then it is necessary that you apply cauterization according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head in your hand; and have the assistant hold his head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move, nor does he remove his head; after put moist cotton in egg white or in juice of persilion on the eye; then heat the cautery which is this size: and it is shaped for the head like the form of an eagle feather, together with which should be the cautery; if you wish, let it be pointed from one end to the other, and if you wish, let it also be like a tent; but nonetheless, this one that is shaped is better for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus, and dry it; and if it is closed, then open it, and draw out the bow; after put on the hot cautery firmly, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part below the eye, so that your hand does not make a mistake; and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery until the bone, it would be well.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then begin the cautery again once, and another if you need it, and leave it for three days; afterwards put moist cotton in butter on it, and treat it with a drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, then apply an aqueous corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and heal it according to what would come in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a method of cautery for fistulas that some of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Attend to the fistula, and cut open the area; afterwards put in the incision one piece of camphor as follows:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make it to the quantity of three spoonfuls; and hold your hand on the eyelid firmly, and the patient does not move at all, so that the melted pitch does not run into his eye; and it is necessary to put on the patient's eye cotton moistened in egg white or in water: the pitch thus heals the fistula place, and with marvelous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, it is necessary to administer the puncture to the navel, and to bring the fistula back to the body of the navel according to what is appropriate in its own proper place.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Very often cracks appear on the lips which are called "hair", and especially on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks that we have mentioned by division, and the treatment does not help, then heat the small knife-shaped cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it quickly into those cracks until it reaches the bottom; afterwards, treat the area with ointment until it heals.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes at the root of the throat or in the tonsils, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, afterwards it turns into pus and rots and becomes swollen and develops into a fistula; and you treat it as we have mentioned by division, but if it does not help: then you must have a cautery according to the size of the fistula; afterwards, insert it into the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand until the heated iron reaches the bottom of it; and do this once or twice; afterwards, treat it with what we have said in treatments until it heals; and if it is treated thus, it is good; and if not, you must expose the area and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	of the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicines but it does not work, then place the head of the patient on your knee; afterward, heat the cautery which will come in form afterwards in such a way that you put a cane on the tooth; and quickly place the hot cautery inside, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth; afterward lift your hand and repeat the cautery as you wish; afterward have the patient fill his mouth with salty water, and let it stay for an hour then spit out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way, the tooth that was moving is confirmed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupted moisture is dried.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When tooth pain comes from cold, or there is cold in the vein, and medical treatments do not work, then there is need for cautery according to two methods: and butter cautery and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Butter cautery is such that you take cow's butter and the end in an iron or bronze spoon; then take cotton and wrap it on the tip of a needle, and dip it in boiling butter, and place it quickly on the painful tooth and hold until it cools; and do this often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you wish to dip wool and cotton in cold butter, and place it on the painful tooth, and put hot iron over it until the fire comes to the edge of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cautery together with fire is such that you take a cane of iron or bronze, and it should be thick so the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient; afterwards heat the cautery, from which the form will come after, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, for the pain will be removed that same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it is necessary that the patient fills his mouth with good butter during the application of this cautery, and then strongly wipes it; and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery of the head size that you want, and according to what you are able to do; and this is the form of the cane:
des scrophules	of the scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofula is of phlegm and cold moisture, and does not respond to digestion through medicines, then heat the hair-like cautery as follows comes the form, and it has two openings for the smoke to exit from the other side of the cautery; and place the heated cautery on the abscess once or twice if necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small then apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it there for three days; and put cotton moistened in butter as long as the burn is removed; afterwards treat the area with ointments and bandages until it heals.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the reed:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the moistures overcome in the channels of the phlegm, and especially when this comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first by solutive medicines; after which you make a cautery at the root of the throat, and beware that you do not go as far as the throat itself, nor burn the heart but only a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After that, make another cautery at the joint of the neck to the top of the spine, and let the cautery which is called "clavile" be as we have described before; and treat the area as we have said before until it is healed.
de la toust	of the toast
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all and disease of phlegm are from cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is old, make two cauteries on the forearm in their places; and another cautery in the chest between the two mammary glands; and let the cauteries which are called "clavile" be according to the form that was previously described.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you wish, make cautery by pricking with the entire cautery that is called “points” of which the form is here before in the disease of the ears; and let the points reach up to thirty, or inquire around.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the place according to what was said before, and let the cauterization be three inches according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And for that reason, the cauterizations are lighter, because you do three at once.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After the patient is placed on their back and on their side; then lift the heart which is inside with your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery which has two nerves thus is the form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize the heart until it is pierced to the side, and the shape of the cautery would come together with four cauters; and for this reason, the cautery is made with the cautery that has three nerves, so the shapes of the cauterization are six cauters; and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the form of the cautery that has three nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And sometimes it is placed on this one nerve, so there are eight cauters.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After put on the cautery powdered parsley with salt; after let rest the patient, and do not move the limb for a long time until it is well strengthened.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, which rarely happens, then apply a cautery on the thick part of the collarbone, or many cauterizations by pressing.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach come coldness and much moisture that it alters its temperament, and are multiplied the catarrhs to him, and in the customary ways of treatment he does not benefit, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on his back, and extend his legs and arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	From this point on, make three cauterizations: one below the nipple of the breast for a size of about two fingers, all of which should be clavicle-cauterized, and two more cauterizations outside the two sides so that the shape of the cauterizations forms a triangle, and there should be such space between each that they are not joined together when they expel pus; and let the cauterizations be so perfect that they touch both parts of the heart, and let the shape of the cauterizations follow this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and for those who fear this cautery, cauterize by pricking and bleeding on the stomach one point according to the amount that you wish to apply; then cauterize it entirely with what is called the "point" cautery.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the care of the treatment that we had before, until he is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver comes to pain from cold and moisture and great windiness, such that it is forcefully removed from its natural temperament by excesses; and the patient is treated with what we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit him, then the patient must be bled on his veins; and mark three cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, below the hypochondria, where the ribs of a man come; and there should be space between each cautery the thickness of a thumb; and let the cauteries be long towards the body, and do not press too much with your hand over the entire cautery; and only burn half of the center, and let the patient stand on his feet; and if he cannot, then let him lie down, extend his legs, and raise his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if your will is to cauterize these cauteries of the knife, if you are subtle and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn all the heart, for you would dry up the whole body; and that it does not come up to the boil, for the hearts are very delicate in that place, and you know this well.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When it has abscessed in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain but not too strong; and if it is in the membrane, then they feel fierce pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this treatment is necessary, the patient must be shaved on their head; then apply a poultice to the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cauterization tool which resembles a ray, of which here is the form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And cauterize the cautery until the blood is burned and comes down to the flesh, until all corruption is entirely gone; after the treatment according to the treatment of wounds until it is healed; and it is not fitting that anyone other than one who has studied long in the art of medicine use this cautery, through which hands sometimes these diseases have corrupted.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he may boldly work, and nevertheless it seems better to leave it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the cautery of pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should make pleurisy cauterizations with the roots of aristolochia, in this manner: take a root of aristolochia, as long as you can find, and it should be dry, and as thick and as long as your fingers; soak it in oil, heat it over fire, and apply the cautery between the shoulder blade and neck, and two small cauterizations slightly downward in the area below the beard; and two cauterizations between the fifth rib and sixth, slightly tilting towards the back; and one cautery in the middle of the chest, another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two on both sides of the chest outside the cautery that is between the two shoulders; and do not press your hand, but do it openly as with fumigation.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And some ancients said that some men use fire cautery resembling a razor, and they heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess; and suddenly the pain goes away, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work, there is fear that the patient may die immediately, or a fistula may develop which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse in the way we have described in the divisions of treatments, and it does not help, then there are three types of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of which one method is that you make three or four cauteries, lining them according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cautery we mentioned before; and do not press your hand over the entire cautery, and let the patient lie on his back; another method of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two prongs, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and raise the area where the mouse is located, or where the side of the patient comes towards the left, and let the elevation from which you raise the area be according to the curvature, according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After you put the two nerves aflame until the heart is pierced from the other side, and then pull out the cautery, and thus there will be four. And if you want, cauterize all around the cautery at three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has discharged pus for a long time, and this is worth more than the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cautery does not help the dropsical, except in the manner which is called "asclytes.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then you must make four cauteries around the belly, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one near the breast; and let the cauteries be close to the surface of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leave the cautery open to expel pus for a long time, and do not abandon the patient's treatment after the cautery; and healing would be hastened, and the two intentions will come together with God’s help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly should be the key-shaped one that we have shown before; and the one for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is set forth above.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the legs
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the legs are swollen in one who is dropsical, and are full of yellow water, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring toe; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, so as not to cut through the yellow bile, and let the cauterization be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After make on both legs two cauterizations in each leg at the point of the shin; and let the cauterization be long, one below the knee in front and the other outside, midway down the leg; and leave the cauterizations open for a long time without treating, so that the bile may come out; after treat with the other treatments that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	Of the menstruation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the evacuation of the bowels comes from cold and moisture, such that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by other methods; and you see the patient enduring well and of great strength, then make one large cauterization on the stomach according to what has been discussed earlier about the cautery of the stomach, with a circular cautery; and four small cauterizations around the navel each like a small key-shaped cautery, and two cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the wrist, and a cautery on each thigh, and two small cauterizations on the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	about the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhoids are in the anus, one or more, and are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and they have been treated as we have said in divisions, but it does not help, then make cauterizations: three on the spine of the back, those which are all outside below almecdate point by point in triangulation, and one cautery below the buttock two inches; and if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the food does not cook, and swelling appears in the face, then apply a large cautery to the stomach as was previously mentioned, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen all around with a key-shaped cautery; and leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating, heal the place until it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you cut the thelul, heat the cautery that resembles a razor, and then place it entirely burning on the cut thelul; leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the base of the vein from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is much thelul, cauterize each one as we have said; after that, treat them with beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the chatim, it will provide greater aid.
de plaie mal curee	of a wound poorly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear a knife or an opening, which we will discuss in its place, such a disease comes that cannot be healed other than by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When an Fistula comes to someone, and it is awake and discharges putrefaction and corrupted moisture, you should probe it entirely with a fine tent, and be sure that you know the entire length of the tent how deep it goes.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heat the cautery that resembles a razor, and insert it into the fistula according to how far the tent has entered, and repeat the cautery until all the putrid and corrupted flesh is burned, once, or twice or thrice, according to the amount needed; and beware of burning the nerves that are there, and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and to the intestines, beware of these places, and do not act otherwise than in a fleshly area, and think that it is not passing through; afterwards treat the place until it is healed, and if the wound is sealed, and the materials are removed for a long time, then know that the wound is entirely healed; and if the materials are not removed, know that the wound is deep, and the bone is corrupted at its base; and thus as one of those we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	Of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from cold comes to the kidneys and from great windiness, and he has no desire for a woman, then you must make a cautery on the kidneys on one side and the other with the clavile cautery that we have said before; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in a line, and they will provide greater aid.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and cold due to cold and moisture, so that the patient holds back urine, then make a cautery on the outer part above the bladder, where the hairs of the wrist begin, both right and left, and let each cautery be as long as a thumb; and make one cautery outside the back, or two if you need them; and let the cauterizations be made according to the form previously described.
de la marris	of the hernia
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the hernia is cold and moist, and does not allow conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their period is delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: then it is necessary to make three cauterizations around the swelling, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauterizations outside the back; and let the cauterizations be made according to the form previously described.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moistures descend to the hip joint, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the site of the departure is found near, then you should cautery the patient on the hip with a circular cauterization, and mark before the site around the hip as it turns, so that the joint is inside the circle; and let the cauterizations be such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this cauterization is not available to you, make three large cauterizations with the olive oil, and let the cauterization be as perfect as all the others; and care for it until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the joint of the hip, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is treated with what we have said in the division and the treatment does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient of the thick humors with foul pills, or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	After that, apply cauterization; and the method of cauterization is according to two methods: namely using burning medicines together, and fire cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Cauterization by fire is according to many methods, of which one is as follows: you cauterize on the joint of the hip three triangular cauteries in this form, and make a good depth and large, and leave between each cautery the space of a thumb's width, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped; sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle on the head of the hip, which is why there are four in this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you wish, then cauterize it with the circular cautery that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the hip; but do so in such a way that the circle contains the entire hip, and all the parts of the heart are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the method used for sciatica, when the pain remains in the hip, and does not extend to the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it extends to the thigh and the leg, then make two cauteries there where the patient says the pain is, and one cautery above the ankle four fingers wide, to the left side a bit; and let the cauteries be chisel-shaped, and burn the thickness of the heart; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the toes of the foot or close by, then cauterize where he feels the pain three points or four with the cautery called "points.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if needed, I do more for him; and if he knows that the pain is under the knee towards the thigh, I do cautery with a knife-shaped or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauterizations not to leave the cautery so long that you burn the nerves and the large arteries, and that you do not cause more harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who have done cautery on the ankle of the foot, and left it so long that the leg was completely swollen, and the foot likewise, and all the foot was perforated and corrupted.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a purgative from which he received death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pain is in two parts together, do cautery in one and in the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise ones say about the hip cautery, of which here is the method, make such an iron and let it be at the head as thick as a fig kernel, or a bit less, and let it have crossbars and let them be from one crossbar to another spaced the length of a knuckle; and let the crossbars be made of two parts, and let them also be like knots, and there should be an iron handle well made; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is all red and emits sparks, and then place it on the sore hip joint, and turn it towards the healthy side; and cauterize it once with one cautery and leave it for three days; and then make a poultice of butter, and keep the wound open for a long time; after treating it with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasis says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its gaze, and we see few who use it; nevertheless, this is one of the good cauteries, which can be tolerated by those to whom it is suitable.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The cautery of burning medicine is such that you make the instrument to interlock where the margin of the door descends, and it should be made of glass or iron on one side long, and in height have two inches, and have between each the quantity of the thickness of a thumb; and they are open below and above, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After place the box on the hip of the patient lying on their healthy side, and press your hand heavily on the hip box; then pour between the two circles of warm water that has been heated over fire one cup, and leave it for one hour in time, and let the patient endure the heat and burning from it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For there he finds a burning as if of fire; and when the burning has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and raise the hip with warm water, and leave it thus for three days, and apply butter until that which is black from the scalding be removed; and let it stay for three days so that pus may come out; and this would be the last aid after the treatment of ointments until he is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or to the leg, make an instrument that steeps in warm water as you have done for the hip equally; and this is the method of warm water, and I have written it in the treatise on the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and vitriol, an equal amount of each, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	where there is a small opening to blow so that the point of a razor can enter; and put on top of that pot another pot well sealed, and put on alkaline and heat and sweet water over it until there are two parts above the powders when you have well mixed it in your hand; and leave it thus until there descends water acid and falls into the sealed pot, then take all that water, and throw it on heat and on alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then it will be very acidic and is administered in much work of medicine and in cauteries of other members For it does the same work as fire, and it has other medicines with which one cauterizes well the hip like this with turpentine and anacardi and heat with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galien tells us of a cure where a man was healed from the pain of the hip and sciatic nerve, and he praises it greatly, and says that no other treatment was done, and that he was healed in one single time when this cure was performed, and he was bathed as he teaches afterwards.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he says that you should take green litharge fresh and dry, and grind it well with a poco of grease, and apply it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is, and leave it; and let it stay for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him enter the bath until his body is a bit warmed, and make him enter the bed, and the pain will go away entirely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use a cautery of such medicines, if not after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's fat, it helps greatly; and the cauteries should be made in such a manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take wool and anoint it with old oil, and place it on the crease that is between the big toe and the other one called the instep.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	After that, take dry goat's fat and press it to fire until it becomes charcoal, and put it on the wool, and leave it until it is consumed; and do this again, and continue doing so until you think by sense that it reaches the hip, and the pain ceases; and this method of cautery is called "goat's cautery.
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or by percussion or by too great an evacuation, or by similar cold matter spread out, none of these similarities is worth cautery, for it is one who comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary after the patient has been purged of foul pills or other similar things, that one makes on his back, where the pain lies, three lines marked with incisions, and in each line five cauterizations or more according to the strength and quantity that the patient can endure; and let the cautery be done according to the cautery which is called "points"; and if you wish, make III cauterizations or IV with a medium clavicle cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often comes to small children, and the sign of the beginning is that they have tight throat when they wake up, and fear; and you find on the last spine of the back and in us the appearance which comes on the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and wish to treat it, cauterize it with a circular cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery marks each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with a deep cautery of two lines or three, and let the points be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treat the area until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply cautery to swelling that is in spasms of nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain of joints is from moisture that spreads to every member of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which doctors properly call "gout," and when it is of cold cause and treatments of medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this manner: make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need for you to prick at the sole of the foot, then make a cautery across the entire point called "point.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come down to the knees and other joints, which often happens, make a cautery on each knee three or four cauteries in each part, all olive-shaped; and if you need more, then make more, but do not hold your hand so long that the fat of the bone is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend down to the knees and the back, then administer the cautery that we have described in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the armpit two inches; and if there remains any pain in the fingers, make points on each joint and on the palm of the hand; and if the pains come down to the elbows or up to the shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good care to the patient and apply medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give him good care and you purge phlegm, he will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the spleen
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When rupture comes in the groin, and the testicles descend to the thighs and it is new, then it is necessary that when you wish to treat him, he should not eat that day; and let him use things which loosen the belly so that the bile descends from his stomach; afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to stretch his legs until the testicles return, and hold them with your hands, and sign below the rupture on the bone of the wrist, and all a mark that is similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery which here is its form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it is white and it gives off sparks.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then hold the testicles in their place; and have an assistant stretch his hand over them so they do not return backward; and work well on the thighs of the patient, and put under him a cushion and another underneath the thighs, and one other under the part that stretches the hands; then put the cautery on the mark with your entire hand, and hold it straight and keep it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, repeat it again until you come to the bone; and carefully watch that the testicles do not leap when you make the cautery; so as not to burn them; and by this the patient does not die or suffer other harms.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is of no worth.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size, and for adults as large according to their measure; after three days cure the place of the cautery with butter until the scalding is removed; afterwards cure with other ointments until he is healed, and let the patient lie forty days on his back until the wound is well sealed; and it is necessary that his swaddling be loosened for a long time, so that the boil does not protrude when he begins to walk in chambers.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, let him be given a well-made bandage, and wear it for another forty days; and let him have good rest, labor little, and beware of excessive drinking and eating, and of shouting too loudly; and when he follows this instruction, he is entirely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say hereafter the treatment of cutting in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	Of the rupture of the belly.
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow more, make the cautery according to its quantity, and let a third of the kernel be burned; after that, treat it according to what we have said; and some of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a three-angled cautery in this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the place and make a line across the width above the rupture, and another outside, and hold your hand in the middle of the entire key-shaped cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cautery is lighter and gentler.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any limb, whether from falling or striking, and that pain lasts a long time, and the cure of medicine does not work, then it is necessary that it be cauterized with the cautery which is called "point," and let the cautery be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and its weakness and its virtue and its location of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; if not, apply another cautery to it, for such is the custom that it must change to the part that is closest, which is why you must make the cauterizations until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	of mixing
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The mixtures are sometimes aided by cautery with great assistance, and especially the diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	When you see it needs to be cauterized, take note if the disease is at its beginning, and if it is treated according to what we have said in the division, and does not lessen or remain, and you fear that the corruption may spread throughout the patient, then make five cauteries on the head: one inside the head near the ear, another towards the forehead at the end of the hair; and two on both temples, and one behind on the nape; and leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the bone, and so that the scabs come out so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape; and cauterize on the mouth according to what is mentioned before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And if the disease is spread everywhere; and it shows clearly, then you must cauterize it with those cauters we have mentioned at the top, and one cautery on the neck, and two cauters on the spine of the neck, and six cauters on the spine of the back, and one large one on the rump and another nearby, and two on both shoulders; and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the breast, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; and beware of the nerves that are on the heel, so you do not burn them; and sometimes one makes a cautery on the bone of the wrist, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more cauterization I do, the more help I provide, and it benefits him; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as a healthy person would, because the body is already entirely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and the joints, according to what you will find in methods of irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment, apply the place with flour of vetches and honey and other treatments until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling comes in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it is not healed, then make cauterizations on the limb according to the size and smallness of the limb; and let the cautery be a bit entering into the thickness of the skin; then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes a cautery is made on the hand and foot and back, at the point where the nerve moves the limb, and thus the swelling is removed; and nonetheless, do not let anyone intervene who is not knowledgeable about the limbs and the points where the moving nerves are.
de albaras	of arthritides
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease which is called "arthritides" is awakened, and medical remedies are of no use, then cauterize it with a fire cautery a little perfectly, according to the quantity of the thickness of the swelling, until the whiteness be removed, and its color changed; then cure it with flour of vetches and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, and blood of colt and blood of partridge, of each one part; and let all be mixed together, and bound with a bandage, and aired at the place until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of chancre by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When chancre comes at the beginning, and you wish to stop it, then cauterize it with a cautery that resembles a circle, all around the edge of the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And nevertheless the wise say that one should make a cautery also in the middle of the ulcer; and yet this does not seem good to me, for I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen it happen sometimes; and it is more proper that it be cauterized around, with the cautery which is called "circule", as we have said much about cauters.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease which is called "adubelati", and it takes time to heal or due to the excess it causes or because of the age of the patient when they are decrepit (that is, too old) and have little blood, or due to the season; and you want to hasten its healing: then cauterize around with many small cauteries deeply; afterwards leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hasten to mature.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you wish to pierce it with the entire cautery, then heat the cautery in this manner which is its form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it externally in such a way that the course of the putrefaction is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment until he is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire treatment by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of disease there is which is called "corrodens," and it is nothing other than a consumption of the member, for it consumes the limbs as fire does to dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a place that can withstand cautery with fire together, then heat the cauteries small and large according to what is needed for the place where the disease is; afterwards cauterize all around until you reach all the corruption, and none of it remains, so that everything which is corrupted be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and put on the cauterized places burned bread with oil until the burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	Afterwards apply ointments that promote flesh growth.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not grow, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery on what remains of the corrupted areas.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this mangension has sometimes been treated with medicine applied in place of fire cautery; but nevertheless fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the treatment of the medicine to be used in the section: take it according to your need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of the boils that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Very often there occurs on the feet a disease that is called "clos" according to our understanding, and it is a large swollen thing that hurts the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterization of this disease is according to two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cauterization, and cauterization with hot water.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is such that you heat the cautery to the thickness of a goose feather, and it should be made of good iron according to its measure so as to cover the nail from all sides, and there are fine edges; then put it entirely hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches the root of the nail; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to expel pus; then make a poultice of ground wild mallows with salt, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then clean the place of anointment with grease until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted outward on the body, and it often happens in hands and feet, then you must apply a cautery of hot water; and it is done in this manner: take a cane of reed or iron, or a goose feather, and put it on the nail and the althelul, that is to say warts; and place the cane so that it surrounds all around, then pour some hot water onto it, and hold your hand well, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the cane reaches the root of the nail, and the hot water can reach deep down to the root; and let the patient endure a bit of the sting of the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will be uprooted entirely from its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another until you strengthen all those that are of the body, then treat them with ointments which generate flesh.
li cure dou trembler	the treatment of trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone trembles from cold or nerves, or from quartan fever or other causes, then you should make four cauteries or four on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra; and one cautery on the foot, and one on the stomach with an olive-shaped cautery; it will stop the trembling, and hasten the health from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of smelly pus-filled boils
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes they appear on the outer part of the body as blisters or smelly pus-filled boils, which come from corrupted thick materials.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	so it is necessary at first when they appear to make a cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery of myrtle wood, of which the point should be taken up by fire, or of long aristolochia root, or a lens-shaped cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this method, and they cannot grow any further, but the excess from which they come is broken, and they are healed; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great flows of blood from the cut artery at the wound that comes to the surface, or in the incision of an abscess, or in the cautery of the limb, and similar things; and it is a very difficult thing to stop.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And still when this happens to anyone, you must hurry to put your index finger on the vein wound, and press hard so that the blood is calmed under your finger, and no drop comes out; then place in the fire olive cauterizers of various sizes small and large until they are all red; then take one, whether large or small according to the wound and the place where the artery runs through, and put the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the blood is restrained.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery fails, then quickly take another of the cauterizers that are in the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing this one after the other until the blood is stopped; and beware that you do not burn the nerve nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be easily restrained unless by one of the four ways we have mentioned: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by tightly binding with thread, or by applying medicines that have the power to stop bleeding; and it should be tied and pressed appropriately.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who administers compressing tightly with cloths or placing burning things upon, or other similar things, does not profit if the pain persists.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to someone and they have no physician or medicine present, then they should place their index finger on the vein's wound as we have said, and stretch well until it is compressed over the wound and over the vein; and they must not move it, but moisten with very cold water often so that the blood be frozen and thickened and compressed; and do this before seeking what they need of cauterization and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of the cures for wounds.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases where fire cautery or burning medicine is needed, and the qualifications and causes and substances and forms of cauterizations; and I have placed that chapter from head to foot, and I will follow the same path in this chapter so that one may find more easily what they want.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And before I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first one about cauteries, and therefore greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you do not undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come to treatments.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	such come from those who are so hated with their illness that they change easily because of the madness they find in their sickness, and from the greatness of its malice; and from these one must have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And among these there are who give their senses and say: "wait, I am cured"; and the disease is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put greater trust in your honor than in your desire, and do not open foolishly but wisely about what you are certain of, and from which you can gain praise; and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients to whom salvation is converted; and this will help you to acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, May our Lord grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if he wishes to inspire you with the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter by dividing it into sections, according to what is before in the chapter of cauterizations, that I have divided from head to foot, so that you may find more easily what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this disease often comes to children at birth, and when it is given too forceful a pull on the child's head; and sometimes it comes from an unknown cause.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease except in children, and in all those that I have seen death hastened; and for this reason it seems to me that one should not be too lazy in such cases.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child of whom the shoulder was filled with water, and the head swelled each day until it could no longer support it; and the moisture grew so much that he died, and this moisture is collected under the bone on the syphac, between the brain and the bone; and the work is such that if the moisture is between the brain and the bone, and the abscess is small, you split the head in half with a wide cut; and it should be as long as two fingers, until the moisture flows out; and see here the form of the spatumile.
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is thicker, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs you see are the seams of the head open on each side, and the fluid jumps out forcefully when you press it with your hand from the inside, and this does not rebound to you: then you must make three incisions through the head in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all the moisture out.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After extracting the incisions with cloths and powders, and put wine and oil in them, and leave it this way until the fifth day; then untie it, and treat the wound with tents and ointments, and continue to bind the head evenly, and give the patient dry food with little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another manner of incision is that you look where the swelling of the abscess appears, and the gathering of the fluid; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut then where the abscess appears, and the filling of the fluid, and make an incision according to what you are able; and beware that you do not cut the artery; and if blood flows out, such that the patient dies from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of rheumatism
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When it happens to someone a disease which is called "catarrh" in the eyes or nose, and the illness is old, and the treatment with medicine does not help, then the final treatment is cauterization along with cutting the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Then when you cut the veins, have the patient lean back their head; then rub the area with a coarse cloth until the arteries appear, then tighten the patient's neck with all the cloth; then look where the vein lies, and the places of both are behind the ears and they sit close together; then mark the points to cut, then cut one and the other with a sharp two-edged knife until the cut reaches the bone, and this should be across the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you wish, place the knife under the artery and cut above it, cutting also as two times across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, then blood sprays up continuously outward.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to feeling, then you must measure the quantity of space of three fingers, then incise and cut until bone; what needs of blood to be removed is six ounces, and perhaps a little more or less according to what the patient can suffer, and the repletion of the artery; then look at the wound: if there remains on the bone any sign of syphac, cut it so that hot abscesses do not come, then drain the wound and tie it up, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	The term "de emigrainne" seems to be a misspelling or an archaic form of "migraine." In medieval medical texts, terms might be spelled differently due to variations in language and transcription methods over time. If this is from a medieval context, it likely refers to the condition known today as migraine. However, without further context or a complete sentence, it's challenging to provide an exact translation or interpretation beyond identifying its probable meaning as "migraine.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old migraine and acute catarrh come, due to the moisture of tears and heat in the temples and old congested areas and similar things, and it is treated by methods of medical cures but all that does not help, then we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extracting them is that the patient should pull back the hairs from his temples and focus on the artery that appears in the temple, for it shows clearly by its pulsation, and is sometimes hidden more outwardly than in some people who are too cold; and if it is hidden, then the patient should tighten the neck with some cloth, then rub the area with a rough cloth, and wash the area with hot water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatula of which this is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	Then scrape the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it up to the incision, and separate it well from the tissues that are beneath on each side; and if the artery is delicate, turn it with the tip of the hook, then cut it from that part according to the quantity of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, then the sinew does not jump entirely all over.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And bleed for six ounces, down to three; and if the artery is large, then it is necessary that you tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk, so that no putrefaction comes before the healing of the wound, and bleeding occurs; then cut off the excess that is between the two ties at the same time, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a knife cautery up to the bone until the joints are cut; and this is the most difficult work, if the patient does not have fever and is of hot temperament.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cautery is help to finish the moistures: for this reason it is of greater help to the moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For the extraction of arteries, one must fill the place with old cotton and put well-made bandages on top; and when they are untied, be careful to treat with dry medicines that promote flesh growth and bandages until it is healed; and if blood flows from the artery as much as you work there, hasten to cut by cautery, or use the place of vitriol and strain at your hand so that the blood is stopped; and if you do not have this present, then put on the spot your thumb until the blood is frozen, and rinse the area with cold water until the bleeding stops, and strain it as appropriate; and what is more effective and lighter in the extraction of arteries is to cauterize the vein with this sharp cautery of two parts, but the edges should be well thickened to maintain their heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too thin, they hold less of their heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And there should be between the two knives one inch of space, and then when you have marked to incise the two places, and you put the burning iron until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two parts; and they should be separated between the two sides for it is not fully sealed by this cautery; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears of the eyes descend from the veins that are on top of the head due to heat, and medical treatment does not help, and you see the face of the patient turn red, and feel on the forehead movement as if trembling; and the eyes are thin and moist so that the hair of the eyelids fall out, and the eyelids are heated and scorched by the ardor of the tears, then this treatment is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And the ancients called it «treatment for contusion», and that is what you do at the back of the patient who has this disease, let him have the hairs on his forehead, then make III cuts on his forehead equally according to the length of the forehead; and one of the cuts should be as II fingers right in the middle of the forehead going down to the nose, and the other II on both sides above the temples, and beware of the arteries that are on both sides above the temples; and keep your hand away from the connection of the two jaws, and each wound should be the quantity of III fingers across; and prepare a piece of sponge and much cloth for wiping the blood, then pour the strong spatumile made of II parts as is its form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the cut which is next to the temple up to the second cut; and peel all the skin that is between the two cuts to the surface which is on top of the bone, then do likewise from the middle cut to the other second one, and then apply this strong spatumile.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	so place in the first cut the instrument which is called "cultellaire", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is smooth, not sharp, and this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the sharp side towards the diseased flesh of the heart, and the smooth side towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes so that the incision is continuous until it reaches what opens into the heart, and then make another in the middle cut until the other side; and then drain the blood evenly, and press the area for the drained blood; then place a wick of old cotton in each cut, and put on cloths moistened with wine and oil and egg white, and guard against hot abscesses forming; and on the third day loosen the bandage, and apply plenty of warm water, then treat it with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other treatments used to cure wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	of the realm of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When to anyone comes a sharp and usual catarrh, and you see the eyes dim and small, and weakening the sight, and the eyelids burned; and the hair falls out, and on the head there comes an acute pain, and the patient sneezes; then know by these accidents that those matters and this catarrh do not come from anywhere but many veins, and the most effective cure that there is, is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And it is that you instruct the patient to lie down with his head backward, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another on the wide temple.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begin from the incision of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision go as far as the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves in the temples that move during eating; and when the bone is uncovered, wipe all the blood with a sponge, then separate the two edges of the incision and put old cotton and flaxen threads; then bind on top cloths moistened in wine and oil, and beware of hot abscesses; when they are removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat it with drying agents that promote fleshing over.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take two parts of wheat flower, and four parts of colofonium, and make a plaster; and administer it on these wounds to quicken flesh growth.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the deafness of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	Everything that falls into the ears is one of four things: grains, or insects, or small stones or similar things such as iron; or seeds, such as beans, peas, lentils; or flowing substances such as water and oils and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When a stone or any other kind of thing that does not fit in the ear and does not grow in the ear falls into it, place the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, distill a small amount of violet oil or flaxseed oil, then proceed with extraction; and make him sneeze with condice, and plug his nostrils when the sneezing comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool; and stretch the ear upwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times pus comes out by this treatment; and if it does not come out, proceed with extraction using fine tweezers, of which the form is here described:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it comes out with the tweezers, that is good; if not, proceed with extraction using a fine needle of small gauge; and if it does not come out by this means, make a cane of iron and place the tip of the cane in the opening of the ear firmly, and plug what is around the cane with soft wax so that air cannot enter with the cane; then pull forcefully, as pus often comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in such manner, take glue from which birds take, and place some instrument that is pointed for this purpose, and put a piece of cotton around; then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it may be, and pull out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not heal from all the things that we have said, then you must hurry to split the ear so as to prevent a hot abscess and spasm; and the method of splitting is such that you first let blood from the patient’s cephalic vein according to the measure of their strength, then sit the patient between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear in the fat where it hangs; and let the cut be like a crescent until you reach the bone, then remove it as much as you can, and suck quickly with your mouth; and treat until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is grains that are inside and they swell, then administer an extraction; and if it cannot come out, then apply the spatula gently according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and to administer an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think the grains are moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces; then extract them with subtle tweezers and a suction device, as we have said, so that the extraction is light.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the case of fluid that falls into the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use sneezing first, and stuff the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And lie down on that same ear where the fluid is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps out through that, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not, then take many stones according to the length of your thumb, thin and light, and heat them somewhat in the fire; and have the patient place one or more into the opening of his ear, and jump up with one foot from another side, and strike with another stone upon the stone which is in the ear; and do not cease doing this from stone to stone until all the water comes out entirely, and thus it will come out completely; and if you wish, take some reeds, and put one end into the ear, and heat the other end with fire until the thinnest part of the reed is burned; then do again with other reeds until all the water comes out as we have said with the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the creature, if it is small in body, like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is large in body that one can feel it, then use the extraction with tweezers; and it is the easiest thing to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of yellow worms from the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the section and in the treatment of distillations, and if the treatment does not help, then you must look at the ear in the sun: if any worms appear, then pull them out with fine tweezers, and if they do not appear, then take the cane from which is the form:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And insert the finest end into the ear according to the extent of the patient's suffering, then suck hard on the entire cane; do this often until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not come out, wrap cotton around the cane as I have said for the stone; and if they do not come out forcefully as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have tested for worm occlusion, and you will find them in the treatment of distillations; and distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, whose form is as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And whether of silver or brass, narrow below at small openings and above for dripping; and to press inside the distillation with a well-made brass instrument for that purpose, and if you want use the dropper and wrap around the point properly with cotton; then throw your oil or juice in, and what you want of your medicines into the tube, and the tube should be in the ear; then pour into the dropper all the cotton, and press your hand moderately so that the oil is distilled into the ear canal; and the patient feels it inside, and let the distillation pot be heated a bit over fire before you distill into the ear; and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the obstruction of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	Some children are born who have no openings in their ears; and the same thing happens to adults due to blockage from a wound, or of matter born within the ear, and these blockages sometimes occur deep inside the ear, so one cannot see them; and sometimes it happens that the point blocks the opening, and one can see it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes deep inside, so one cannot see it, is of difficult healing in many conditions, and for the one that can be seen you must put the patient's ear to the sun; and look inside: if you see the obstruction clearly, then apply all this spatumile, of which here is the form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And let it be smooth and sharp on both sides entirely, so that it does not hurt the ear; if the obstruction is of matter born or flesh from inside the ear, then hold it with fine tweezers, and cut lightly until all the matter is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the obstruction is completely in the ear, then take a fine light scraper and warm it slightly over fire, then place it in the core of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you feel the obstruction from which the patient feels difficulty in hearing, pierce lightly, and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear; then place in the ear a plug according to the width of the opening, and anoint it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this for several days until the wound is healed, or take a plug and anoint it with rose water, and sprinkle powdered vitriol on it; and if you see the ear swollen, then you must remove the plug and replace it with another plug anointed with cerate made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then clean it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, soak a sponge and cloths in cold water, and put it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding which are in the treatment of distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the flesh of papermakers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This ailment that comes from papermakers' eyes when they are moist and then dry, you should stretch them with tweezers and brushes, and cut them out with a spatula from their roots; then put ground vitriol on the spot.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if they do not heal from this, then cauterize them with a fine lenticular cautery and the cautery after the incision is very useful; and they often recur because something remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the hail
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times, things that resemble hail in their form and hardness come upon the eyelids, and for this reason, this disease is called "hail," and it is a collection of moisture thick on the skin above and below; the treatment is such: take notice if the hail moves from one side to another, and it is easy to know; then cut it open widely, then gently peel each part, then take it with tweezers, and remove it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	if you cannot cut it without piercing a bit the skin, then do not worry about the patient; and if the incision is large, then sew it up, and treat it until it heals; and if it is small, then do nothing forcefully, for the ointments will restore it soon and promote flesh growth.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the wax is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, then invert the paper, and extend the wax with tweezers, and cut and press from both sides; and if the paper is moved away by the incision, it does not matter; and when the wax is cut, wash the eye with salt water, and clean the place of that which clogs until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a fat that clogs the upper part of the eye membranes, and this happens more to children than to other people, and it greatly troubles their eyes, causing them to have catarrh in the mornings, and they cannot look at the sun's light because tears rush to their eyes; therefore, they lie on their faces immediately and sleep thus, and their eyelashes under their eyebrows are moist as the swelling and appearance are covered with exinach that appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the place with your fingers and feel the extraneous matter between.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of the work is that the patient puts his head in your lap; and then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity that contains extraneous matter from each part, then place it on him; and press with your hands from one side and the other so that the extraneous matter be gathered within the circle; then cut in the middle of the moisture with a sharp spatula a slit as wide, and let it not be larger than the wound you make at the vein incision; and cut the skin thoroughly until you reach the extraneous matter; and in many dispositions comes extraneous matter from the slit, according to the form of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract it then with a piece of cloth wrapped between your fingers against the wind, and turn your hand to right and left until it is spread out; and be careful not to insert it into the crack, that you do not come all the way to the pupil, that you do not injure it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the extraneous matter does not open at the beginning of the crack, then slightly enlarge the crack until it opens; then extract it as we have said, then wet cloths in oil and water, and place them on the area, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And there are such people who grind ash and put it on to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat until it is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes to the place hot, then treat it with soothing plasters until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	the hairs of the eyelids
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When hairs other than those natural grow in the eyelids and are irritated, they harm the eyes and cause various ailments such as habitual tears and softening of the eyelids and leukoma, to the point that it is a cause for the destruction of the eyes; and the treatment follows four methods: by cautery with fire together, or by medicine according to what was said before in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and suturing or by cantharides, as I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You must put the head of the patient in your hand, then turn the eyelid towards your left hand; if it turns, that is good; if not, insert a needle with thread over it; and do this near the edge where the hair grows next to these hairs, pull the thread across all the eyelid, and turn it to the razor; then cut in the part below the eyelid, below the fixed hairs, along the entire speculum from the large tear duct to the small one; then extract the thread, and place a small tent of cotton and cloth under the eyelid, then apply on top of the eyelid a figure like an interlace, as the leaf of myrtle, and always it is necessary that the figure be according to the amount you wish to lift the eyelid which is divided into all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And thus there are some who need to cut a large quantity of the eyelid according to how soft the eyelid is; then make an incision all over the spatule on the two lines that you have marked, and start from the large larmier down to the small; and let one of the cuts be close to the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the lancet into one of the two angles of the area, then peel it entirely; then join the two edges with a stitch of a needle with an entire thread of fine wool, and wipe the blood, and remove the excess threads on both eyelids with some sticky substances if you wish to do so; and if not, then don’t care about it, then leave the stitch and the threads for three or four days; then treat the wound without stitches using drying and binding things, because the eyelid rises at the healing of the wound and its joining together, but the stitch is more harmful (as the ancients said), and this work is without fear; and there is another method: which is to mark the eyelid with a shape that is as if it were a myrtle leaf, just like we have described, three inches apart according to the form that is here.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then cut what protrudes above the small forces equally according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the tweezers, and the thing is not equal, then take a needle with thread, and insert it into the figure; and place one thread beside the large eyelid, and the other thread beside the small, and bring together between your fingers the threads equally; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin where you have marked, as we have recounted, then bring together the two lips of the wound by stitching, and treat it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar soothing ointments; and sometimes happens that the hairs of the eyelid are turned inward: then you must use what we have said about the incision; but the stitching in one and the other is more intricate.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of the canes is according to this form: you must turn the parchment and cut inside as I have said, then make two canes by art, and two subtle threads as long as the parchment and as wide as the spatula is; then cut at both ends where you hold the threads; then join one and the other subtly on that which rises above the parchment of the eye, and extract the two canes from both parts properly; leave it thus for some days, and the skin which was constrained will die, dry up, and shed, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays, then cut it with force, then treat it until it is healed; and when the wound is sealed, and the parchment is lifted, the hairs will no longer grow; and this is the form of the two canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The work is such that you take a fine needle and put the silk thread through it, thin and fine; then bring together the shoulders and tie one to the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long; then arrange in the container another fine silk thread briefly, and tie the head of the thread; then have the patient's head in your hand; and let it be near the sun so that the work is illuminated, for this is delicate and minute work; then push the needle to the root of the hair attached all through the container, and make it pierce into the paper quickly until you pull it over the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the container, and put in the container that hair, if there are one or two or three or more; then withdraw your hand so that the hairs come out of the container onto the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the shaft is treated and the hair does not come out with it, you will pull the shaft from below along all the thread that you have arranged there, until the shaft comes out of the hole above and you see it with your eye; then you will pull the shaft and the thread, close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair burns in its place and flesh grows over; and if the hair is small, add one long hair from natural hair, and raise it along with that which you leave there, until it is raised and then lift it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the pus from the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the pus comes to the eye, there are two ways it can occur: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens by the suddenness of a wound, or of a cutting, or of a cautery, and by similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the method of the work in it is that you split that suture, separate its lips, and put linen tents inside, and leave it until it is healed; and it does not befit you to use in its treatment things that dry and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the disease returns worse than before; but use softening things, such as fenugreek; and the decoction of water or ale and flaxseed should be cooked, and ointments of aquilon melted in any of the oils, and wrap a tent around it, and cure it thus.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your care is that you take heed that it does not heal according to the form it was before; and this work which we have spoken of is nothing but remedies for this disease so that it does not return in the form it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes into the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is beneath is truly called "axacrati," and it is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wounds and cuts and cautery and similar things; and the way of working with it is that you take a needle, in which there is double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left eyelid to the right so that the thread comes out two fingers away from the flesh; then stretch the flesh above all the needle, and cut it one span wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the shape of the membrane returns according to what is appropriate, it’s good; if not, take a scraper and put it in the split, and turn the membrane, and make two cuts on the inside of the membrane; and let the ends of the two cuts be at the two angles of the incision that you have made, and make one angle so that when they are joined together, the shape is like the shape of a letter called «I griesche»; then remove that flesh according to the amount its sides are sharp below, from what surrounds the membrane, then join the two separated parts, and sew them with a thread of wool; then cure it with what we have said about softening medicines, and bandages, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a split or a suture or a cautery, then you must make a full cut below the hairs of the membranes, as mentioned above; then separate between the two edges of a bandage, as I have said; and the work should be done according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and wise masters devise ingeniously with all their power how they might return the shape to its natural form; and the patient himself, according to what is needed for the work and instruments in various positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	of the suddenness of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this welding happens to men in such a way that the paper above is soldered with the white of the eye, and cannot move or perform its natural works, then you must put the point of a razor under the paper, and lift it up; and stretch it with pincers, until you cut off what is hard with a subtle spatula, which is not too sharp nor too cutting, so that the patient cannot bear if the sharp spatula wounds the eye; and let your incision, with which you peel off that assembly, be lightly, so that the paper returns according to its natural form; and heal all of that assembly, and sometimes make salty water in the eye, and lift it up with sweet water, and with collyrium; then place between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and put on the eye wool soaked in egg white; and after the third day use the collyrium and things to solder until he is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the nail is according to two manners: one is nervous and similar to a hard surface, and another which is not nervous, but resembles white moisture frozen, which when one touches it with iron and tries to pare it with tweezers, one cannot; and both appearances begin near the large tear duct, and grow little by little until they cover all the sight and all the light and the movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of the incision is that the patient places his head in your hand, then you work the eyes; and lift the paper in your hand, then cut the nail with tweezers of small padding, and extend it above; then take a needle, and put horsehair or ox hair or cow hair, and strong thread; and double the tip of the needle a little and insert it into the nail, and pierce through all the needle, and tie the nail with a thread and stretch it above, and peel off all the hair on the side of the nail next to the pupil and sew the hair up to the top, then cut the remainder at the root of the tear duct using all the spatula finely and with small force, and leave the natural flesh or tear duct so that the usual flow of tears does not come through the incision; sometimes extend the nail only by an inch and with thread, as we have said; then peel it off completely with a fine spatula as described here is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And take care that the spatula does not touch the flesh membrane and break it, and that the pupil is not pierced; and after the incision throw into the eye a bit of pounded silkworm excrement, and of collyrium made of litharge, and leave it until the next day; then clean it with what is necessary until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not fleshy, and you cannot insert the needle, and the forceps cannot enter, this kind of nail resemblance is often treated with medicines; and they grow as I have described in the section, and if you want to cut it, you work on the patient's eye using the spatula slightly sharp according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And lift the nail gently from above, and if you see that it does not thin out and the inflammation presses in, then distill into the eye with your mouth a collyrium made of litharge and red collyrium and pounded silkworm excrement, and plug the eye until the next day; then begin the work again according to this same method, until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If anything is not contrary in the eye, such as a warm abscess, then leave it and first treat the warm abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh from the eyelid harms the eye by great damage, then suspend it with a needle, and cut off part of it but not all, so that tears do not come; then instill in the eye red collyrium which is made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows on the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	In the eyes of some men, red flesh sometimes grows and covers the pupil, pressing on the papillae and turning them inward, resembling a pomegranate blossom; and the work is such that the patient places his head in your hand, then you operate on the eyes, and cut all that flesh with suitable needles for this purpose, holding it firmly; then cut off the first layer of flesh, going all the way to the scraper until the end, taking care not to injure the eye during the work; and let the incision be from the spatula we have mentioned in the incision of the nail and the small forces with which you remove the seal, as is shown after this chapter; and when the incision is completed and all the flesh removed, then apply the oil of burnt glass or instill red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines, and place a cotton cover on the eye tied with egg white, so that it does not become inflamed; and if anything remains and warm blood flows, and you fear an abscess may occur, leave the eye alone and treat the inflammation with soothing remedies for hot abscesses; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do when flesh is attached in the eye by this appearance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nonetheless you must lighten the treatment of each weak eye by the natural way; and by the accidental way, in iron work; and do not put your hand into any of these works until you see that this limb can bear this work.
des voines des eulz	the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Bloodshot veins that cover the eye, and hinder the sight's work and weaken the eye all day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	It is then necessary first to examine if the eye in which the bloodshot occurs is strong and has no other disease besides the bloodshot; then proceed in this manner: instruct the patient to place his head on your lap, then suspend those veins for a whole ounce according to your wisdom, and let the ounces be doubled as per this method:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two oncinies by degrees in the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	then when you coil those subtle veins with force, and wipe the blood hour after another, until you see those veins move out of the eye; and be careful not to injure the eye with the points of the spatula, and do this work at midday in front of the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that you do not cut outside of those veins; and when you have done this, distill into the eye green and red collyria to corrupt what remains of the sebel.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot collect all of this in that hour, then make a plaster on the eye of things that ease the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is eased and you are sure of a hot abscess, then begin again according to this method that is before until it is healed; and this is the form of the force:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The doctors call it "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and hot medicinal fire as I have said before, and it is not healed, then it is necessary that you cut into the abscess where it should be opened, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, then scrape it all with this instrument which has the following form; and it is called "aspre chief," and it should be made of iron with a sharp end, and pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place it on the corrupted part of the bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a little until you know that the corruption is scraped off; and do this several times, then restore the area with drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the sinus is sealed and flesh grows there, and the body of the vein is sealed, and remains this way for forty days, and it does not renew or become abscessed, and no adverse incident occurs, know that it is healed; if not, then there is no other method but to return the fistula to the opening of the sinus in this manner: which is to uncover the bone a second time by iron and with medicinal cauterization, and when it is uncovered you take a forceps in this form, and let the head of the iron be three-angled, and the shaft be tapered up to the top as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	then place it on the bone near the tear duct, and keep your hand a little away from the eye, then turn the forceps completely until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it by the wind that comes out if he holds his hand over his sinus; and afterwards restore the area with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and hardens in the place, the matter goes to the sinus; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the discharge from the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eye is fully and entirely open, and there comes no obstruction to the nerve, nor diminishment, then you should bind the patient; then heal it, then apply leeches or a suction cup without pricking to draw out, then put on the eye a bandage made of acacia and aloes and frankincense and storax, and then strain the eye, and cover it with plasters and cloths; and the method of the cloths is that you take cloths quite soft, and double each one four times, and then place one over another according to the amount the eye needs; then tightly bind above with a strong bandage, and repeat the suction cups without pricking; then remove the suction cups and leave the eye bound day and night, and if the bandages soften, then you must strain it very much; then remove the binding after the day and night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good; if not; then restart the plasters and cloths and the binding and the suction cups until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Of the breaking of woven tissue
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions come in the woven tissue, it then opens up, and fibers come out like resin grains, which is astonishing to see; then if you see it cut, the work is such that you push a needle into the root of the part below all the way to the top part, then insert another needle where there is double thread from the tear edge; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its position; then cut the place of the double thread and tie one part of the tissue around, and bind it well, then remove the needle and put on the eye moistened wool in an egg white; and leave it until the threads fall with the tissue, then treat the eye with things that comfort until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restrained by the tissue on both sides of a circle of cloth until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eye shows great appearance, then pierce it with a subtle spatula that comes from the perfection of the eye, and draw the white moisture down and into the eye, and enter thus quickly; then extract until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the white of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing more than white that gathers in the eye, resembling descending water, but it is not water; and the manner of its appearance is such that you make the patient sit on a prepared and straight seat, then take his head between your two hands, and move it until you see the white come up to your eyes; then let it stay fixed, and do not let it descend and break the light, so that the patient can see things as usual; and if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if the descent of the white is not prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	seat the patient between your hands, then take the thin spatula and cut into the corneal layer with the continuation of the conjunctive with the cornea and the crown, until the pus comes out; and when it has come out, distill into the eye hot water mixed with honey, or water in which fenugreek has been boiled and honey, then cure it with another treatment until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	eye waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have seen the similarities of the waters in the division, and what is needed for piercing; then work according to the health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you seat the patient between your crossed hands, away from sunlight, and bind his healthy eye tightly; then place the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eye is left, or in your right hand if the eye is right; then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument called "almagda," or in your left hand if the eye is right; then put the tip of the instrument near the cornea by the thickness of a hair at that gland of the eye to the part of the lesser lachrymator, then thrust the instrument called "almagda" forcefully, and turn your hand until it pierces into the gland of the eye, and feel when almagda comes to the empty space; and it is necessary that the measure of the way of almagda be exactly the same as the measurement from the pupil to the end of the iris; and this is the cornea of the eye; you will see the bone through the paper because of the clarity of the corneal layer, and then place the instrument until it reaches where the water is, then squeeze it under one way after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the aqueous humor is now dislodged, the patient sees it in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After rest for a little while, if the aqueous humor rises through the second channel, apply force with the instrument, and when it is fixed and does not rise, then extract the almagda gently by turning your hand little by little; and then put in a bit of clear gem essence, and lift the eye from within.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then apply to the eye pledgets or wool soaked in rose oil and egg white, and bind with the healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those of our time, apply ground cumin mixed with egg white.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter into the eye because of its hardness, for there are such men who have very hard eyes, then you must take the instrument which is called "alberit", of which here is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And pierce then the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but make the place subtle, then put in almagda, as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient a comfortable sleep, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place; and let him be free from all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and bind him according to his condition until the third day; then release him in that same dark room, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then rebind him until the seventh day; and it is not appropriate for you to do this at the time of the treatment or after the incision now, but it is necessary for you to lighten this, because the liquid rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	When abscesses come with heat, that you unbind the eye before the seventh day, and address it with what soothes abscess; and when it is calmed, then unbind the vision and place on his face an eyeshade to cover for some days, and be now in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then gradually leave the house little by little, and return to his usual activities; and know that no disciple should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from Yemen, who told us that in his country they make pierced almagda, which one sucks the water out of, but nevertheless I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read about it in ancient books; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagda, for those who do not understand them see them; and they are of proper brass:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the front end of this same fineness be and the back end in three sharp angles.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh on the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes flesh is born on the nose in various forms, some of which resemble scorpions with many legs; and there are those where the flesh is engraved in a fox-colored hue, and also has smooth flesh of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	In that case of these smooth flesh, which is not engraved, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun; then work his nostrils, apply the ointment to that flesh, and pull it hard; then cut what you can sustain with a fine sharp spatula on one side until you know that all the flesh has been removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains something that one cannot cut, then open it all with subtle and light instruments so that nothing remains; and if the pus is abundant or the abscess hot, aid it as necessary; and if they are malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize until the pus is exhausted and all the matter removed, then apply a cool and moist dressing with water or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the nose bleeds and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healing; and if moisture does not emerge properly, know that there is dead matter in the bone above which the instruments cannot reach to cut: then you must insert a linen thread somewhat thick, and tie it by knots of about an inch or less apart; and have the patient put the end of the thread into his nostril as far as possible, and pull on it gently until it comes through inside the mouth; and many times children in schools do this, and it is easy for one who wants to do it; then hold the end that comes out of the nostril with one hand, and the other end that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and untie the knots one after another as they are drawn through.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this until you know that the gnats have corrupted that flesh, then pull out the thread, wipe the blood, and soak the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrode everything remaining of the flesh; and then place a linen plug in the nose for some days until it is healed, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purify the head, into which one distills oils and medicines into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a tube, and guide it thus; and if you wish, make a closed tube, and let the instrument be filled to purify the head; and have a handle at the top to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh on the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Many times a disease called "telul" arises on the tip of the nose and grows rapidly until it becomes a large visible thing to look at; and for this reason you should cut it at the beginning, remove all of it, then apply a cautery or burning medicine to the area; and if you delay cutting it until it is large, beware if it is hard, of a fleshy color, and has little sensation: do not touch it with iron because it is an infected abscess, for when one cuts into it sometimes great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is soft to the touch, not of a fleshy color, and you see that it can be entirely cut out, then cleanse the patient and cut it without fear, and treat the area with drying and binding substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nose is cut and sewn.
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when continuations come in one of these cartilaginous works, it profits little, for in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary then when this happens to someone, if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then join the two lips with a seam, then treat it until it heals; and if the lips are already separated on one side and the other, you must skin all the parts of their surface until they heal, then bring together the two lips with a seam, and bind them tightly, sprinkle dragon's blood powder and ground incense over them; and place a piece of plaster made from wax or another binding plaster over the powders, and leave it until it falls off by itself, then treat it with ointment until it heals.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of the suture is that you assemble the wound: either with needles, as we have said in the suturing of the belly; or with thread, as I have made known to you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	To some men, hard abscesses occur inside the lips, resembling grains of wheat, and smaller and larger; then you must turn the lips, and cut on each knot, and take them with forceps and cut in each part; then apply the area after the incision with ground vitriol until the blood is stanched; and then wash it with oil, and treat the area with dry substances until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the gum tissue
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times a flesh grows on the gums that the ancients call «albulus»; you must hold it with tongs and cut it at its root, and let the pus or blood flow; then apply ground vitriol or other binding and drying powders to the site; if this flesh returns after cutting, which often happens, cut it a second time and cauterize it: it will not return after the cautery; these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
des sordens	of the foul smells
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes teeth are gathered at the head, inside the mouth between the gums, with rough and ugly shells; and sometimes the teeth are black, yellow, and greenish, until corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth become stinking; you must make the patient sit between your hands, and his head should be in your lap, and scrape the teeth or the shells that appear, until there is nothing left; and thus do with the blackness and greenness, and yellowness and other stains, until they are clean; if what is there can be removed at first attempt, it is good; if not, repeat again on the second day and third, until you have scraped everything off; know that teeth require various forms of instruments for scraping, according to what the work shows, because the rasps used to scrape the teeth have different shapes than those used between the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When you treat the tooth for its pain, you should delay drawing it as long as you can, because one must not do so; for it is a very high substance up to now that there is no excuse for scraping.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is forced to have it drawn, you must be certain of the painful tooth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Often the pain deceives the patient, and they believe it is in the healthy tooth, and have the good tooth drawn; yet the pain does not leave because of this, until the bad one is extracted, as we have already wanted to show these wise men; and when you are certain of the painful tooth, you must cut around the tooth for a full i. spatium wide to protect the gums on all sides; then move it with your hands or with fine pliers little by little until it is well loosened, then firmly secure the pliers; and let the patient's head be in your lap between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extract the tooth straight without breaking, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and insert it inside on each side lightly, and move it as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is perforated and decayed, it is necessary that you fill it with cloths where the holes are; and then grasp it subtly with tongs so that it does not break when extracting; and it is necessary to work very wisely around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be well wary that you do not break it and leave a part behind, which may return to cause the patient, by the cunning of the root, greater pains than before.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And beware that you do not act as the ignorant surgeons do, who by their haste and recklessness sometimes break the tooth, and do not administer what we have recounted; but they sometimes cause great illness through the extraction of roots that remain or because of the tooth they break, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is drawn, wash the area with wine or oil and salt; and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, apply vitriol powder to the area; and if this does not work, then cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, with which one first moves the teeth, should have long points and thick handles, so that they do not bend when you pull the tooth; and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be of thick members so that they do not bend easily, and let them be well made of iron, and toothed to hold the bones.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains outside, then you must put on the place cotton moistened with butter for 1 day or 2.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the area is softened, then insert the forceps which are called "algefri," which resemble the beak of a bird; and they are made inside like a file, and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not come out completely with these forceps, then you must uncover all the flesh around the root and apply the instrument which is called "althali," that is to say, a chisel, of which this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out because of this, it is good; if not, then use all the instruments, whose forms come after here:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And one uses this instrument which has two prongs, whose form is given here:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other iron tools which are mentioned in the section on teeth, and of this instrument that resembles large tongs, whose form is given here:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let this instrument be strong so that it cannot break, and know that there are many dental instruments; and likewise other tools which are not counted; and the wise subtle masters find their own tool by themselves according to what their work and the diseases show them, for there are such diseases where the ancients did not teach any instrument due to diversity; and if one breaks a tooth or of other bones where it could, then seek out the appropriate instruments that I have told you about, and help yourself with gestures, whose forms are given here:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be thick and well holding to hold the bone, so it does not escape, but can hold and remove it; and then restore the place with appropriate medicines, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, and it is small, scrape it all with this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear not according to the natural body and their form is ugly, especially in unmarried women, then you must know if the tooth has come out after the other tooth and is not in its proper place, and cannot be smoothed or filed: then cut it; and if it is loose with the tooth, take this instrument whose form is here, which resembles a small beak, and let it be of iron and very sharp at the tip.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And cut it little by little over several days because of the hardness of the tooth, and so as not to move the others, and if it appears that you can file it, then file it with a file like the one whose form is here:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and it is also like the file with which we make needles; and file the tooth bit by bit little by little lightly, so that it does not move until it falls; then smooth it at the end entirely with a sharpener, and if the tooth is too sharp and it wounds the tongue, then you must file down the roughness until it is even, so that it does not wound the tongue nor corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the teeth ache
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	When the front teeth ache, either by percussion or by falling, and the patient cannot press on what they eat without it falling out, and you have treated them with constricting medicines, but that does not work; then you must bind them with a gold thread, for silver threads turn green and rot, but gold never changes; and let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin according to the space between the teeth; and if you wish to align the teeth, take the thread and insert it double between the two healthy teeth, then place the fingers between the loose teeth, whether there is one or more, until you reach wisely up to the healthy tooth on the other side; then repeat the binding until you reach the part where you started, and withdraw your hand subtly and wisely so that it does not move at all; and let the binding be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then cut the thread of the tooth with some pliers, and assemble them, and place them between the healthy teeth, and set it so that it does not injure the tongue; and then leave it as tight as it can stay, and if it loosens or the thread breaks, tighten it with another thread; it will remain and serve in this way for all its time, and this is the shape of the tooth and the form of the alignment of the two healthy teeth, and the two bad ones, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, it is reset in its place, fresh to fresh, as we have said; and no one should intervene who is not wise and skilled, and sometimes a form of a cow's bone tooth is made, and it is placed where the defect is, and it is tightened as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cut the ligament of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	Sometimes this ligament that comes from under the tongue is natural, which one is born with; or due to a healed wound injury; and the work is such that you operate on the patient's mouth, and have his head in your lap, and lift the tongue; then cut the nervous ligament widely, so that the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or knot, and it is due to a healed wound, put in the uncinus and cut widely this ligament; and be careful that the incision is not too deep for the artery beneath; and when you have done, lift the area with rose water and basil, or cold water, then place under the tongue a linen tent; and the patient should remove it every night so the wound does not heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if bleeding occurs, put ground vitriol on the spot; and if the blood does not stop, then cauterize it with a lentigo-cautery, which is good for this; then treat it with another treatment until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it of a pus color or black or hard, such that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is a chancre; and if it declines into blennorrhea, and there is moisture, then throw on an unguent, and split it with a fine spatula, and free it from one side to another; and if the blood does not stop because of your work, put ground vitriol on until it is stanched, then return to your work until you draw out all the matter; then lift the place with oil and salt, and treat it with other treatments until it heals.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes there come into the throat swellings which are called "godath", and they are properly called the two almonds, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, and if they are not healed, then take care: if it is a hard abscess of little sense and of flesh color, then do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if it is red and the root is large, then do not touch it with iron, also for the flow of blood; but leave it until it turns black, and then you will divide it, or it will break by itself; and if it is of a white color returning, and the root is thin, then have the instrument ready to cut, but first check if the abscess heat subsides and calms down.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his shoulders be in your hands, and work his mouth and take hold of his tongue between your hands, and press the tongue down with all the instrument, which is the form here; and it should be of silver or bronze as fine as knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	When you press the tongue with all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the lancet and stick it in the almond, and draw upward as much as you can; and draw some thing from the cloth with it, then cut it with the instrument, which is the form here, that looks like forceps; and the ends are curved, and one end touches the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, then cut it with tongs, of which here is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And let it be sharp on one side and blunt on the other; and when you have cut one of the almonds, then cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with warm water, and water and salt, and if bleeding occurs, then gargle the patient with water in which pomegranate peels or myrtle leaves are boiled, or similar things, until the blood is stopped; then cure it until it is healed; and sometimes other abscesses grow in the throat besides the two almonds, so cut them in the same way as the two almonds alike.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman who had an abscess grown inside her throat, that is to say an abscess of the little sense; and it had nearly closed off the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe because the passage was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and she would have died if she had remained thus for one day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess had risen so high that it had forced two fingers through the two nostrils.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I hastened then quickly, and placed one awl in one nostril, then pulled it out, bringing a large portion of the bow with it; then I did the same on the other side of the nose, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards, I placed the awl in the abscesses and cut off part of them, and only a little blood came out; and thus was cleared the conduit of the woman's throat, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I did not stop cutting into that abscess for a long time; and the abscess grew again, filling the place I had emptied, until it became very large; then I incised it and cauterized it inside the throat: thus it remained without growing; and I left those parts, and know not what God did with her after me.
de l’uve	of the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When rheum descends to the grape, and it is swollen and elongated, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is below large and round, it is called "grape".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the hot abscesses are calmed, and they are subtle, then you must cut it off; and those which are roundly gathered and are not elongated; and if they are blood-colored or of a pus color or black, then you must avoid making an incision on them.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it according to the way I have said, of its blennorrhea and length, you make the patient sit before the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier; then insert the needle into the eye, and pull it down, and cut it with one of the two instruments I mentioned in the incision of the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you must not cut beyond the excess that is over the natural limit; for if you cut more, you harm the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and treat it until it heals.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient fears the cutting, then you must use ingenuity in the cautery of their fearful senses.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is sharp water.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And it is that the patient puts his head in your hand, and then you press his tongue with the instrument we have mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and mix with hot strong water so that it is not too thick nor too thin; and use the application of this instrument, of which here is the form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it should have a hair on the head where one puts the medicine, like the spoon of a ladle, and put the instrument with all the medicine on the eye; and let the patient lie on their side so that saliva and phlegm run out of his mouth from the medicine inside, so that it does not go down to the throat and harm him; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it against the eye for half an hour, until you see it withered and the stinging of the medicine is calmed; and if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, and soak the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument with all the cotton into the canal above, so that the cotton burns on the eye; do this often until the cautery is perfect, then leave it to dry, and it will fall off after four or five days. And if you need to start the cautery with medicine again, then restart it, and after the cautery, wipe around the eye with cotton wrapped in butter, and clean what is around from the medicine; and let it be rinsed with cold water, and treated with gargles until he is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is more than the incision and cautery; if it is treated by fumigation in this manner, take calamus and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and avronne and similar herbs, and gather them all or some of them in a pot, and put oil in it, and make it boil; and the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and in the middle of the pot have the instrument arranged according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And let it be of silver or bronze, and let one of the shoulders be placed in the mouth of the patient so that the vapor rises to the ear through the tube, until the ear is mortified; after which you repeat this often until the ear dries out, and beware not to do this at the beginning of the hot abscess's appearance, for many things happen; and do not perform this except when the hot abscess is declining.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put inside the head an eggshell so that the patient’s mouth is not too hot; for the eggshell does not let the steam make the mouth heavy, and it is a good treatment together with health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times a bone or fish spine, or something else, gets stuck in the throat; therefore, you should draw out what you can see and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument so that you can move the object; and for what is not visible and hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps the swallowed object will come out through vomiting; or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a lettuce root, or a morsel of dry bread; and tie a string to the sponge and then swallow it; and when it reaches the place, it will stick, and then you pull out; and if it does not come out by what we have said, take the instrument of plonc according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instruments be curved at the head so that they may more easily enter the throat, and have the head lifted up; and beware that you do not touch the epiglote, for fear it does not come out, nor push the bone inside; and moving is better if the patient puts in the instrument, because it moves where the thing is burned; so she pushes down, or pulls with all the instrument equally, until it comes out.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the phlegm from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	Sometimes the phlegm is treated with medicine, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines; and when this does not help, then look into the patient's throat in the sunlight, after which you press their tongue with the instrument that I have told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the blood, then draw it all with a small hook or with fine tweezers that are suitable for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, then take a hairy cord, and insert it into the patient's throat, then place a heated iron on the end of the cord, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient sweats with water all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	then take a full glass of cold water, and work it in the mouth, and throw it down without swallowing, and move it around with your hand often; and as soon as the blood tastes the water, it falls.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not fall as we have said, then sub-fumigate the patient with asafoetida, with the instrument I have mentioned for the fumigation of the grape; do this many times, for it will fall without delay.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the method of fumigation is that you take a pot in which there are live coals, and cover it with a lid pierced in the middle, and through that hole be the head of the instrument; then throw your fumigation in, and the patient puts the end of the cane in his mouth, and closes the mouth so that no smoke escapes but goes to the sinew; and the sinew will now fall out, and if it does not fall, start the fumigation again several times; and let the patient suffer thirst, eat salty and hot things, and drink no water; then it will be necessary for it to come out by this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument with which one pulls out the sinew is such that when it can be seen, it resembles curved tongs to easily enter the throat; and it has the appearance of a bird's beak, and should have the roughness of a file so that what it grasps, it cannot let go; and you see here its form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapter of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	Many kinds of abscesses exist, according to what the memory comes after one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and size; and it is in two ways, one of which is in its own appearance, and from what it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for the places where they are on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	for the abscess of the head is different from that of the fundament, and the abscess of the fleshly part is different from that which comes in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And there are abscesses that one should not pierce until the pus is ripe according to its completion; and there are such that must be pierced when they are hard, and do not die according to their completion, such as abscesses that are near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near joints, and one lets them grow around, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint may be corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	For when the abscess is near the principal limb, and if you delay perforation until it is dead, it will harm the principal limb; if it is near the fundament, then pierce it before it becomes dead; and it is not right to pierce a hard abscess without completed digestion, except for that which is near the fundament, so that it does not grow perfect, and extends inward, and a fistula comes about; and cannot heal in a long term.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you must know the time for perforating an abscess that has matured according to completion, and this is when the pain is calmed, and the departure of fever, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and the weakening and sharpening at the head of the abscess, and the other signs; and you must make the perforation sit in the lowest part of the abscess, and where it appears most movable; and let the perforation be along the length of the body, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all similar places where there is no pus.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those that bend, according to that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the fleshy area, it is better that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed after complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before then, the body of the venom from it will be prolonged, and it is full of much filth; and by chance the lips and the depths of it may harden.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And there is some abscess that should be pierced according to the size of the body, according to what the limb requires.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it is necessary that you make small punctures in small abscesses; and in large abscesses, large openings, and many slits according to the likeness of the size of the abscess; and there are such abscesses where it is necessary to shave the area, and cut; when it has become like a flag and is softened, it is necessary to do as one does with buboes: and there are those that are slit in three angles, and there are those which are cut like the leaf of myrtle, like abscesses of the armpits; and there are those where a round incision is made, and other cuts and similar operations.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who have no head, such as superficial abscesses, you must pierce them completely; and when the abscess is large, and it has collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus at that hour, but a part of it; then plug the abscess until the next day, then draw some more; do this several times in small amounts, until all the pus comes out; likewise if the patient is of weak strength, or pregnant women, or young children, or old decrepit men.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the sneezing sometimes occurs with the discharge of pus, which might accidentally cause the death of the patient, and you would not be aware of it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid therefore this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, wipe the wound, and check if the opening of the abscess is small; and if it is a clean cut, then apply strips of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, you must put a strip in each one so that they come together; and if you have cut away part of the skin from the abscess and have spread it around, you must fill it with old cotton or linen shavings without moisture, and bind it until the third day; then remove it, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs in your work, then apply cold and light water, and wet the cloth, and place it on the bleeding area multiple times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bleeding persists, then apply treatment and care, and the powders that I have mentioned in various places in this book, and if it is during winter, and the place where the abscess is located is very nervous, you should put on cloths wet with warm wine and oil; and if it is during summer, and the area is fleshy, you should put on cloths wet with water and oil, or with cold wine and oil, up to the third day, as we have said; and then lance the abscess, wipe it, and treat it as appropriate until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this must be universally understood in the treatment of abscesses: I have told you how to proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	It seems like there might be a typo or an incomplete phrase in your request. If you meant "des sors" (Old French for "lots" or "sorts"), it refers to the different kinds or sorts of something. Could you please provide more context or clarify so I can assist you better?
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	When small abscesses come from the head, and they are kinds of things that are in webs, like the down of a chicken, and there are many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fatty and of such which have moisture like pus; and there are some which are hard and stony to cut, and there is no doubt if the artery does not hinder.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the waist is that you test with all the instrument which is called "intromissory", from which the form comes after, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, then you cut it open on top of the long part.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is emptied, then scrape without leaving anything of the skin that contains this moisture, for it returns immediately if something is left; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present; if not, in water and salt, and apply to the wound, and leave it until the next day; and what remains from the night will heal.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then repeat the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that nothing remains from the night; then treat the wound with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds fat, cut it according to this form, from the long side; and throw your lancets in, and strip it from all sides, and put all your care into drawing out the coat where it lies; and if the artery opposes you, do what I have told you after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And do the same for the abscess if it is stony, and in cutting and cleaning as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And when you cut into the stony and moist abscess, it is lighter, for they are full of blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And there are some of these abscesses on the head that have no moisture, and of these I cut an abscess on the head of an old woman; and found the abscess like a dull stone, rough and white, and could not be broken; and if one had struck it, they would have made as much of a wound as with a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming to the head, whether those that come to the top of children's heads and at the roots of the ears, the opening should always be in the lowest position, for pus to flow out; and treat them as is appropriate.
des scrophules	Of the scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Often this abscess occurs on the neck, and under the jawbones, and in the armpits, and sometimes they appear elsewhere on the body, and they are large, and cluster together.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly within its coat, like a knot and an abscess on the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofulas are various.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are such things that contain moisture, and there are malignant ones that do not wish to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In that one which you see has a good disposition to the touch, and resembles the color of the flesh, and is silent on all sides and does not affect the nerves of the neck or the artery or the conduit, and is not deep; then you should cut it from above, and peel it on each side, and stretch the two lips of the wound with hooks if you need them, as we have said in abscesses of the head; and draw it out little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and let not the spatula be sharp or cutting, so your hand does not slip, and do not go too far, lest you cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you cut the vein or artery, and this does not allow you to work, then put in the wound vitriol ground up, or some powders that stop blood, and bind the wound; and leave it until the abscess is calmed down, and the wound softens, and begins to heal.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the blood is stopped, then return to your work until you complete it; then search for any small scrofula that remains, cut them and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, then you should not cut the scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall off without harm; then apply the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut all the scrofula, then it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, since there remains no excess due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	and it is necessary that you pay attention to cut the root of it, and pull hard, and sew it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofulas that hold excess, pierce where it appears to decay; and pierce it thus as the one previously mentioned, hanging down, then apply tents with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleansed, treat it with ointments promoting flesh growth until it heals.
de squinance	of dislocation
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke of the shaping of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those who have dislocation, it is necessary that the cut of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be removed; and if aid is not given by this means, because all the veins and the phlegm of the patient are affected by abscesses that are hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the two tonsils.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the phlegm, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to avoid the loss that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It is then necessary, when we wish to cut the epiglote, that we cut it below three circles or four with a small crosswise cut, between the two circles or by the quantity of the surface cut, not in the cartilage; and this place is suitable for the section of the epiglote where there is no flesh, and the vessels are long inside.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, then he must stretch the skin of the throat to its full inch, then cut until he comes to the windpipe; and avoid the blood vessels, if you see anything, and then cut the surface, as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the phlegm from the windpipe that flows out through the place which is broken, and by the loss of voice; and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed in which one suspects strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound of the throat, and sew it all alone without the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says that one should not do this until the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged to be near death, and the defect is in the windpipe.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then one cuts the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is saved from death; and for this reason the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed, and it passes in three or four days. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and clean it until it was cleaned; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a young lady took a knife and stuck it in her throat, cutting part of the windpipe; and I was called to cure her, and found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound and found the blood that had come out of it, and I knew that she had not cut a vein or artery but only the throat, and air was escaping through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hurried and sewed up the wound, and treated it until it was healed; and nothing happened to the young lady except that she became hoarse of voice, and later returned to her normal state; for this reason I say that there should be no fear in suturing the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called "throat hernia," and it is a large abscess of the color of rust, and it occurs mostly in women; and it comes in two ways: natural, and accidental; the natural one has no sign.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accidental one comes in two ways, of which one is similar to fatty growths, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from arterial flux; and there is fear, and it is not appropriate to work with fire except in the small one, and you prove and search throughout the insertion: if you find it like a fat knot, and it cannot enter any vein, then cut it as you would cut growths, and extract all its covering, if there is any; and thoroughly examine everything, and treat it as necessary until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	from us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many methods from us exist, of which I will speak all the similarities; and now it is fitting that I say all the difference that exists between wound and discharge.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that discharge is heat and fever lasting until the boiling has passed, and putrefaction is completed; then the fever and heat rest.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	With the wound, there is no heat, no fever, no pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the flesh, and begins like a pustule, and becomes large; and there are according to two similarities, dry or moist, and very much in color as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to treat the wound, that you test and inquire first about all the instrument which is called "introducer", according to what its form will come in the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the method of inquiring into abscesses of the nose is that you take the moistest place you find in the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little until you know that the instrument has pierced the core; then remove the introducer, and be careful in this so it does not hurt.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If running moisture comes out, whatever color it has, cut it open as I have said for other abscesses; and if no moisture comes after the introducer, know that it is fatty, so then cut it in a cross shape, grasp it with tweezers, and gently peel it from each side and watch the area where it lies so you can draw it out clean with the wound; and if you cannot draw it out clean, then draw it out in pieces so nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if anything remains there, the swelling returns many times; and if a little remains and pains you, apply some corrosive powders to the wound, hold the wound tight, put hot soothing things on it for an abscess, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed; and if the swelling is large, sew the two edges of the wound together, and treat it with what promotes flesh growth.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the pulsating vein is against you or otherwise hinders, hurry and apply ground vitriol to it, leave it there for two days or three until the wound rots, and stop the boiling of the blood; then return copper to what remains of the swelling.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of the inserted instruments, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small; and there are three squares that are called "albaret," and one that is called "breb," and they come in three types: large, medium, and small, to encircle fistula abscesses; and they are also like the needles used to sew wounds, and they are made of brass, iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are more effective, and black lead is better tested for encircling fistula sores; and they come in three types: large, medium, and small, according to the width of the openings.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of the lancets are very similar, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and there are lancets that have two curves in three ways also; and there are lancets that have three curves, and they are also in three ways; and there are lancets that have two curves, and lancets with only one curve, and they are in three ways; and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The heads of these that we cut with are sharp, and there are some that do not cut strongly from one side, which are used to peel the skin, so as not to cut the vein or nerve; and these intramissory ones are placed in sleeves, so that the patient does not feel them when opening abscesses; and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium, as you see; and they are only used in fleshy areas, such as legs, arms, breasts, and similar places; and sometimes another small instrument is made, resembling flax shavings, according to this form, with which blood is stopped.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is placed at times in the place that heals with cutting of the veins, and the arteries, and at times according to this large form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	At times the breasts of some men swell when they begin to corrupt, so that they seem like women's breasts; and they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to cure them must shave according to this form from this line 2 up to 8:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	then peel off the fat, and apply medicine to the wound that softens flesh, then sew together the two lips of the wound, and treat it until it is healed; and if the breast sags down and is softened due to its size as happens with women, then cut it open in two sections above, by two similar incisions; so that one is connected to the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line 2 up to line 8; then peel off the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and administer what we have said about sewing and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully made because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive ointment; and leave it until it consumes the remaining fat, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of the abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come under the armpits are kinds of hard scrofula with edges, and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. up to line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus that is in the abscess has been drained, apply the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess is of the appearance of scrofula, then cut it as we have said in the incisions for scrofula, and if the wound emits pus, then apply cauterization as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is ruptured, and the skin above it is sealed, abscesses often result; and the same happens with swollen veins and abscesses. One can recognize this for the artery when the abscess is long in appearance; and when you feel it with your hands, you sense a constriction. And when it is from the vein, there appears to be a softer swelling beneath; and it is foolish to cut into this abscess, especially when it is under bones and joints and at the neck and in many other places, and it is very dangerous.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is necessary then to avoid the iron cure, and one that is at the head should also be avoided, and in those who have an artery swelling, make a cut above the skin on the long part; then work the incision with lancets, and carefully separate the artery from the tissues until it is exposed; then place a needle underneath, and pierce it through to the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread in two places according to what I have taught you in extracting the two arteries that are in the temples; then puncture the area between the two ties with an introducer until the blood comes out which is inside, and the abscess be relieved; then administer the treatment that causes bleeding until the tie falls off; then treat it with ointments suitable for this, until it heals; and if the abscess is due to the size of the vein, you should stain your hand as much as possible from the abscess to all the skin, then place a needle under the area that you hold in your hand, and pierce it, and have a double thread so that you pull it through to the other side; then tie the abscess as I have said, or tie one of two parts at both ends with the two heads of the thread; and if you fear that the threads will not come out, place another needle completely under the entire abscess from the incision of the first needle and bind the threads in four places; then cut the abscess until all excess comes out, then remove any superfluous tissue and leave what is tied; then put on a wet cloth soaked in wine and oil, then administer treatments with bandages and ointments until it heals.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As abscesses come in the artery and vein, so do abscesses come to nerves when they are wounded, or by too much labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more often in the shoulders and hands and in all places where there are joints, and it is grievous abscesses, and its color resembles the color of the flesh, and it exists in many positions without pain; and when one presses strongly on it, then the patient feels pain, and it is not entirely within the body but beneath the skin; and it moves well from all sides, and does not go forward or backward, nor below nor above, and those that are in joints should not be cut with iron: perhaps contraction might occur; and those that are on the head or forehead, cut the skin with a scalpel.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, hold it with some forceps, and cut it at its root; and if it is large, suspend it with an onion, peel it, then remove it and sew up the wound with a stitch, and care for it until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	large hanging boils
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Sometimes it happens in the abdomen and not elsewhere, which is a disease called "fungus" by similarity to them, and its roots are subtle, and the heads are large; and there are small ones and very large ones; and I saw one person who had two in their abdomen that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had fine roots, and were easily split, and a moist substance would flow out immediately.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I copied them and found in one eighteen ounces weighing, and in the other six and a half, and the work in the incision is such that you look if the patient is moist, and the color of the joint is white and moist and of subtle root; then cut with a broad spatula, and have present the cautery by fire.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For when cutting comes many great flows of blood, and if the blood overcomes you, hasten then to cauterize; and if you see the patient frightened and fearful of the iron incision, take a well-made linen thread, bind the joint as we have said, and leave it for two days; then release it, and do not cease from binding the linen thread until you cut the joint, and it falls off by itself without effort; and if the roots are large, there is fear in cutting especially for the abdomen, but you can well cut half of it, then cauterize so that it does not return; then treat the wound, and be careful not to cut the skin which is of reddish color and has little sensation and milky appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess with a sore, and I will come to the treatment of sores afterward.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the boil is about to burst.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the boil comes from a wound cautery or a tear in the skin, and it is on the abdomen where some boils occur, as happens in other ruptures, or from blood flowing from veins or arteries as mentioned before, or from windiness; and if it is due to a rupture in the skin and from the discharge of the boil, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light matter without pain, and opens with various discharges.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the discharge from the intestines, then it is more varied, and when you press it with your fingers, it springs back and then returns, and sometimes it becomes hard, and enlarges greatly at the entrance of the bath and with strong exertion.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, not constraining; and if it is due to blood, then the abscess opens with these signs, being large and hard, and is fixed according to a quantity; and if it is due to windiness, then it is soft to touch, and the work is such that you observe whether the appearance is due to arterial blood or venous blood or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	And it is necessary that you leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear in it, as I have said in the chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the boil, then it is necessary that you instruct the patient to lie on their back and extend themselves straight, then apply a poultice all around the swelling; then command them to lie between your hands, then go around the area where you have applied the poultice with all the salve, then stretch half of the abscess above with a large uncine; then tie it around with a strong thread or a rope of strong silk firmly, and let the knot of the tie be loose; then work on the stretched part of the abscess over the tie, and put your index finger in, and seek the intestine; if you find it caught by the tie, untie it, and bring the intestine out from the belly; and if you find a boil, take it with an uncine and cut off the excess; and if the artery or vein obstructs you, go around carefully, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two strong threads in them, and insert the two needles crosswise where you have made the puncture; then draw the abscess out from four points over the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the area until it rots, and the dead flesh falls off by itself; or cut it when it has become thin and rotten, then cure the area as necessary, and close the abscess as we have said; and draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the area as needed, and sew up the area.
dou chancre	of the ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division the likenesses of ulcers, and how one must work with medicines, and how one should avoid the iron cure; and we say the ulcer appears in the marrow, and great caution is needed in the treatment, and the ancients said that when ulcers are in a place where they can be scraped off like ulcers which are on breasts, and in the thigh, and in similar places, and it must all be removed when it is at the beginning; and when it is large and old, then it does not befit you to approach it, for I have never healed any of them; nor has anyone ever healed them before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the work, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile; then make him sweat if there is evident excess, then prepare the patient well for the procedure; then apply your lancets to the ulcer, and scrape all around, and remove it from all sides without leaving anything; and let the blood flow freely, and press the area with your hand or some object, and if the bleeding makes you oppose the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize until the blood is stopped; then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have already said in the division the varieties of dropsy, and in what manner the accumulation of water is formed, and the signs of each variety, and the treatment which is done by medicines, and that which is treated by iron: it is only edema; and one should not touch with iron these two varieties: that is to know, tympanites and hydropsarche, for it is a deadly thing; then when you treat this variety of dropsy which is called "edema" with medicines, and the treatment does not help, look if the patient is weak, or if he has another disease besides dropsy, such as dysentery and diarrhea and similar things; do not touch with iron for there is danger; and if you see the patient of strong vigor, and he does not have any other disease than just dropsy, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you must act thus: lift the patient up straight on your hands, and the assistants press the belly pushing the water to the lowest part of the body, then take the spathmite spine according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let it be cutting of two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And the point, and all the while it should not be so penetrating that it can reach the intestine when you insert it, nor can it injure; then look if the dropsy is inclined towards the intestines: then you must make three cuts directly below on the thumb side; and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, your cut should be to the left of the button three times; and if it is for jaundice, it should be to the right, and it should not be that the patient lies on the cut so that the superfluities do not flow to that weak area; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, insert it, and lift your hand with all the intervening space between the skin and surface as when flaying to the quantity of a finger or around; then pierce the surface until the intervening space comes to the empty place, which is where the water lies, then draw it out forcefully, and insert this instrument of which here is the form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a thin silver chain, and it is made of tin or light brass, and has at the lower part one small hole; and on the side of one part, three holes; and two from another part, and one from another; and the head is cut like a quill, and this is the form of the incision with which the scribes cut the quill:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	At the top is the alembic, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it now rises with the instrument; then empty half or a third of it, for if you empty more than is appropriate at this time, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit in the arm, or he falls unconscious, or approaches death; but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the patient's strength indicate, and their pulse; then remove the instrument and retain the water, which is now retained for the plug that stops the hole on top, as I have mentioned, that you pierce in this manner; then restart the instrument another day if you see the patient enduring this, and draw a small quantity of water; do this for several days, and be careful not to follow until only a little water remains.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the patient, and leave much water in him, cure it with burial or hot sand, and sweat much or bathe in the sun, and abstain from drinking; and cure it with drying medicines until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	about the constriction of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born who have no opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary to pierce it immediately with a very fine instrument throughout the area in the following manner:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	then put in the hole a fine plug of wool, and tie it and keep it thus for three days or four, and when he wishes to urinate, remove the plug, let him urinate, and then replace it; and perhaps none is needed, because the urine that comes out does not leave it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	He whose hole is small is treated with the plug of wool, as we have said, so it will widen.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the hole in its proper place are defective, for some are born with the hole at the tip of the penis, so they cannot urinate unless they lift their penis up; and they cannot impregnate because the semen cannot reach the uterus, and this is a serious illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method of the work is that the patient lies often on his back, then stretches the head of the rod and cuts it as well as the length of a feather, so that the hole falls in the middle, as it should be; and beware of blood flow which comes many times, and if it happens, stop it with what stops blood, and treat the wound until he is healed.
des pustules de la verge	pustules of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times this albathe comes on the penis, and it is an ugly appearance of flesh; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; so you must take them with a fine lancet, cut and clean all of them, then put moist cotton with Egyptian ointment on; then treat it with diafinicon ointment until he is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the albathe is malignant, of putrid color and stinking, then you must apply a cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	When you have cut it, and if the albathe is at the end of the penis, and part of it is inside the skin and part outside, then you must remove the albathe that is inside first; and when it is sealed, then treat the part outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it all together, the head of the penis is not secure and may be pierced, causing blackening and corruption in the penis and the testicles; then you must remove all that is blackened and corrupted, then apply a poultice of honey and flour made from pomegranate bark and figs, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding occurs, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery helps in two conditions together: namely, bleeding and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then you must insert a tube made of bronze into the urethra of the penis, and have the patient urinate through it; and when the foreskin is adhered to the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or there is an injury or abscess, then you should peel it with an instrument bit by bit until the tissues are loosened, and the head of the penis is freed from all sides; and if it is difficult to separate this, then you must cut into it slightly at the tip of the penis and the skin with a spatula; then gently separate between them, and put a fine linen cloth moistened in cold water, so that it does not adhere again.
de la circoncision	of the circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not the separation of continuity like other wounds; nevertheless, when we perform this work of our own will, and especially for children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the least harmful to healing.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not practice circumcision on their children, for it is not used in their law, and we have nothing more than what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the majority of masters and surgeons who performed circumcision around the I dal, and with forceps, and with a new scalpel; the skin would bleed because there are two layers, and by chance, one might cut the upper layer and leave the lower layer intact.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the recovery is cut short, and the pain is doubled, and in the cleaning of the nail bed the tip of the member is not secure; and in the cleaning of the nail by chance the iron slips, and ruins the work, and often they are born thus without needing cleaning and I have wanted it so.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the cleaning that is done with force on all the thread of the ligament I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the force cuts just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, you cut evenly all the time; but let the thread be tightly wound around the skin; and the method of the first work is such that you make the child think, if it understands, that you are only tying the thread around the penis just once, then give it hope in every way you can; then hold it straight between your hands, and place the forceps between your hands or under your feet so the child does not see them nor any of the instruments; then put your hand on the penis and blow at the root, and pull up until the head of the penis is inside; then clean well the dirt that has gathered there, then tie the area you signed with a double thread, then tie below the pouch to another ligature; and hold it with two hands by the second tying at the pouch and the index finger, and cut between the two ligatures, then lift the root up quickly and pull the head of the penis; then let the blood flow little by little, for this is the best; and put powder on top and on top of the powder a cloth glued with an egg white tempered with rose water, cooked well and fresh oil rose, and leave it there until the next day, and treat it with another treatment until it heals.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of forces for mundification is this: the two shoulders should be held and should be cutting, and the shoulders should also be as large as the sleeve equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error of mundification is when the pus inside flows at the incision; then you must extend it with your nail, unless the wound causes an abscess; and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, then hold it with forceps, and then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it lasts more than three days, and the area beneath the penis is swollen, then wait until the abscess has cooled down, and lightly scrape it; cut it as much as you can move it, and be careful of the part of the penis, for this will not harm it.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat then the area of hot things with a powder wound, as we have said in the treatise on powders, and if one cuts from the heart beyond measure, and it goes above, it will do no harm; treat it then, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	of the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	Retention of urine is due to obstruction by stones, or congealed blood, or feces, or dead flesh, or similar things, which we have discussed in the division; and if the urine is not released, and you see that the retention is caused by a stone located in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent over his knees; and their feet should be placed on their back, extending their belly from the upper part towards the back, and restrain the patient tightly as much as they can; and thus the neck of the bladder is constrained to expel the stone upwards, which releases the urine; and if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instrument called "catheter," of which this is the form: and let it be of fine thin silver, light like a bird's feather; and let the tube be one and a half palms long, and be fine at the head.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the method of urine extraction is that you take a double thread, and tie at the head a ball of wool or cotton, and insert the end of the thread inside the catheter; and cut off the excess wool so it reaches the tip of the catheter, then anoint the catheter with oil or butter and egg white, and have the patient sit on a chair, and wet his bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water; then gently insert the catheter into the penis until it comes to the root of the penis, then fold the penis up towards the belly; then push the catheter forward until it reaches the bladder, and the patient will feel it come to the empty place, and this is not done according to this order forcefully because the passage through which it goes is twisted; then stretch the thread little by little with the ball of wool, and the urine follows the wool, then pull out forcefully, and make the urine flow; and repeat the catheter insertion until the bladder is emptied, and the patient feels relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When blood comes into the bladder or putrefaction is gathered there, and you see aqueous and medicinal substances being distilled in it, then make use of all the instrument which is called "clepsydra", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed and has three openings: two on one side, and one on the other, as you see; and the end should be such that the medicine can well plug the penis without addition, so that one may draw out moisture and push when needed; and when you wish to inject your medicines into the bladder, put the head of the container in the moisture, and draw with the tube inside; you will draw the moisture into the container, and then push the tube back in forcefully; thus, the moisture will enter and come into the bladder now, so that the patient feels it; and this is the form of the subtle clyster with which one performs an enema on the bladder: it is here:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or gold, and the head is higher; and below at the groin where the ligaments fall; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture in which you wish to use for enema into the bladder, then tie between the two groins with one strong double thread, and warm that moisture over fire; then put the head of the enema in the penis, then press your hand on the bladder so all the moisture comes out gradually until the patient feels that this moisture has come to the bladder; and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it roundly around; then put strong thread through these holes, then gather the circle as one gathers a lid, and put inside what you wish with oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you have done with the bladder, pressing your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have said before in the division the types of stone, and the extraction along with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone lodged in the kidneys, and all the signs, and in which stone one should operate by cutting; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder often occurs more frequently with children, and it is a sign that the urine jumps from the bladder resembling fine urine; and gravel appears, and irritates the patient's penis, and can happen many times, and then stiffens; and much of this jumping affects the foundations; and the healing of children is light until they are four years old, and it is very severe in the elderly, and it is moderate for those in middle age, those who are between youth and old age; and the cure is lighter for those who have a large stone than for those who have a small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with aclyster, to draw out all the bile that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it sometimes hinders seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, and lift him up and move him downward so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it leaves its higher position; then make him sit between your hands placed together, and his hands should be below his thighs so that the bladder is entirely inclined downward; then seek it and touch inside; if you feel the stone in the space, now hasten to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not fall at the full touch, moisten your index finger with oil from your left hand if the patient is elderly, or your middle finger if the patient is a fully grown youth; and put it in his anus, and seek the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, grasp it near the neck of the bladder; then press down on your finger, and push it out where you wish to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instructs the attendant to press the bladder with his hand, and commands him to stretch out the right hand the testicles upwards, and with the left hand lift the skin that is beneath the testicles in the part where the belt goes; then he inserts the sharp spatumile, of which this is the form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And make an incision between that which is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but to the left side; and let it be straight on the stone, and your hands should be close to the anus, and let the cut be across so that it is wide at the front, and inside narrow according to the size of the stone, not too large; perhaps it presses so much with the hand that is at the anus that it comes out easily without effort; and know that there are such stones that have angles and edges: they are difficult to remove; and there are some that are smooth, resembling a kernel, and round, from which the extraction is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	For those who have angles and edges, make the incision larger; and if it does not work, then you must press with tongs that are like a file at the end, to better grasp the stone so that it does not escape; or place under it an instrument subtly curved at the end; and if you cannot force it this way, then enlarge the pouch opening, and if the flesh is tough, then soak it in vitriol; and if there is more than one stone, then put the largest first into the neck of the bladder, cut above, then draw out forcefully, and the smaller ones afterward if there are several.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then it must be sawed, and make a larger incision.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or the urine comes out immediately because the wound cannot heal; but nevertheless exert yourself in pulling it out, or breaking it with tongs, until you pull it out in pieces; and when you have completed your work, then apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it tightly, and place over it a cloth moistened in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess; then turn the patient on his back, and do not loosen the binding until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen it, wash the area very well with oil and water, then treat it with ointment diaphoretic and basilicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if hot abscesses and corrosions come to the wound and clotted blood in the bladder, which causes urine retention conceived in such a way as to leave without the urine: then put your finger in the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains there, it will corrupt the bladder and destroy it; then cleanse the wound with water and ash and salt, and aid it in every way you know until it is healed; and it is necessary that all the hours when you treat it, you bind the two thighs together, and apply the medicines to the area.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small and it is in the duct of the penis, stuck inside, and the urine cannot pass; then you cure it as I said before, that you cut it many times, so one is excused from the cutting through this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proved it thus.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take an iron bar according to this form and let it have three pointed ends fixed in one handle:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it cannot move back into the bladder; then insert the bar into the penis gently until it reaches the stone; and turn the bar in your hand against the stone little by little, until you can pierce the other side of the stone; urine will soon flow, then press your hand on what remains of the stone inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	So it is broken at once, and jumps out with the urine, and the patient is cured; and if you cannot do this because of something that prevents it, then tie a thread under the stone and another above, then cut the penis where the stone is between the two threads, then pull it out forcefully, and untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood in the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It sometimes happens that a stone is formed in women, and if it occurs even once, the cure is difficult, and it is prevented for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a knowledgeable woman who will reveal herself to midwives, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman well skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is more towards perfection than the stone of the man, therefore it must make a deeper cut, and great fear there is. And if necessity summons to this, then you must take a midwife well knowing, and hardly one finds her, and if you do not find one, then choose a clever male physician; and present him with a wise bailiff in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command that she do what you command for the investigation of the stone; and look very well if the woman is a virgin: then must she put her finger at the bottom and seek the stone; and if she finds it, then constrain it under her finger, and recommend that she put her finger to the patient's con and search and press her left hand strongly on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, then it is necessary that she move it bit by bit from the entrance of the bladder down, until it comes to the root of the thigh; then cut into the stone at the root of the thigh towards the middle of the groin, where it seems properly arranged, and feel the stone in that part; and do not move her finger above or below the stone, and let the incision be small at first; then place the awl in the incision, if you feel the stone enlarge the wound until the stone can come out easily, and know that there are many kinds of stones: to know, small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and which have edges.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	and know the similarities to understand the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the blood overcomes you, then put vitriol powder in the place and hold it for an hour until the bleeding is stopped; then return to your work, until the stone is extracted, and use the instruments I have told you of for extracting stones from men to help you in your work; and if the blood overcomes you, and it is an artery that has been cut, then put the powder on the place and bind with cloths and bandages, and do not start again this, and leave the stone and do not treat it, lest by chance the patient might die; then heal the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the swelling has decreased, then return to your work until the stone is extracted.
de hernie carnouse	of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Aquous ramus is nothing other than an assembly of moisture or white syfac, which is below the heart of the testicles that contains the egg; and it is called "syfac," and sometimes it is properly in the webbing of the egg, so one thinks it is another egg; and this is the skin of the testicle between the white syfac that we have mentioned; and this does not happen if the pouch is not there.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramus is due to the weakness that comes to the testicles, and that material is spread.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the testicles, and this moisture has many colors: it can be inclining to yellow, or without red, or black, or white aqueous, and this happens more often; and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is in the white syfac that we have mentioned, then the abscesses are hard, the pouch long like the shape of an egg, and the testicles do not appear, because they are surrounded by moisture entirely.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if there is moisture in the membrane of the boil, then the abscess is hard with part of the yolk, and because of this, one thinks it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white surface, then it can be felt well; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, then test throughout the entire insertion square, from which the form is as mentioned before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the insertion, judge of what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we treat it with iron, the patient should be anesthetized according to our ability and the fullness of his body; then he lies on his back, on something slightly raised, and put a lot of cloths underneath him; then sit on his left side, and command the assistant to sit on the right, and extend the instrument to one of the two sides of the scrotal area; then take the heated spatula, and cut the skin of the scrotum from the middle down to near the base, and let the incision be straight while separating the scrotal skin up to the white surface, and peel it carefully according to our ability; then puncture the full fluid-filled sac with a large opening, and drain all the liquid, then place your probes, and stretch the sac upward; do not touch the testicles but only the sac; cut everything in pieces as well on its side delicately, otherwise if you don’t cut it carefully enough, the liquid will return; and if the yolk bursts during your work, put it back in place when you have completed the work of the sac; then sew the two sides of the scrotal area with one stitch, then treat as other wounds until healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, then you must tie the vessels that are suspensory, fearing the downward flow of blood; then cut off the testicle at its entire suspension, and extract the egg, and cure it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the fluid is gathered in two parts together, know that these are two branches; then cut off the other part as you have done to the first equally, then wipe the blood, and put in the wound wool moistened with rose oil; and put over it another wool moistened with wine and oil, and place it on both testicles, and put over that double cloths, and bind it all together according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths, and fill them with shredded wool according to this appearance and let them be sewn together at the waist of the breeches, and one from the shoulder should reach from the fundament to the back, and the other to the part of the groin; and the other two ends on the two thighs, and let all the binding be gathered in the loop of the breech; and sometimes this branch is treated with cautery instead of iron cutting, and you take a subtle knife cautery, and cut the skin of the testicles, and heat it as we have said, so that the white surface which contains the fluid is uncovered; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that surface with the points, and peel it with this subtle hot cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And cut it in all ways that you can, until you strengthen everything; and be careful that the fire does not touch the eye; and know that this work is more secure; and take care of blood flow, and shorten the work of cutting; and if anything opposes you, whether a warm abscess or blood flow or something else, then treat what opposes you according to what was said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to endure this work because of its horror, then advise perforation as I tell you, and it is that when you are well certain by the signs we have said that aqueous matter is there, then make the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess at the part below all the thickness wide, and place the perforation of the long body; and let the holes be large so that all the water flows out freely; then put cotton on the spot, and bind it, and leave for the remaining water to flow out, then treat until the wound is healed; and if the white cloth does not allow the water to come out through the mouth of the wound, you must insert a quill or the instrument used to draw water from dropsical people, whose form was mentioned earlier; and enlarge the opening of the wound, and know that the water returns and gathers after about six months or so around, and when it is gathered as before, thus will the patient spend his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	Know that in the section of this branch there is fear in many dispositions, which is why it seems better to leave it alone; and I will tell you the work and the similarities of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many abscesses come to the body, and especially to the testicles; and this is a matter of much concern.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is known by an abundance of acid and watery substances that spread to the testicles, or from a blow; and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; and there is no pain found, and it is a severe abscess; and perhaps some severe abscesses are fearful and stony, and of a flame color, and sometimes come from a knot in an artery, or from swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is by an artery, it is known by the arrangement of a hot abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it does not befit that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	He who is affected by a vein swelling is known by its appearance upon touching with the fingers, and one can properly perform the incision on this similarity, and on other parts; and it is that you cut the core of the testicles, then the egg rises up, and draw out the force from the white part, and release the suspensory ligament from all around the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already swollen with these new parts, then you must draw out the egg and cut it; and if it is airy on the surface or within the vessels, you must release all of that tissue and cut it roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the flesh is at the back part, then you must cut it all away and extract the egg, just as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, then apply the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a membrane resembling a boil, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient suffers greatly when walking; and the treatment for this disease is as fearful as the one mentioned before, yet we will still tell you the procedure for it according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	You must make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then place the suspensory of the testicles down to your hands, covering all the vessels close to the penis, and hold them firmly by the master parts, and stretch them out fully; then cut with a broad cutting scalpel across the middle part the vessels until they are uncovered, and then peel from both sides as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in temples; then insert a needle with double thread, and tie it at the first place where the vein is coming, and tie again at the other end; then cut straight through the middle according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moisture; then treat the wound as others when one uses bowe, so that no vessel falls which nourish one of the testicles; for by this there comes no harm, and if all vessels have a vein, it is necessary to tie off the testicles at all the vessels; so that the egg does not lose its nutrition due to cutting of the vessels, dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the thigh
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The occurrence of this condition is due to the cut that comes in the thigh, or the extension on the belly in the area of the groin, causing the intestines to descend from that rupture into one of the testicles; and this rupture can be either in the thigh itself or in its extension, and these two types of hernia arise from causes such as blows, jumping, wrestling, lifting heavy weights, and similar things; and the sign when it is an extension of the thigh is that it happens gradually over a long period of time and does not come suddenly; and the swelling is even up to its full extent because the thigh compresses the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the sign is when it is from the cut of the thigh, that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the swelling appears varied under the skin nearby, and this is due to the protrusion of the intestines and the body beyond the thigh.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the hernias descend with the intestines, and are held there, causing great pain to the patient, especially when they are pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron cures there is fear, therefore one must avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the method of the work is that you instruct the patient to keep the intestines inside with his hand in the wound if he can enter it; then place pressure on his neck between your hands, and lift the legs; then stretch the abdomen upwards, and cut all the skin from the scrotum lengthwise; then insert hooks into the lower part of the waist according to what you need to open the wound, and they should be such that the pus can come out; then peel off the surface beneath the scrotal skin until the hard white surface is completely exposed; then put your index finger in what follows the testicle, between the white surface under the egg skin and the second layer of skin, and separate what is behind the egg and between the second layer of skin; and move with your right hand inside the abdomen of the scrotum, and lift the hard white surface upwards with your left hand, and raise the egg towards the waist; then command the assistant to stretch the egg upwards and untie what is around behind the bandage; feel with your fingers if there is any intestine wrapped in the hard white surface, and if you find anything, place it inside the abdomen beneath; then take a needle with thick thread made of ten threads, and insert it into the back part of the skin, which is after the scrotal skin; below the waist, cut off the visible ends of the threads so that there are four threads left; then arrange them one on top of another in the shape of a cross, and tie the skin tightly with two strong knots as we have said it is beneath the scrotal skin; wrap the threads around the stitches firmly with two knots so that none of the vessels that nourish cannot enter inside, so no hot abscess can form; then place another knot according to the first long stitch by two fingers length, and after these two knots leave a large space of one finger from the surface beneath the scrotum's skin; then follow all around according to the roundness that the egg bears; then cut in the part below the scrotal skin until it is smooth, and apply ointment as we have said earlier; then administer moistened woolen cloth with oil, place it on the wounds, and apply the bandage as we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white surface that we have mentioned is cauterized after the incision, due to fear of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this often happens, and let the ligament be until it falls off by itself; and if it delays in falling, it should be soaked with hot water, and apply what we have said, until it falls; then treat the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of fleshly hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I have never seen anyone who would dare to perform the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is done like the branch which is together with the vine, in such a manner that you bind the vessels after cutting slightly underneath; then cut in the middle, and treat the abscess of what is worked on until the vessels fall out; and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes rupture occurs in the bowels, as we have said, and the area opens up; and none of the intestines should hang down to the groin, and if they do hang down, it is bad, and repairs happen continuously; and still, if it stays too long at this point, the wound grows or the sphacelus enlarges until the intestines hang down; and this happens due to the stretching of the sphacelus which is in the bowels, as we have said, for it stretches out, then softens and swells up the area and opens up; and the treatment is by cautery, as we have previously said; and sometimes it is treated with iron in this way: and that is when the patient lies down on their back between your hands, then cut the swollen part of the rupture according to a length of three fingers; and then remove the sphacelus which is under the skin that follows, then take the rod and put it over the visible area of the sphacelus; and press it perfectly against the abdomen, then sew up the two visible areas of the sphacelus at the top of the rod, sewing one and the other; then remove the top of the rod, and do not cut any part of the sphacelus nor stretch the eye or anything else, as I have made known to you in the treatment for the prolapse of the intestines; then treat it with the treatment for wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the fibers, then dress and treat the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The suture is tight, and there is no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is lighter in this place, and closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Often the skin of the testicles becomes softened in some men because the flesh inside is softened, and it is clear to see; and it is necessary, when one wants to treat it, that the patient lies on his back, and cut the softened skin over the natural skin; then bring together the two lips with a suture, and if you wish, sew first the excess of the softened skin with three or four firm sutures; then cut between the sutures, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed, and remove the thread.
dou chastrement	from the chaste one
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Know that chastisements are scorned in our law, and for this reason it would please me not to speak of it in this book; and it is not necessary except for two reasons: the first is that doctors should know how to respond when asked, and know the treatment; and the second is because we often need the chaste ones of some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say then that castrations are done in two ways: either by attraction, or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the one that we do by attraction, we make the animal sit in hot water until the testicles are softened and hanging; then take them in your hand, until they retract and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	For the castration of the animal: you must paint the beast, and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie up the suspensory ligament, and cut on each egg once, when you have properly skinned them; and leave some of the surface and the fine surface that is on the vessels; and this method of castration is milder than that which is done by traction, because in traction something of the testicles may remain by chance, by which the beast desires lust; then treat the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	about hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphroditism occurs in two ways in humans: one is when between the two testicles there appears something like the structure of a woman's genitalia, where there may be hair, and sometimes it also expels urine.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And another manner is in women, and it is on the wrist also like a rod and two coins.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the treatment for men and women is that you cut off all the attached parts, and treat them like other wounds; in the second manner, for men whose urine jumps through the skin of the testicles, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	of the tension
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Tentigene is a part attached to the natural area, so that it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	You should dye the excess of the tentigene to your hand or with needles, and cut it lightly; do not go too deep, so that bleeding does not occur, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed; and for another part that grows at the mouth of the womb, and use it, and perhaps it becomes hard, and it resembles a horn, and for this reason the ancients called it the "horn sickness.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	So you must cut it as we have said about the tendon, and treat it until it is healed.
de erratique	erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the opening is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental due to illness that has come about; or it is caused by thick skin or thin or thick membranes, and formed perfectly in the middle, sides, below, or wherever; and it prevents conception and childbirth, and sometimes menstruation; and knowledge of this is through examination.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the swelling appears close, you should seek it with your hands or a probe.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is of the subtle spleen and it is near the two thighs, hurry up, and do this: put your two index fingers together, and let the woman be on her back, spreading her legs; then extend the two thighs well, so that the subtle spleen becomes round and over the swellings; then take wool, and anoint it with oil, and place it on the spot, and have the woman lie with a man each day, so that she cannot become pregnant.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the spleen is hard and thick, then you must shave it with a spatula shaped like a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the swelling is of new flesh, then suspend it with a lancet and cut it; and use blood-stanching medicines, such as quicksilver, dragon's blood, incense, all mixed with egg white; then apply a broad bandage to keep the wound from closing; and thus do this for a long time, and dress it with a linen cloth; then continue other treatments until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when flesh grows in the wound, it must be cut according to this method, unless there are infected abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an infected abscess that is in the wound, one should not touch it with iron.
des emorroides	hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins from which blood flows habitually, and when hemorrhoids become old, they turn black; and we have said in the division their similarities and signs, and I will say here those that receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and blackened areas, when they are fully in the wound and do not protrude to be felt, should not be treated with iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the maw, which one can feel, are those whom one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Then you must put the woman in a cold house, then extend the altar with tongs and cut it at its roots, then sprinkle medicines that stop blood, such as aloes and dragon's blood and frankincense, and similar things; then place her feet to the wall for an hour, then immerse her in cold water; and if bleeding comes, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peel and galls and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and lard, and make a plaster on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, make him apply leeches to the back and breasts without piercing; then take wool, and moisten it in plantain juice or in elderberry juice with old wine, and apply it to the area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess rests, clean the area with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough head, so it must be cut as I have said for the tumor; and then clean it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	of the abscesses of the jaws
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscesses occur in the jaws, such as ulcers and stone abscesses and herpes and thrush and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the classification.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It is necessary then that I say in this treatise the hot abscess which comes on the jaw, which is not one of the abscesses gathered by the bow; and if you wish to know the work of iron, look whether the abscess is sharp at the beginning of its arrival, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Then do not hasten to pierce, but let it die down until the pain is calmed; and then make the patient sit on a chair, and have two small chairs where he leans, and rests on his back and brings his feet together behind the leg; and let his thighs be spread apart, and place his arms under his knees, and bind them well with a good binding; then turn the bail towards the right side, and bring the instrument used to work the mouth of the jaw, from which comes the form hereafter; and it is necessary that when you bring this instrument, you first fix a rod in to know the depth of the jaw, so that what enters inside the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and that it does not hurt the patient; and if the instrument is larger, then cover the depth of the jaw with cloths, so that the instrument does not distress him; and it must be that he places the tip of the instrument above, and that he taints the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess is open, and it is cut with a soft hand, one must cut at the head, to the spatule edge; and when the bowel is empty, then you should put in the wound tents moistened in rose oil, or in dried green oil; and place the tent far from the wound into the marrow's depth, and put on top of the marrow and on the swelling clean wool moistened in water or where mallows are cooked; then treat after two days with anointing suitable for this, until it is healed; and sometimes one lifts the marrow and the wound by a catheter of water and honey, and then with water or roots of lilies and long Solomon's seal cooked; then return to the anointing.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound has penetrated into the marrow, then you must be careful not to use hot iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	It is necessary first for the midwife to recognize the signs of natural childbirth, and these signs are when you see the woman pressing down, and desires to smell the air: then the child hastens to come out forcefully; then you know that this childbirth follows the natural order, and it comes out head first, and the afterbirth with it; and when you see these signs, then you should gently press her belly so that the child comes out quickly; for when it comes up head first, the afterbirth comes with it, and the mother is cleansed of her excesses by proper cleansing; and those who come out otherwise do not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For sometimes it comes out on its feet, and the body or the shoulder or the hands come first, or it comes out belly first, or buttocks first, and by chance is turned on its neck, and in other bad positions; therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skilled in these matters, and beware of error and deceit, and I will show you all the positions and how one should assist them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes onto its head through natural passage, and the woman gives birth heavily, and her strength is weak, then make her sit on a stool where the women hold her; and boil oil or fenugreek, and then the midwife places the small spatula, whose shape is as follows, between her hands:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and split the amnion, and cut to her nail so that the moisture inside runs out; and take hold of the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must enema the woman with a paste of fenugreek mixed with sesame oil; then make her sneeze and snort from condyse, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour: now the child will come out.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands come out weak, then you must reset them gently bit by bit; and if they cannot go in, then put the woman on a chair, and lift her feet up high; then stand the chair on the ground, and tie down the woman so she does not fall when standing; and if the hand cannot enter, and the child dies, then cut off the hands with the knife that was placed there before, and extract the child, and reset equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the birth of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes out feet first, then you must push it upwards; and then turn it bit by bit until it is aligned; then take one of the feet and stretch it bit by bit.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	When it jumps up to the thighs, then it commands to grasp it and makes sneeze with condiments; if it is strong, may God will.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not go strong as we have said, then turn it little by little until it is according to the natural form.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it moves lightly.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come strong as we have said, then take a mixture of altitude, and sesame oil, and dissolved gum, and grind all in the mortar; and put on the nature of the woman inside and strengthen this ointment, then make her sit in warm water up to the ribs; and when she is moistened underneath, make the collar of myrrh for her, and put it underneath, and leave it an hour; then make her sit on the seat, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and grasp her belly lightly, for now the infant jumps.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the birth of the child upon its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, the midwife places her hands gently; then she leans it on its neck, and lets its feet hang down, and lays it on the bed; and bends its arms little by little, and then takes its hands to its belly, and removes the cushions underneath until it is positioned downwards; and if the child does not come out, she takes its feet and pulls forcefully, then lifts its belly up, and then puts her hands there; and brings out the child gently; and commands the woman to push as much as the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the birth of the child who comes with one hand extended widely
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	One must plan to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, then have the woman stand and walk; if she cannot walk, then have her lie on the bed, and extend her legs properly; then administer the ointment I have described; and if she does not give birth, then have her sit on a chair, and continue trying to bring back the hand; and draw out the child according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and command that she pulls as much as the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the birth of the child on its neck, and have its hands spread out, and its face turned towards its mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	One must have the midwife hold her hand, then turn it little by little, and draw it out gently; and when it is straightened, apply the natural ointment of altitude and oil as we have said, then command that she move little by little; and once you have done this, have her sit on a chair, and command that she pulls; and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of this same manner to all the small intestine
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes in this manner to all the small intestine, cut the small intestine with your nail until the moisture is emptied; and if the fetus can be on its face and on its neck, then cut it from the bud so that it is not retained, and kill the fetus; then put the child inside until you have placed it as it should be, and instruct the woman to grasp herself several times: then it will come out easily.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the birth of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes three or four are born; and this is not a strange thing, and it often happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are strange things and do not live much if they have any name; I know that they are multiplied, and are separated by the sieve which divides them, which is tied to the stump; and sometimes they come out as naturally as some eggs, just as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they come out forcefully, then treat them as we have said, and the cure should be subtle, and do quickly and lightly what it does; and act thus as it is worth moving towards salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the womb I or II or III or IIII or V or VI or VII, or many up to XV, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the wise glorious, and it is necessary that the healer know all this, for perhaps similar things happen; so do according to what is appropriate.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman for the dead child in her womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are forced to use manual work; then you must know if the woman is of sound health, and has no condition that would cause fear of death; then the woman must be laid on her back, and her shoulders inclined downward, and her legs raised; and the attendant should tie her in two parts, so she is fastened to the bed so that she does not move with the descent of the child; then rub the mouth of the womb with moist oils mixed with muslin of althea and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint both hands of the operator with these oils and these mixtures; then gently insert them into the womb, then search for the place where you should apply the hooks that are suitable for this purpose, and be careful if the child is positioned so that it comes down on its head; then insert the hooks in its eyes or neck or mouth or palate or under the chin or forceps near the sides, and if the descent is on feet, insert them into the ankles and middle ribs; and you must hold the hook in your right hand, and place the curette between the fingers of your left hand, and gently apply it with all your hand, and insert the hook into one of these places that we have said until you reach the empty space; and this is the form of the hook:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	then place against the other bone, or a third if you need it, so that the extraction be equal; and then stretch equally by moving from one side to the other, for the teeth to come out, and let the bones be toothed to hold the teeth, as is shown here:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part of it remains, then anoint the healthy part with some of his fingers oiled, and insert them into that part, and pull the other part; and if any point remains, then place this bone in a higher position, and do this until it comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes in front of the other and cannot be brought back due to constriction, then you must wrap it with a cloth until it comes out completely; then cut it at the joint of the palm or the wrist; and thus you should do the same for the other hand, and for both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the shoulder of the child is large and it is stuck in the birth canal, or there is a pointed head gathered at the top, then you must put the spatumile spine between your fingers, cut the head and extract the water; or you round it with the tool that is called «almidach», from which the form comes with the tools of the chapter that follows this one; and likewise do if the child has a large head naturally; and then pull out the bones with forceps, and if the shoulder jumps out and holds on to the forceps, then it should be split so that the moisture in the swelling can come out; and if it cannot come out, cut it into pieces as much as you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then you must pierce it until the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the inflammation is on his feet, then the attraction is light, and the adjustment at the mouth of the ulcer is slight.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is strong in the belly or the breast, then you must stretch it with a cloth wrapped on the hand; and cut the belly or the breast until the moisture that is there runs out; and if other limbs are removed and the head remains, then the physician puts his hand into the depth of the ulcer and draws it to the mouth of the ulcer; then he puts one or two fingers in, and pulls strongly; and if the mouth of the ulcer is narrowed by a hot abscess that has come there, then you must not work on it, but you should administer moist and fatty things; and apply plasters, and sitz baths with softening and moisturizing water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the fetus is on its side, and you can make it straight, then apply what we have said for the living child; and if one cannot do so, then pull it out by parts, and leave nothing of the secondine.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, apply what we have said for hot abscesses that come in the marrow; and if bleeding occurs, then apply constricting water, and treat with other remedies.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose womb one fetus had been dead, then another was placed on top of it, and the other also died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came upon the buttock, and swelled so much that it burst open, and began to severely putrefy.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat, and I pondered for a long time, and could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a strong attracting poultice, and an bone came out, and after some days others did as well.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very amazed, because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that they were the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I probed the wound, and pulled out more bones, until the woman was much better; and the woman lived for a long time thereafter, and there came out a little pus from the place; and I have recorded this chapter not only because when masters find strange things, they should take note to add aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring back the dislocated to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	After this comes the form of the press, with which books are pressed; and it has two wheels at the two ends of the two shafts.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Nevertheless, the horns should be finer than the restrictor, and should be made of ebony or boxwood; and the mouth of the shaft should be one inch wide, and the margin of the boards one inch, and in length one and a half palms; and between the two shafts should be two fittings of this same wood, which are fixed on one and the other side, half a palm long or a little more; and these two fittings are inserted into the mouth of the dislocation to open when the two horns are turned.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of pincers; and it should have at both ends two attachments, as you see, a palm long, and two fingers wide; and when you wish to open the maw with all the instrument, make the woman sit on one bed, feet hanging down and legs spread, then put the two attachments together into the maw, and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs; then work your hand at all the instrument as you have done with pincers equally, according to the quantity that you wish to open the mouth of the maw, until the uterus does what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These instruments are all perfected, and their forms are multiplied; and when the physicians have them prepared, the work is done more quickly, and they are more valuable to people according to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	So do not despair of the instrument that you have prepared, for their necessity is not avoidable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the afterbirth is retained at childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her breath, then make her sneeze with condiments, and hold your hands over her mouth and nose; and if she succeeds by this means, it is well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If not, take a pot and make a hole in the lid, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the womb, such as calamus, rue, anise, camomile, cassia lignea, and centory; all these herbs or some of them should be boiled in the pot with water over the fire; then place one end of a tube in the hole of the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the womb, and smoke until the vapors come inside the womb; then make her sneeze as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	Then the tendon springs quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this treatment and does not go out, then instruct the nurse to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or in marjoram plaster, and then apply it naturally, and seek the tendon; and when she has found it, take hold of it and stretch it little by little straightly so that the disorder does not fall during extraction; but it is necessary to move it lightly to right and left, and then pull; it will come out and unstick.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the opening of the disorder is very narrow, we have mentioned the treatment of sneezing and fumigation with herbs; and if it does not come out entirely as we have said, beware that you do not follow through with pulling; but it is necessary that what is at the opening of the disorder be tied to the thigh of the woman, then cleanse her with a tetrafarmacum enema; she will expel and reset, and it will come out; however, still when she expels, there comes a bad odor in the stomach and head, and hurts the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	So suitable fumigations are required for this: some of the ancients have experienced the fumigation of cress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman for the retention of flowers and the secondina is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is made of glass resembling a cane, and one places the narrow end inside the body, and the wide ends over the fire; and let the fumigation be on the coals, and continue until it is spent, and begin another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the anus
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not have a pierced anus, but it is stopped up with a fine membrane: so it is necessary for the nurse to pierce that membrane appropriately, and not use a sharp spatula, and be careful not to touch the sutures; then apply wool moistened in wine and oil, and continue the treatment of ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will relapse, put a pin of lead in the hole, and leave it for several days, and remove it when the child wants to go to bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this swelling comes from the adhesion of a wound or an abscess; it is necessary to cut that adhesion: then it should be treated, as we have said about the pin of lead.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula of the anus
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come below the anus are nodules and swelling that appear near the anus or in the space of two parts, and there is one fistula or more; and when this nodule is old, it works, and often emits white or thin pus, and sometimes these fistulas are perforated; they are recognized by the fact that something comes out during defecation or flatulence when the patient evacuates, and occasionally some of them may leak.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And there are fistulas that reach as far as the bladder, and up to half of the penis; they extend as far as the hip joint, and up to the knot of the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows the fistula penetrating to the fundament and not penetrating: it is that you put your index finger in the fundament, and insert a fine needle of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no curvature.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if it has curvature, then insert a thin lead probe or horsehair until you feel the probe or the hair with your finger; and if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge of excrement, wind, or worm as we have said: know that it does not penetrate; do not hasten to cleanse it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula extends all the way to the bladder or to the urinary conduit, the urine leaks out, and cannot be sealed by medications.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And if it extends to the joint of the thigh, then the pain reaches that place; if there is no curvature and the source of the pain around it, then urine immediately flows out, and neither medicine nor ointment can seal it; and in these penetrating fistulas, there is no cure other than labor, and the foolishness of those who intervene is vain.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	In those that are not penetrating and not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back; then lift their legs up to their thighs, and incline their thighs towards their belly; then insert a probe of lead or bronze if there is curvature, until you know where the pain comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels it around the anus, then you must put your index finger there, and if you sense that the tent has pierced it; and whether uncovered or not where you feel between your finger the surface or the flesh, then you know that it is perforated; do not work at it as it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	They say that sometimes it can be healed well, but this happens rarely; and the aid that one does, is to heat the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was previously mentioned; and put it very hot into the fistula until it reaches near the anus; and do this two or three times until you know that the foul flesh is burned, which looks like a bird's feather; then clean it with moistened cloths in butter, until that flesh comes out, then cleanse it with an ointment that heals and binds the flesh.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus healed, it is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If this is the case, it cannot be healed otherwise; and if the tent enters, and does not reach the bone at the base, and there is a thick cover of flesh or sinus between your finger and the tent, and you see the fistula under this cover from the core; then cut from the beginning of the fistula, and push the tent forward immediately, and cauterize afterward until it reaches the head of the tent; the tent will be freed and fall out; then clean those corrupted flesh that look like a bird's feather, and leave nothing behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound swells and forms between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or medicinal substances.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cautery brings together two good things: that is to know, the closure of these burned areas joined, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture; then treat wet tents with butter or crushed things until the pus flows out, and the burned area in the pus comes out; then treat the wound with hot ointments that soften hard flesh, and are the medicines dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes up from the bottom of the anus and is distant from the body, put your finger in the anus and examine it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tent and between two is the tissue or the sinus or flesh, where it is close to piercing, there should be no force but way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three ways: either you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can put tents and treat it as before; do not go too deep that you do not cut the lining which holds the anus, and the excretions come out unwillingly; then treat it as we have said; perhaps it will be healed, or you remove that covering and clean it after it is cut near the anus, either by tent or by another sharp instrument; then cleanse that diseased flesh which is in the wound as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and keep the fistula in the part outside the anus: this will be a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes there are fistulas in this manner: and it is when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is at the side of the anus near the skin above, then take a probe pierced at the head according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And you twist the thread around two, and insert the probe with all the thread into the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is pierced at the edge of the anus inside, then withdraw the thread from that perforation, as you insert your finger into the anus; and pull the end of the thread, and bring the two ends together, and bind one to the other, and leave it for one day or two; and sometimes tighten it until the thread cuts through the tissue that is between them, and they fall out; then treat the wound until it is closed and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not burst, then make it burst in all ways that you can, if it is not too deeply embedded.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not right to cut so deeply for the suture and then clean it, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spatumile spine used to make the fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting; and on the other side not, so that one does not cut what should not be cut, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are according to two manners: they are inside the anus, like grains of resin, and there can be small and large ones, and they bleed immediately; and there can be one or more, and they are outside the anus and at the head of the anus; but those which are outside have little moisture, and they also contain a bit of yellow bile or a bit of blood, and have the color of the flesh. The treatment for those who have them inside the anus is that you instruct the patient to strain as if going to the chamber, so that the anus comes out, and then the threads appear; then hurry and grasp it with forceps, or hold it with your fingernail, then cut it at its roots; and if the uncinate cannot hold due to moisture, then take them with a cloth, or cotton, or a piece of linen; and pull them out with your hands, then cut them, and sprinkle some warm powders that are like cautery on top; or you cauterize them as is said in the chapter about cautery, then treat them further until they heal. And if the anus cannot come out, then give the patient a harsh and rough purgative to wash what is inside the anus so it can come out clearly; when the patient strains, and if the threads are outside the anus, the treatment is light; that you take them with your fingernail or forceps, cut them, then treat them as we have said until they heal, and fear incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	So you must administer the stitch in this manner: take a twisted thread, and put it through a needle, and then pull the thread above and pierce the needle from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and so let it be wide; and tighten the thread properly, then tie the thread, and remove the needle, and do this for all the others, and leave one to drain the excess blood; then place over the wound a cloth moistened in rose oil or in ointment, and put on the wound, and instruct the patient to rest; and then let it be until they drop, and when they have fallen out, clean them with ointment and other treatment, until they are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	from the dryness of the dung or wound
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Very often there is dryness of phlegm in the intestines, and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	You must scrape at the tip of a spit or with your nail the bark above, which should not be moistened; then clean it until it is sodden as it should be; and if it cannot become sodden, then begin the shaving more forcefully than before, until it bleeds much, and is skinned; then clean it until it is healed.
dou fremit	of the trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Formice is a small faulty appearance around the body, and it spreads very quickly; and sometimes it is found by cold, and it is felt like death from trembling, and it affects the whole body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a quill from a goose feather, or a strong vulture feather, and put that quill on the wart, so that the circle surrounds the wart completely; then turn your hand all around the quill until you cut all around the wart, and place it perfectly, and pluck the wart from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you wish, do this with a needle of brass or iron according to this form, and let it be thin below and sharp above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	do not pierce, to hold the flame steady, and to press the flame And if you wish, cauterize the wart, as it is described in the chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	about the form of the clyster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes a clyster is made of silver or gold, or melted tin or lead; and sometimes these substances are made small and large, according to those to whom they are administered.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those that are administered in the treatment of children and those who are weak and painful are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the small and large clyster is wide on top, where the belly is tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and there should be an opening where the belly is tied, as you see, and the end should be pierced inside; and it should have two holes on one side, and one hole on the other; and the belly where one puts the medicines should be made of an animal bladder or parchment, and should be pierced all around with small holes, and there should be one inch of space between each hole, then insert a strong thread of raw linen through ten or more times around, and gather the belly like a goat's; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument at the front with a strong thread, then perform the clyster; and this is the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or egg white, or similar thing, then put it in gently; then the minister grips it with both hands together until it is all shut, then withdraws the clyster, and lifts the patient's legs to the wall, and if the medicine wants to come out, holds it back as much as he can; and if he sleeps a whole night, it is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you clysterize in a disease of flux from the belly, and the medicine hastens to come out, restart it until he is purged.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are in the anus, or an abscess, then let the clyster be as fine as for a child; and this is the form of the fine clyster on which the skin should be restrained:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already said in the division about the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you the treatments of hands and medicine, according to the fulfillment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made by, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by the throwing of stones, and the cutting of sword and knife, or lance or staff or arrow, or similar things; or that they are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that lies on the neck, or on the head, or the chest, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs; and I will tell you the treatment of each wound, and I will begin with simple wounds of the head, for the remembering will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, take note if it is from a stone or similar objects, and the skin is entirely ruptured and the wound is large, and you doubt the formation of a hot abscess: then have it bled immediately from the cephalic vein especially if little blood comes from the wound, and let the bleeding be opposite to the wounded part; and purge the patient of excess wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not bleed, then reduce his food intake, and let him drink no wine nor eat meat; and apply to the wound, if hot abscesses come, cotton moistened only in rose oil or in astringent wine; and if there is no hot abscess, then apply on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood and not moved by air, powder, which I will mention a little later; and if the sun has dried it out, then apply some ointments until he is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like that of a sword cut and similar, and the edges cannot be brought together by hand, then bring them together by stitching, just as I will say for abdominal wounds, about the suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to the bone, and can, and holds no more than a little, then cut it; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat coarse foods, such as heads and cooked wheat, also like pulse, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find rotten skin, and it does not reach the bone, then cut out all the rot and throw it away, then clean it; and if there is an artery or vein in the wound that cannot be stopped by medicine, then tie off the artery, and if you find it dislodged, then secure it with a thread; and if this does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: it is that you put in this powder which seals as soon as the fire has moved it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; live coals three parts, and powder them finely, and apply to the wound, and press it strongly, until it dries well and adheres to all its blood; then bind it well, and leave it without loosening, unless it swells; for you do not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes this is done with coals alone, when one does not have incense or dragon's blood, but the fire has not moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the burn has moved the wound, especially in this state, one does not put this powder on it; but put some digestible ointments on it, or flour of barley made with water and honey until it gives pus; then cure it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine forceps; and I will tell you hereafter about fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between this and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerve, there is no other method but to leave the treatment and not apply anything restraining, for it harms the nerves and makes them retract; and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their connection with us is with the brain, which is the highest member; but let the medicine be warm, such as hot washed in sweet water, and mixed with rose oil, and cucumber also washed in sweet water, and other minerals according to this method, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, sew it and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and filled with blood, pierce it at the lowest point; and if an artery is cut and bleeding occurs, expose it, tie it off, and cauterize it if necessary; and if the spine of the throat is cut or the conduit is damaged through which food passes, sew the conduit onto the canal of the throat, do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural form; then bind it appropriately, leave it for some days, then treat it with drying ointments until it heals; and if the wound has pressed into the bone, remove it; and if there are pieces of bone, extract all that you can, and those you cannot have, leave them until the wound becomes gangrenous, and clear and relieve the discharge; and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle on the powder I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, then treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a lance or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, then look to see if wind issues forth when the patient breathes: know then that the wound is mortal; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not apply powder at the first hour, nor bind it tightly because the blood does not clot properly and returns to the heart, killing the patient; but apply an attractive ointment and bandage it twice a day; and if you have no ointment, then place old cotton in the wound to draw out moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wounded side for three days, or four, or more; there will be no spasm, nor trembling of heart, nor strangling breath; and when you see good signs, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat it then with bandages and other treatments, until he is healed; and if she cannot heal, and acts, then know that there is a fistula; treat it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple, whether on the front or back, treat it with what is in front; if it is large, by suturing; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone, and has chipped pieces, then wash the wound, and pull out the splinters if they are loose; and if they are not loose, let the wound fester to lighten the extraction; and for other wounds on other limbs, the judgement is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	of the rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The rupture of the abdomen is large and medium and small; from the large wound sometimes the intestines or the nerves of the intestines come out, causing intrusion of air; and the suturing is more difficult, and sometimes a smaller wound is worse than a large one, because one delays in properly placing the intestines back inside if they are not placed immediately; for the intestines swell as soon as they feel cold, making them harder to return, thus a medium-sized wound is better because the intestines can be more easily returned to their place than with others. And know that the rupture of the abdomen occurs in four ways: two common sutures happen at the suture of the abdomen, and the other wounds of the body have two other specific sutures which are common to other wounds; however, they are more specific to the suture of the abdomen, and I will speak of each one and explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and something of the intestine comes out, and it is difficult to put back, this is due to one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen from the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: moisten a sponge or soft cloth with lukewarm water only, or you boil in water squinant and cypress and spike, and wet the intestine until the swelling is removed; and sometimes wine that restrains does this, and it is better than alone for reducing swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water in which fennel and mallows have been boiled, for by this means the entrance is eased slightly; and if it cannot enter, cut a little of the wound with the instrument with which we cut hemorrhoids; and the first treatment is better than the incision, which should not be made without great necessity; and here is the instrument to make the incision: cut inside in the curvature and do not go out, and see here the form.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is widened, and the intestines jump out, then reset them according to their natural form in their proper place if you can, for this is worth doing.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And when the wound is wide, and it is in the part below the belly, then you must have the patient lie on his back, and raise his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part below the belly, then raise the head and chest higher than the parts below, and likewise if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, place your attention so that the wounded part be higher than the other; and thus you must administer what I say in large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	In small wounds use what is prepared for you, then take in your hands one tender minister who sews up the entire rupture with his hand and brings together the lips; and this is the common way of stitching, which is that you take a needle or more according to the quantity of the width of the wound, then leave from the head of the wound an inch of space, and stick in a needle with it having strong thread; and pierce both sides of the skin with both sides of the sinew, which is below the skin inside, until you make it pierce that part, and bring together both ends of the sinew four altogether; then stretch a double thread around the needle from two parts, then bring together both sides of the wound fittingly, and then leave an inch of space, and stick in another needle; then tie the end of the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to what needles you need until all the wound is restrained; and let the needles be medium, between fine and thick, for the fine needles cut up all the flesh, and the too thick ones cannot enter well: therefore they should be medium; and it does not befit to push the needles too deep into the flesh and skin, lest they cut and work on the wound before the healing; then cut off the ends of the needles so that they do not hurt the patient in sleeping, and put tents or cloths at the ends of the needles to hold them firmly, and leave them until the wound is healed; this way of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, for there fits one needle or two. The second stitch is common, which is that you bring together both sides of the skin and both sides of the sinew together on a needle with it having medium strong thread; and when you have pierced all these four parts together, then continue the needle to the part where you began in the way clothes are sewn; put an inch of space between each stitch as thick as one small finger. This stitch know men, and I stitched a wound that a man had on his stomach which was cut by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm wide, and two palms of intestines came out, and the wound was in the middle of the stomach.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine after it had been outside for 24 hours, and the wound was sutured up to 15 days, and I treated it, and he was healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the physicians had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle; and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicines; and I placed old cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Now I will tell you the two proper ways of sewing: take the needle and push it from the outer part to the inner; when it has pierced straight through the center, then hold the head of the needle where you have sewn, and make it pierce again from the inner part to the outer; the meaning of this stitch is that you sew just as a tanner works with skins, leaving one side out once and then taking it up again, until the stitching is fully completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second manner of suturing, which Galen properly described, is as some do, who bring the two parts together naturally, and apply one end of the surface to the other end, in such a way: stick a needle at the end of the wound that is closer, and pierce only that place, leaving both ends of the surface; then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outer part to the inner part, at two ends of the surface; then pierce one and the other from the outer part to the inner part, at two other points of the wound which are on the opposite side; and this is the crudest manner of suturing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen says this word, and some testify to it, that one should sew the belly with two needles, each having thread; and one must push one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew leather straps; and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the suturing is more difficult than at other places on the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds: and it is that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, although the fire has moved it, then reset the intestines, and the cut; then put on powder to heal flesh, and if the fire has moved it, then put on some ointment that is present until the wound drinks; stitch the thread, and let the sifac and mirach be soldered; then treat the wound as the others, until it is healed; and if you have no medicines, then put on, as soon as it begins to expel drink, old cotton, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you have no need of other medicine in many cases when the wounds are simple; and if you fear that the wound may communicate with the principal members, then you must moisten light wool in tempered hot oil or in rose oil, and place it around the armpits and under the arms; and if he feels pain or putrefaction in boils, which often happens, then cleanse them with warm black wine, and likewise if the putrefaction reaches the intestines; and pierce it inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine which is called "jeun" cannot heal when it is wounded, and this is because of the thinness of the veins that are there, and due to the delicacy of the entire body, and its closeness in nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the hernia comes out of the wound, reset it as you would with the intestine while it is fresh; and if it is old and has turned green or black, then you must tie the place that is black so no further bleeding occurs, for there are veins and arteries; then cut what is between the tie, and let the two sides hang from below the wound up above to lighten the extraction when the hernia falls out, and the wound draws together.
de la routure dou boueil	Of the rupture of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestines are round, and the wound is small, it can be restored in some people, because I saw that a man was wounded in the belly with a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became infected and turned into a fistula, and excretions and wind came out; I put care according to what I could, and did not stop subtlety until he was healed, and the opening was sealed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it sealed, I feared that the patient might have trouble in his belly; and he had no trouble, but remained in better condition, eating and drinking; and some experimentors said that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it should be tied in such manner: take pins with large heads, then bring together the edges of the wound, and when the pin has opened its mouth, place it over both edges so that it holds its mouth closed; then cut off the head, and this stays so that it cannot come undone, then put another pin after in the same way as before, until the entire wound is bound up; and sew the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	These heads are burned in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient, and one can sew the intestine with a fine thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal, in this manner: take the head of this intestine thread which is very thin, and then tie to this thread the fine linen thread twisted, then put the thread in the needle, and sew the intestine, and keep it together at the rupture; and this method of stitching firmly is not different from according to the way of trust and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the major intestines, there is no skill or knowledge except subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of the fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it awakens, is generally called a "fistula," and especially when it is hairy and runs pus.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is according to the truth a false and hard knot, white, where there is no pain, and it is also hairy like the feathers of a bird; and sometimes it discharges clear pus, and other times thick; sometimes little, and other times enough; and I have already spoken in the division of wounds that any wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, is due to none but one of the nine causes: namely, by the smallness of the blood or body; or because of its malice; or because there is hard flesh inside and on the lips, which does not allow new flesh to grow; or there is too much pus; or the site is porous, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption is a kind of pestilence; or due to the property in the region where digestion is slow, and health comes late, and swollen by nature; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, their signs, and the medical treatments in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now you must know the treatment of fistula which is done by hand.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body; for there are fistulas that come to the large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or on the surface, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in some of the ribs, or at the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet; and there is such that comes to the principal part of the member and similar places.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all the fistulas of this kind are difficult to heal, and there is only labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come to the places I have mentioned, and you have confidence in its treatment, and you wish to know it, then take a probe of brass or iron, if the fistula is straight, then cut it; and if the fistula is twisted, then search it with a delicate probe of lead, for lead can bend around the twists; and if the fistula has many openings and you cannot explore it well with probes, then irrigate it through one of the openings, for moisture will run from one opening to another and cleanse it; then cut it wisely as much as you can so that you know whether there is bone or nerve, and this should be done carefully, and ask the patient about the pain he feels when pressed by your hand, and the place where he feels it; and when you truly know the location of its presence, and if it is far from joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, or in any places that I have told you, then cut it according to what I have said, and remove the pus and corrupted flesh inside; and then treat it until it heals, and if the fistula is very deep straight ahead, then cut completely as much as you can, then place moistened probes with healing medicine, and push them to the head of the fistula so that the medicine corrodes the excess left at the bottom; and then apply ointments that promote healthy flesh until it heals; and if it does not heal by this method, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerve does not trouble the main limbs as we have said; and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, then cut until all the corruption is removed, then treat with things that heal flesh until it is healed; and if it is not healed and begins to ooze as before, know that you have not gone deep enough: so expose and scrape until you reach the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the area; and if it heals in this way, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If not, know that the corruption is too deep for you to reach; there is no other remedy but to leave it to nature; and if there is a small bone corrupted and you can extract it with tongs, then pull it out with the appropriate tool for this, and if there are many bones, extract them all, do not leave even one; and if moisture works against you and there is no mistake nor fear, cut away both moisture and flesh, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them in one hour, then put on the wound a substance promoting putrefaction, and leave until the flesh is rotten around the bones, and then they will have the bones more easily; and if it is a large bone, such as from the leg or thigh, then cleanse only up to the corruption until all blackness is removed, then restore the wound; and if there is a great part of the corrupted, coming up to the marrow of the bone; you must saw and cut right up to the corruption, and then cure it until it is healed; and I will tell you of an ulcer that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example and aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was a young man around thirty years old who had pain in his leg due to something that came inside the body, so that the matter came to the leg, and it swelled with a large abscess, and there was no reason to open it; but the doctors, by their folly, worked on it until the abscess opened, and much material corroded out, and became an ulcer, and many leaks developed from which all kinds of bowels and moisture of the body poured out; and many doctors treated it for about two years, and there was no wise person in the art of hands until I was called to it, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which he was being cured, and what came out through the leaks with great corruption; and the body of the young man turned red, and had a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I placed a tent in one of these perforations, and then searched all the perforations, and found that one came opposite the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I then hurried and cut into one of the perforations until I uncovered part of the bone, and found it corrupted and pierced; the corruption reached inside to the bone. I removed what appeared to be the corrupted bone, thinking there was no other corruption except for that which I had taken out; I began to heal the wound with poultices over a long time, but it would not close. Then I started again and uncovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continuing in the bone, so I scraped and removed it, then tried to close the area; but I could not until I cut around nearly an inch of the bone, and entirely through its mass, then applied medicines; it healed and closed quickly, and there was no need to begin the work again except for the patient's weakness, which they could not bear, and the fear of death that I had for them.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation he often bled, but he was entirely healed, and in place of the bone a hard flesh grew, and it was of good disposition and had no harm nor contrary effect whatsoever, neither coming nor going.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be sutured in this manner: take a thread, and tie it at the head of the exposed bone, and command someone to pull it up; and place another thread of wool thicker than the first thread on the flesh that is over the bone, and stretch the head so that you draw out the corrupted flesh underneath, and expose the flesh where you wish to sew, so that the suture does not injure the flesh; and place a hot iron or a board under the bone to cut away the corrupted flesh; and one must sew as much as can be seen and felt of the corruption, and sew again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then uncover all the flesh; then put the ember underneath, and then sew from one side to the other the corruption, and let the sewing be as long as the corruption itself, just as we have said; and if the corruption is at the joint, cut off the corrupted joint, and sew the bone where it contains on the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then there is no other remedy but to cut; and if the corruption is at the wrist of the hand or the ankle of the foot, this thing is very difficult, but nonetheless you must investigate that corrosion, how it appears to you; and cleanse it in all ways that you can, but that the vein or the nerve does not oppose you; and know that the incisors and the saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and their fineness, and their size and their smallness, and their hardness; and therefore it is necessary to equip each kind of work with its tool; and know that the work will show you the tool that you need according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the manners of diseases; so consider the tool that you need according to what it should be.
dou feu	of the fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The shoulder rots either from within or due to lack of force; and when you have treated that corruption with medicine but it does not help, then one must cut off the limb up to the place where the corruption comes from, so that the patient escapes death by this means or by the mischief, which is greater, of lacking a limb; and the sign is that the limb turns black as if burned by fire, and after the blackness appears, the corruption spreads member by member and throughout the body; thus hurry to cut it off, and if it is due to the bite of venomous creatures such as sea scorpion and basilisk and similar, and the corruption is at the tip of the toe, then cut it off, and do not give it space to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes up to the hand, cut at the joint so that the corruption does not reach the arm; and if it comes to the arm, cut below the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and no remedy avails except for the amount of his strength; and all thus do when the corruption comes to the foot: if it comes in the first joint, cut beyond the other joint; and if it comes on the foot, cut off the entire foot; and if it rises into the leg, cut at the knee joint; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to leave the patient to death; and the method of cutting or sawing the member is that you tie above and below, and have one minister hold one tie down, and another minister the other tie up, and you separate the flesh which is between the two ties by a spatula wide, until the bone be uncovered; then cut or saw it, and put on each side a linen cloth so that the saw does not touch the healthy place, and cause in the patient another injury and hot abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if bleeding occurs when you operate, then quickly cauterize the place, or put some binding powders on it; then return to your treatment until it is completed, then bind the wounded limb with an appropriate bandage, and care for it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man in his foot: he had a blackening that seemed like fire's burning, and this corrosion first came on his toe of the foot, until it would spread over the entire foot; and when the man saw the corrosion, he hurried to cut off the foot, and was healed; and long afterward the corrosion returned on the thumb of his hand, and he came to me, and I put repelling things on after cleansing the body, and could not stop the corruptions; and he wanted me to cut off his hand, and I did not want to, for I had hope of repelling the matter; and also feared that if I cut off his hand, he would die, for the man's strength was weak; and he lost all hope, returned to his home, hurried to cut off his hand, and was healed; and I have this recounted only so that it is known that one should act otherwise, when necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Sometimes an abscess comes in a cartilaginous area and remains for so long that it makes a great gathering of pus; then it rots and breaks open, and the pus jumps out, and the place becomes as if empty; and the skin above is as delicate as fine drapery, and does not extend to the bone or to the nerve, and such disease is called «sain», and is not called «fistula»; but if it extends so far that it reaches the bone perfectly, then it is called «fistula»; and you must cut all around that skin even when it is delicate as fine drapery; and its corruption does not stop.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you fear that the skin will burn, and the corruption is not yet perfect, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it with an enema in this way: look if the breast is large, and the pus that comes out has a foul smell, then enema it with Egyptian medicine which is made thus: take hellebore, oil, and litharge equally, and cook them in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey; and then take of this according to your need, and mix it with water and honey, and enema the breast, and tie up the opening; and leave the medicine inside for two hours, then extract it by squeezing; do this many times until the breast is cleansed, and the filth is removed; and sometimes it is enema with lye water when this medicine is not available, and take vine wood ash and pour water over it, then strain it, and use it as an enema until you know that the breast is well cleaned; if the patient cannot bear it, nor the Egyptian medicine nor the lye water, then enema it with water and honey where there is a bit of ground litharge mixed in; or enema it with a mixture of honey and wine, for honey has the property to cleanse and wash, and wine makes the abscess burn; and when you have done this, and you believe that the breast is well cleansed, then enema it with what makes flesh grow in it, and take diaphoretic plaster and mix it with rose oil and wine; or enema it with some medicines and ointments of which I have mentioned their properties in the chapter on ointments; if the opening of the breast is small, and the enema tube cannot enter, then widen it a bit with an iron, and put some of the Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment inside so that it widens; if the wound is too large, sew it up and leave only one place where the enema can enter, and if the opening that discharges pus is on top, then cut it at a lower spot.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the pus is perfect, it does not allow flesh to grow; and if you cannot cut under the breast as much as you wish, then arrange in such a way that the pus flows to the lowest point possible, for when the pus is perfect, it does not allow flesh to grow and if you cannot cut under the breast as much as you wish, then arrange in such a manner: so that the pus runs lightly downwards, and leave nothing of the pus; and take consolidating medicines to put on the wound, and stretch over the linen cloth that covers all the wound; then cut forcefully at the narrow part of the breast slightly wider than the first, then extend an ointment above another cloth according to the size of the opening, and place it over the wound of the breast to lighten the pus, and do not remove the large cloth except once after many days; and that which is on the opening of the breast, remove often to remove the pus, and know what flows from the pus, whether it is venom or little or much, or digested or indigested; and be wary if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been spread in such a way and you see the nature that rises on the opening of the wound, then know that the breast starts to heal and health approaches; and then untie it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you untie the wound, change another cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast discharges undigested fluid after many days, know that the breast is not healing.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle pus forms after a long time, do not despair of the health, for recovery approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For there are people whose wounds take a long time to granulate, and of those who do the opposite; and if undigested fluid shoots from the breast after many days, know that the breast is not healing; and if the breast delays in healing and is widespread, then apply moist substances with drying properties, such as diaphoretic ointment, for it contains a large portion of vitriol, and this is the last medicine; take diaphoretic ointment, and make it with rose oil, and sprinkle old wine equally on the substance; then cook it and use it; and this same thing works better when honey is thickened, when diaphoretic ointments are not present, or you take balm and aloe and frankincense, and grind them, and powder them over the honey while it is over the fire; then glue the drapery, and stretch it over the breast, and sometimes aristologe longe and roots of celestial lilies, which are also like wheat flour and chalk; and use simple or compound herbs: grind them, make a powder, put it on the honey I have mentioned, and use it; and if the cure is prolonged, and not cured by this treatment, then know that the corruption is perfect, and affects the bone, or hard parts, or ligaments; treat it with fistula treatment, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Panarice is an abscess that arises under the nail of the finger of the hand, or of the foot, or sometimes arises in other digits; and when it becomes old, and no attention is taken, then comes the hot abscess, and it runs and casts pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and sometimes it eats through entirely; and the corrosion goes up to the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the joint of the digit swells wide, and its color turns pale.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, then you must cut with an iron all the excess that remains of the nail, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cautery is much help if the bone is sound, and the nail is sound; and if the nail presses the flesh inwards, and it begins to hurt, and wounds it, then you must put the edge under the nail that pierces the flesh, and lift it up, and cut that flesh subtly and lightly, and apply on the remaining of the flesh medicines burning and corrosive to remove all; then cure it with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corruption is in the bone, cut it out and remove it thoroughly, for as long as the corrupted bone remains there, it cannot heal; and if you see it must be corrupted, then cut it into one of the directions as was said before, then cure it until it is healed; and if it is infected and inflamed and causes great pain, you must first cleanse it; then cut the nail with a sharp spatula by cutting across above, and take care that the cut does not reach the flesh under the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if it happens, put something on top that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the swelling of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The dislocated finger that occurs in some men is entirely fleshy, and sometimes it has bones, and occasionally there is a nail, and some are born at the root of the joint, where the birth is in some ways of the fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	He who is born in any knot of the finger does not move, and he who is born at the joint of the finger sometimes moves; the size of the fleshy one is slight, in such a manner: cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	He who is born at the root of the joint is difficult to treat: be careful with cutting.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In him who is born with a hernia in the buttock, you must first cut away the flesh roundly to the bone, then cut the bone to an appropriate seam, then cleanse it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The webbing that comes between the fingers is due to birth, or by the joining of a wound, or by burning of fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	You must cut that webbing so the fingers return to their natural forms; then place between two cloths or oiled rags that they do not join together; or you put between two pieces of fine linen until the joints are joined as is proper.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If webbing comes between any of his fingers and the palm, then cut that webbing as is proper.
des vils	of the villages
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	There are large swollen veins full of melancholic superfluities, which come into many parts of the body; and it happens more in the legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry loads than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you should administer to him a purgation of bile, and then heal him with basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The treatment with iron is according to two methods: one is that they are cut, and black blood is drawn out; and the other method is that you open the vein, and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The incision is done in this manner: first wash the leg with very hot water until the thick skin becomes fine, then bandage the patient’s leg from above the thigh down to below the knee; then cut the vein in one place, or two or three, with a wide incision, then elevate and draw out the black blood by hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the strength of the patient can withstand; and then bind it up, and instruct him to nourish himself on meat that increases black bile; and repeat the evacuation and treatment when the veins are full, which is harmful to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The lifting of it is according to this manner: raise the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then put him in a bath, and wash the leg with hot water until it becomes red, and the veins swell; and if you have no bath, heat it by fire, and then cut straight along the vein from the long part to the head of the knee, or in the area below at the ankle; then work the skin with a lancet, and scrape the vein on both sides until it appears when felt; and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it looks like a white thread; then push the needle underneath, so that it is lifted from the skin, then scrape it slightly with the lancet, then cut in another place three times; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it with the needle as you have done, and paint it with another lancet as you did first; then cut another length, or more if needed, then lift it, and cut at the toe of the foot, then pull and lift up to the second length; then extract from length to length until it comes out completely, then cut; and if you cannot pull and lift it, put a needle with a strong double thread, and pull and pull, and put under the needle, and turn your hand one way and another until it comes out; and beware that it does not break, for if it breaks, it cannot be pulled or lifted, and harm comes to the patient; and when you have completely extracted it, put on the place of the wound wool soaked in wine and rose oil; then cure it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the skin is constricted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it obliquely, but do not cut it off; and pull it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The form of the iron with which one cuts the skin is curved, and it does not cut through, so that it does not cut the vein; and it is of thick curvature, for if it were finer, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and here is the form:
de la voinne civile	of the civil war
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This war is bred in the legs, in hot areas where no herbs or trees grow, and in land that has no moisture; and sometimes it arises in other places besides the legs, and this happens due to the corruption that comes beneath the skin, just as serpents and worms come within the body, bred between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that there comes in the leg a very great inflammation, then changes the color, and begins the vein to forcefully issue out, like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the vein is open, you must wrap around a piece of cloth from one and a half to two fingers wide, tie it, and leave the cloth hanging on the leg, and every time a point comes out too much, wrap it around the cloth again, and tie it; and if it is too long, cut off part of it, wrap the remainder, and do not cut at its root until it is all out; for if you cut it, it will go back into the flesh and cause an abscess and putrefaction in that place, and a bad illness; therefore, it must be treated little by little until the end, leaving nothing in the body; and sometimes this vein, when treated, can be five palms long or ten, and one man came to me once, from whom it came out ten palms long, and when you cut it, make one incision at the opening, pierce it to the bottom so that everything comes out; then empty the matter inside, and apply healing medicines to prevent putrefaction for some days, then treat it as abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes at this vein there are fewer rains, and especially when it opens in the joint of the foot, or by the foot, and much fluid comes out, and from which it jumps rains; treat it then as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	worms that arise between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "disease of the ox," because it often occurs to oxen, and it is a small worm that arises between skin and flesh, and travels throughout the body going up and down, and one can feel it well as it moves from member to member, until it bursts through the skin where it goes, and comes out forcefully; and it is engendered by the putrefaction of certain humors, just like worms and snakes and earthworms and ascarides in the stomach; and there is fear of its malice, for when it travels throughout the body, and ascends to the head, and reaches the eye, by chance it may enter, and destroy the eye; and this often happens.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you want to cure and extract it, one cannot do so unless it moves: therefore then you must tie the area above and below with a strong bond tightly, then cut over and extract forcefully, and if the worm is embedded in the flesh, and you don’t find it, then cauterize with fire until it dies; and the greatest harm that it causes is that it corrupts the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming near the head close to the eye, hold firmly below it the eyelid tightly, then cut over, and extract forcefully; and it is necessary for the patient to use purging of body with solutive medicines for the bad putrefied humors, and consume meat that prevents putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes to some members, and then moves from member to member; and I have seen what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and right after, I saw it rise like a worm to the shoulder, faster than anything, just as quicksilver moves from one place to another; the pain left that spot and settled on the shoulder, and then shortly after ran throughout the body until it reached the other arm; then she told me that it was now circling around her body, just as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marveled greatly how it moved so from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in such a manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	However, I had seen many who wished to move the pain from one place to another, but I did not want it, as I saw in the woman; and I thought that this was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins exposed, and for this reason the constrained wind appeared; and it does not appear according to this reasoning to those who are plethoric, and who have moist bodies and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you wish to treat this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears to you as we have said, then apply something on top and below quickly, and then cut so that the constrained wind comes out from that place; and cauterize the spot; and if you do not see it with your eyes, then treat it with what expels winds, such as foul pills, and pills of theriaca, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their forms and according to the places of the body where they fall.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of them is that there are those with large points, and small ones, and barbed ones, and welded ones; and those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those with pieces; and the one that falls in any limb falls in two ways: either in a principal member it lodges, such as brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it falls in any part of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you about later, appears: then you should refrain from extracting this arrow, for death often follows; and when this bad sign does not appear, and the arrow is not embedded deeply, then extract it and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when the arrow hits and pierces the bone, and the cerebral fluid which is on top of the brain spills out, is when there is scotoma and bleeding and dizziness and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of tongue, and spasms and confusion of mind, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps there is a discharge without force from the nostrils or ears; and perhaps speech and voice are lost; and from the wound white moisture resembling pus flows out, and also like cooked meat juice; and if this sign appears to you, then be cautious with the treatment, and extract the arrow if it is inside.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the arrow when it hits the heart is that it is near the left breast, and it feels as if it were fixed in something hard, not empty; and perhaps the arrow moves like pus, and black blood flows out, and coldness and cold sweat come, and fainting: then know without doubt that death is impending.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that is stuck in the throat is that without fail foam comes from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs loudly and seeks the cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow falls into the covering of the lung, it is near the ribs; and it causes great anguish and great pain and sighing; and all the limbs from the shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow falls into the stomach, perhaps some undigested flesh comes from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow falls into the abdomen, and no pus comes out through the intestines, there is no hope in the treatment, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps and comes out forcefully, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the arm and the spine and the wrist and the thigh and the legs, and similar members, are safe according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or the artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to a man that an arrow struck him in the arm at the root of the nose: I probed it and drew it out from another side beneath the fat of the ear, and he was healed without harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And draw out at once an arrow that fell into the fat of the eye beneath the parchment below, and the arrowhead was embedded, and could not reach the tip towards the shaft, and the arrow was large from a Turkish bow, all iron light without ears; the youth was healed, and no ill accidents came to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And draw out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears: I seized the barbs, and maneuvered so much that I drew it out, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And draw out an arrow from the man, which had pierced his belly, and I thought he would die; and after he had passed thirty days, his condition did not change; I cut into the arrow, manipulated it, drew it out forcefully, and he had no ill effects.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you see a man to whom an arrow struck the back, and the wound was sealed over; and the arrow remained inside him, and did not change its natural disposition, nor found harm in any of its natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And you see another man to whom an arrow struck his face, and the wound was sealed; and he remained thus without suffering great pain; and many others similar.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And extract an arrow from the man of the king’s princes, which had fallen in the middle of his nose, and was slightly inclined to the right side; and the arrow was entirely embedded. I was called for treatment after it had been three days since it fell.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	And I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I wanted it to enter a very fine tent, and I did not feel it; and he felt pricking and pain under his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I put on a drawing and digestive plaster to prevent swelling; and the head of the arrow appeared.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the plaster for several days, and reopened the wound again, and the patient remained this way for a long time until he felt the arrow one day inside his chest; and he told me about it.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I put corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it was open, and I probed it, feeling the head of the arrow that had settled in place; then I applied more corrosive medicine to the opening of the wound until the head of the arrow appeared clearly; and he survived well over four months, after which I widened the wound enough to insert the tongs, and moved it from side to side, but could not remove it; then I continued to refine and devise various methods of extraction until one day I grasped it with properly made tongs, as will be detailed at the end of this chapter, so that I pulled it out and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the physicians judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I restored it then, and the wound was sutured, and the patient was entirely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	And I have told you the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you apply your care to what I do not say, for the books cannot take everything into account; but wise masters compare well on a very small thing, and upon what is present and lacking, find new work, and new instruments, to counter the unfamiliar things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows do not leave the members where they are fixed in two ways: either through the place where they enter, or from another part; and those that come out through the place where they enter are arrows entering into their flesh, and sometimes coming out the same way.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not jump out now, leave it until the flesh around rots and the discharge is alleviated; and likewise if it is embedded in the bone and cannot come out, leave it thus for some days, moving it each day; then it jumps out, and if it still does not jump out, pierce around all the way through the fine shaft until the area around widens, and then extract it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is embedded in the bone of the head and reaches one of the brain's chambers, and any of the accidents that I have mentioned befall the patient: do not extract it, but leave it until it becomes equal after some days, for if the arrow reaches as far as there, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not fixed only in the bone and does not reach the surface, and the patient remains for some days without ill effect, then the instrument should be used to extract it.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply embedded and cannot come out, then apply tar around it as I have told you; then treat the area until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is embedded in a part of the body where it cannot be seen, search for it throughout the tent; and if you feel it, extract it with an appropriate instrument; and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, cut until the wound is larger; and extract the arrow if you can, and if it has ears by which it clings, remove the flesh that is embedded in two parts as much as you can, then break or bend the ears of the arrow so that you can pull it out; be careful not to break the arrow, which would make extraction more difficult.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, then leave it until the skin around is stretched, then pull it out, for the extraction will be eased.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the flow of blood goes against you, then follow what we have said about the treatment in its chapter; and be careful of cutting the nerve and vein, and use ingenuity on how you can pull out the arrow without peril, whether quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the position he was in when the arrow hit him, for this is the greatest aid there could be, and if you cannot, then put him according to what the signs show.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another side, where some part of it is visible, or the skin is swollen in such a way that it can be seen or clearly felt: cut then over it until the forceps can grasp it, and then extract it: thus it shall now come out.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, then turn your hand roundly until it enters into the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, then leave it and begin the extraction again until it comes forth; and if the shaft of the arrow is there, push all the shaft; and if the shaft falls and you want to administer piecemeal, then administer the instrument with hair so that the tip of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument; and then push out, and if the arrow is hairy, use an instrument with a pointed end entering in to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is poisoned, then you must cut away all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, and then treat the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow falls on the bone or in the belly or at the bladder or at the ribs, and it is close, and you can cut above, then cut; and beware of cutting the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew the wound, if need be; and care for it until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the pincers used to remove arrows is similar to the beak of a bird, and you see here the form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many types: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The form of the hair tip is also like the feather of a bird, to place at the tip of the arrow, as shown here the form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of the tongs for piercing and pressing is here:
des voinnes dou cors communes	the veins of the body commonly
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	There are thirty-one veins from which one recovers, of which sixteen are in the head, to wit: two that are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech"; and the two arteries that are in the temples appearing; and the two veins that are in the tear ducts of the two eyes, which are called "aspires"; and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose; and the two guindeges that are in the neck; and the two veins that are on the upper lips of the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich"; and the two veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins from which one commonly bleeds are five in each arm: one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side, and the common people call it the "vein of the head"; and the middle one is called "faste", and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and the common people call it the "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side, and the common people call it the "vein of the belly", and it is above the flexor muscle, and it is the one from which one bleeds, which clearly appears on the elbow.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the salvatelle is the vein that is between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches; and in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is below the bend of the elbow on the left side, and the second saphenous which is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein called "nesse", which is at the ankle on the other side; and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The swelling of veins behind the ears helps with old catarrhs and migraines; and the qualities of swelling as I tell you are that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then have the patient squeeze his neck tightly like a screw, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two dependent places from the head: catch them therefore with your finger, and where you feel the pulse under your finger, mark it; then take the lancet, and push it under the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein upwards, and cut both the skin and the vein well twice across, and let as much blood flow as you see fit; then tie it off and bind it, until it is bled out; and I have already said about the incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The inflammation of the two arteries that are in the temples is good for old migraines, sordes, and customary ophthalmia, and for the flow of watery tears to the eyes; and the quality of the bleeding is as I say: and it is that the patient strains his neck so that the two veins appear clearly; and feel the pulse under your finger, then incise; then place your thumb on top of the vein above your index finger, and insert the lancet underneath, and raise the vein up, and cut it, just as you did with the other two veins, and let blood according to your need; then release the patient, and put your finger on the vein for an hour, then apply cotton; then tightly bandage it, and leave it until it is healed; and we have already spoken of their cutting and extraction at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The vein of the forehead is as valuable as the cephalic vein for old face diseases, and for migraines, and for redness; and its quality is such that the patient twists his neck so much that the vein appears; then take the instrument which is called "excavator", whose form is here:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point on the vein, and press firmly with your hand, or with something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; then release the patient's neck, and tie off the vein until it is sealed and sometimes the work is done with a wide bandage.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Nevertheless, it is not appropriate for the lancet to be too sharp; and cut across the vein, because the bone is close, and by chance the lancet might break when it is thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The swelling of the two veins that are in the two temples helps the eyes, and the mange, and the redness, and the yellowing in the eye, and diseases of the face; and the quality of its swelling is that the patient strains his neck by twisting some band as before; then he bleeds it, and let the bleeding be sideways, a bit long from the flame a bit wide, for there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are delicate, it may break; then let the blood flow as much as you need, and then bind cotton on top, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	Bleeding the vein of the nose is good for water retention, and for stubborn sores, and for facial diseases, such as migraine and redness that comes upon the face, especially when it is old; and the quality of the bleeding is that the patient strains his neck, then pulls his nose with your left hand, and take a delicate long flame, and insert it between the lips in the space which is between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open easily here, and the blood will now start to flow; and do not go too deep, let the blood flow according to your need, then bind it for a night, for it heals very quickly; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The salve of the two binders helps with the tightness of the bridle, and at the beginning of mixology, and for many illnesses, and for impetigo, and for corrosives, and for herpes, and estiomenes; and the quality of the salve is that the patient stretches his neck under one and the other, as we have said; and let the master be standing on the head of the patient, and the patient sit on a chair, then apply the vein of the long one a bit widely, then draw blood moderately, or as much as necessary; then do likewise in the other vein, then untie the bandage, and bind both veins moderately so that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until morning, until the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	of the swelling of the lips
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The swelling of the veins of the upper lips aids in phlegm in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and cracks in the lips, and from the nose and around.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the procedure for the swelling is to sit the patient in front of you, and hold his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left, and they are known by their black color, and by the small black veins around them: cut both then, and if you do not recognize them and you are in doubt, cut the largest one on each side, and do the same for the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the swelling under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The swelling of the veins that are under the tongue comes after the swelling of the cephalic vein, and it is at the narrow part of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the sweller is that the patient sits between your hands facing the sun, and he lifts his tongue, and looks underneath on each side a black vein: then bleed one and the other, but do not go too deep, for beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the arm that are commonly bled are bled according to two methods: either by pricking with a broad martian blade, or with a fine olive-shaped blade like cutting edges, and it is called "anesil"; and they are broad and fine according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The first form of the flame MARTIN is much renowned, and it is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it is necessary to open the veins filled with thick and visible blood, and which contain thick and turbid blood; and this is the form of the olive-colored flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more finely pointed, and it is for healing the fine veins where there is fine yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The healing of the basilic vein, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the abdomen; and it is necessary for the healer to heal wisely, and to beware of the artery that is below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if he cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes, then it must be stopped, as I have said; and the flames should not be pressing but cutting like an ax.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilica does not open clearly, then you must extract it and change another one; or if you want any vein from it, or you incise in place of it a vein amidst the arm: it opens clearly; and cut it with an ax-like flame as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you wish to know the site of the incision, then first you must bind the arm, touch the place until you feel the pulse; then mark the spot, and then tie up the arm, and cut the vein with an ax-like flame; and beware that you do not hit the artery when you see the spot swell, for it is the artery: avoid it therefore.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it rise up like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is blood from the artery: then hurry, and place your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger when the bleeding stops, which often happens; bind his arm, leave it thus, and let not the patient move it; and be full of fear, and do not move it until he is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the bleeding does not stop, and it overpowers you, and the medicines are not at hand, then cut the artery where it opens, for the head of the retractors; and stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a bark of fennel, and split it, and take one of the halves and bind it well until the next day; if the bleeding stops, that is good; if not, then treat it as we have said, with powders that stop blood; and the stopping of bleeding is not difficult in many positions due to the small area of the wound, and the strength of the binding on the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The swelling of the vein in the middle helps because it draws blood from above the head and below the body, for which it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins as we have said; and it is necessary for the surgeon to be careful for the nerve that is below, and if he punctures too deeply and finds the nerve, and it swells and the patient becomes seriously ill, and perhaps cannot heal; and this nerve often appears, and if it does not appear in some people due to its subtlety, then you must cut it with an anesthetic instrument; and protect the nerve as much as possible.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then cut it lengthwise.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The swelling of the cephalic vein helps because it draws blood from the head and assists the eyes; and it is necessary to puncture it with olive oil or myrtle oil, for it is the safest of all veins, as there is neither a nerve nor an artery below it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	However, it is necessary to seek the lightest vein, and it does not matter if one fails at first, and one retries; and by chance some veins swell when failing the first time, but it does not matter.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the sanie is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about bloodletting is that it is performed not for any other reason but to preserve health and to avoid future illnesses; and the bloodletting should be done in one of the three veins found on the arm: namely, cephalic, basilic, and femoral; and one should undergo bloodletting at the beginning of spring, in autumn, and in winter after meals, when the sign of repletion appears; and one should undergo bloodletting on the first or third day, two or three hours into the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The medicine which is administered to the diseases has no fixed time, but when there is need of day or night, in all hours and at all times; and it does not befit to medicate children until fourteen years, nor a woman carrying child from the fourth month up to seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	And those who have passed sixty years should not be medicated either.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when anyone wishes to be medicated in any manner, it is necessary that they cleanse the intestines with a light enema if there is much retained bile so that the veins do not attract harmful superfluous substances from the intestines; nor should one who is overly satiated with food or drunk be medicated until they are sober, nor those suffering from dropsy; and beware of medicating after severe colic, vomiting, diarrhea, frequent intercourse with a woman, laborious work, sleeplessness, and fasting, which exhaust all strength, whether by weapon or body exertion; then refine the humors if the blood is thickened through food, drinks, and medicines, if you have the power to do so; then enter into a bath, unless something prevents it, to refine the blood, and be medicated from the vein of the arm around the third hour as we have said; and guard yourself that day from labor, pain, and lust, and similar things; and be cheerful and joyful, and let the medicator be higher than the one being medicated, and they should rub the arm two or three times, then moderately bind the ligature above it because when it is too tight or loose, blood cannot flow; and then rub the area with their hands until the veins swell and can be felt; then moisten the medicator’s flame with a little old oil, then place their left hand on that vein below where they wish to medicate so that the vein does not shrink when struck.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flee like strings to the surgeon, and there are such that are full of windiness, so when one applies fire upon them, they recoil from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus is one of these; and if he works the vein, then the wound becomes too narrow, for this reason it is necessary that the surgeons be cautious in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein works the first time, it is good; if not, then begin again a little below that place or above quickly, if the place is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the place is swollen and the patient is afraid, leave it for one or two days without loosening the arm: perhaps a warm abscess will come; do not enter into the bath, then resume the surgery if he wishes; and if the opening is small and the blood flows thinly and you fear that not enough blood will flow, then apply fire directly to that opening with all the flame; work quickly a little, although the place may be swollen; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the place swollen, do not begin the dressing again, and put on a poultice of oil lees, for it lightens the body of blood, and is more effective in this case the lees than the oil; and thus administer the oil lees in each dressing that you dress the veins to stop the flow of blood; and the same does treacle and bull's bile when they are put on the place; they refine the blood and it disperses when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there comes a large abscess, which often happens, especially when it is not dressed before the opening of the vein is small, then hurry and put on the place a sponge soaked in water and salt one pou chaut, and bind it for an hour; and you must do this after the flow of blood from the vein, and if there remains any blackness or greenness at the place after some days, it does not harm; and if you wish, put on something of aloes or murr mixed in juice of calamus, mustard, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often an abscess and swelling appear at the suture of the basilical bone: therefore put your hand upon it, and if you find the place soft under the pressure of the hand, then that swelling is bad.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Avoid therefore putting anything on what we have said, for fear that it might cut into the artery; but make a dry plaster to harden the place, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw from each the blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is necessary for him who is full and strong, and has need of bloodletting, that a larger wound be made, and let the flames be wide; and for him who is weak, do the opposite, and he must be cauterized little and often, and one should cauterize him by cutting across, not by pricking; and this method of cauterization is safe from blood flow and nerve severing, and is better than long or wide cauterization.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for him whose body is lacking in cauterization, it is necessary to give bread moistened in pomegranate juice; if he is heated, let blood three or four times. And if he is of a cold temperament, let him eat before cauterization bread moistened in musk syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints at the incision, after the release of much blood, then it is necessary that he inhales broth of meat, and subtle fragrant syrup, and uses other things we have said in the division or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to bleed one arm and incise another at times, then it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he bleeds a little by little, according to the amount of his continuous strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if one wants to bleed one arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, then he should bleed seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who wishes to be bled from another side, one must be bled on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is much blood within the body that is already heated and brings on fever; one must draw off great quantities and widen the opening until it flows freely. When you restore all the conditions for bleeding, place your hand over their pulse while they are being bled, so death does not come instead of free flow, which often happens when the bleeder is negligent; and it should not be done when you wish to release the arm and allow blood to flow a second time, if the opening is closed, that you press forcefully on it. Nor should it be done if it is bent, that they extend their arm hastily, for this would be harmful; but leave it until it bleeds freely a second time; or you prick with the tip of the blade until the blood which is frozen at the vein’s opening flows out, and place over it a pouch filled with warm water, and press lightly on it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, then leave it alone and do not constrict it until the abscess has calmed down.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if there is need to bleed for the second time, then bleed in the same place or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein inside the arm is bled instead of the vein of the head because it is composed that way.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the method of bleeding is that the patient puts their hand in warm water until the fingers are red; then it should be tied moderately so that the vein appears well, then bleed now across, not wide nor long; and let the incision be large, and bleed close to the joint of the hand, and if blood cannot come out, put the hand back in warm water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough; and if it is summer, do not put the hand back in warm water, for it is used more in winter than in summer; and bleeding from this vein is safer than all other veins because there are no arteries or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The swelling of the palm of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the method: draw out the hand, and put it in hot water until the veins are swollen so that they can be seen; if you cut across it, and if you cut it completely through, it does not matter; do not go too deep, because the nerves are all exposed under the flesh, and then put the hand back in hot water, if the blood is frozen in the wound and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drawn as much blood as is necessary, put oil and tar on the veins to quickly seal them, and do this for each incision.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The swelling of the palm on the left hand is good for the disease of the spleen, and do it all as I have said for the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The salve of sophene is worth for all the diseases that are below the body, like diseases of the marrow, and retention of urine, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the quality of its salve is that the patient puts their foot in hot water, and rubs on the vein until it peres [Note: 'perer' could mean to wear away or disappear], and applies it over the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot there are many veins; apply it then where the vein is widest, or at the ankle, which moves best.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you apply it on the foot, beware of the nerves that are below, and apply the salve across as well as when cutting; and let the flames be small.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the pus cannot come out, then put the foot in water, and let the vein fully drain.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the first attempt at bleeding fails, then begin again a little higher up, for the blood is salty; do not worry about the nerve, as we have said, and thus do the same with the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The vein of the sciatic is at the ankle of the foot, and its bleeding relieves the pain in the hip when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its bleeding is that the patient enters the bath and constrains above the ankle four times by twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then bleed it in all ways you can, even crosswise; and it is better that you cut it, for the blood is salty, and it is very responsive to many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find it, then cut a vein from the back of the foot towards the little toe, and be careful of the nerves; and let so much blood as you wish, and then untie the bandage, and put on cotton and bind tightly; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of cupping treatments
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Cupping is made from horns, or of clay, or of glass; and cupping treatment is done in two ways: either by striking and drawing blood, or without striking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this cupping treatment without striking is done in two ways: either with full fire or without fire; and the cupping that involves striking and extracting blood is performed in fourteen areas of the body, one being at the very top of the head; another is in the neck; and two others on both sides of the neck; a cupping under the chin; cupping on both shoulders; cupping on the buttocks; cupping within both arms; cupping on both legs; cupping on both ankles; and this cupping does not draw blood, but rather from small veins scattered throughout the flesh, and for that reason it does not weaken a person as much as vein bleeding; and it should not be administered with full fire or without fire in any disease caused by excess, until all of the body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if by necessity of diseases it is required to bleed, or for customs, then we perform it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and at any time; for there are such who, when they need to be bled, have heavy head; and there are such who find fullness and redness on their face, and on their head, and at the neck, and darkness before their eyes; and such who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and spit blood; and there are such who dream, and see by night blood and wounded and dead and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we order it to be bled after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The salve of the ear thus helps with the dryness of the head … which comes to the eyes, and it is not right that this should be after the evacuation of all the body; and this ventilation is in the place of the cephalic salve, and it is not right for those who are of cold temperament to use it, or who have catarrh, because it does them much harm; and for this reason the elderly should not use it, nor those who have cold diseases in their head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often recover from it become forgetful, and for this reason the cupping should be placed a little lower due to the fear of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventilation on the neck is in place of the head salve and the basilic salve, and for this reason it is good for constriction of the breast, and to split the channel of the nostril, and for all, and for fullness; and there it should be applied lightly, because if it holds too firmly, it causes forgetfulness in the stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	Windings at the second ribs of the neck are good for headaches, ophthalmia and migraines, and for strangulation, and for pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in the place of basilica's application; and you must instruct the surgeon to press his hand when applying, that he not cut the artery, and there be no flow of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	Windings below the chin are good for mouth diseases, and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the place of applications to the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Windings on the shoulders are good for diseases that come from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	Windings on the ribs are as good as those of the three veins of the arm, for they draw blood from these large veins; and instruct the surgeon not to press too much with a point, for the area is bare of flesh, and lies close to nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The suction cup that is on the rump is good for hemorrhoids of the anus, and for diseases below, and it must be large, and made of horn so it can draw well; and by chance, if it were delicate, it would break; and it makes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The suction cups on the legs purge openly, for they draw blood from throughout the body, and are good for old pains in the reins, and of the bladder, and renew the flowers; and they are used instead of two sophenes, and of the two ankles, and always they weaken the body after long use, and cause faintness in many conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The method of applying the suction cup is to first place it empty, and suck moderately, and apply it quickly, and move it evenly, and do not stop until you see the area red and swollen, and appear the redness of blood; then stop, and reapply the suction cups, and be mindful of the condition of the body, for there are those who have too much flesh, and clear pores: so it is necessary to strike only once, and make wide cuts, and a bit deep; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the vein is thick, then it must be struck twice: the first time to refine the course of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the vein is very thick, then it must be struck a third time; and when we want to draw blood little by little, we strike only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want a lot of blood, then we repeat often; and if the vein is thick, then strike fully, and the end result is that the flow should be pierced suddenly, and it must be for those who have thick and hard skin, and who have narrow pores, that you anoint the sites of the cupping with opening and dissolving oil: if it is in winter, of violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or cucumber seed oil; and if it is in summer, of watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or other similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is thick and cold, then take oil of marjoram, or of balm, or oil of aniseed, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one who is being treated has tender flesh and large pores, then no oil should be applied, but it is necessary to wash after ventilation with rose water, or cold water, or water of black bindweed, or water of cucumber, or water of porcelain, or other similar things.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And for those who have much moisture, it is lifted with ashes, or water of myrtle, and of sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And for those who have thick excesses, they are lifted with old wine, or water of juice, or decoction of aniseed or chamomile, or other similar things; and it is not right to treat with cupping before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath one hour or two; and do not sleep after the cupping, and it is necessary that they exercise when they are about to be cupped and when they have been cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And beware if the one who is healing is choleric, and if the blood is too sharp and inflamed; then it is necessary that they take cold things, such as pomegranates, endives, lettuces with oil, and similar things; and eat porridge, and castrated animal meat, and moist foods.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And the one who has a cold constitution should take honey syrup, and moderate wine that is between old and new, and eat porridge, and eat porridge and small birds and pigeons; and on the day they will be bled, they must drink more than they eat; and it is necessary to give some people sometimes theriac or musk before or after bleeding to strengthen the main limbs; and the blood should be subtle, but those who are hot should not drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The cups that are placed without piercing are those that are put on the liver, and on the spleen, and gout, and on the belly and the buttocks and the kidneys and the hip, because these parts cannot withstand being pierced, and it is only done to draw blood from member to member, as we place them on the breasts when the infant suckles; to remove viscosity which is in the part, as we put cups on the belly and on the buttocks to reduce the part; and it removes pain when there is phlegm or stone, by its attractive virtue it might remove the phlegm, or displace the stone from its place; and thus it acts when placed on the liver and spleen when there is retained wind, and these cups are administered empty for suction only; and sometimes they are applied with fire, and sometimes filled with warm water, as in diseases of pleurisy, and in such a way that one fills the cup with hot water alone, or with water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the cupping applied with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And it has two fingers in width and half a palm in depth, and on the side around the middle is one small hole, as if to insert a needle, and it should be made of glass, smooth so that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb; and in the middle there is a crossbar of glass or iron, to hold a lighted candle inside, and they should be both large and small according to the diseases and age of those who use them; for the cupping glasses of children are different from those of the old, and of the thin from the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one should place this cupping glass on the limb in the following way: take a candle of wax or a lint, and put it inside the cupping glass through the bar that is inside the cupping glass, so that the flame is at the bottom of the cupping glass so it does not burn the patient; then place it on the limb, with your fingers on the hole we mentioned, so that when you want to, the vapor goes out, and remove the cupping glass; and apply the lint as before, and repeat often if needed.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the suction cup which is administered in the disease of pleurisy, there is no tube or hole, and it is not used except when it is full of water, and it is placed only on the limb; and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Suction cups are only used in places where suction cups cannot be placed due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas; and on bare parts of the body, such as toes or nails, and other similar parts; and the quality of using them is that when you find cups that are filled with clear sweet water without any putrefaction, take them; place them in sweet water for a nut's duration until they become familiar, and have nothing inside their bellies; then bleed from a vein and apply a suction cup, then rub the limb until it turns red, and place the cups on it; when they are full and fall off, if it is an area where a suction cup can be placed, place one because this helps greatly.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, then raise the area of ash, and then with water, very well, and then apply it; and if the wound is too deep after the blood vessels, moisten a linen cloth in cold water, and put on, until the bleeding is stopped; and if the bleeding is multiplied, put on ground vitriol or gall, and similar things, until it is stopped; or you put on the area half of peeled beans, and leave them until they burn at the site, it will stop now; and if you need more, take other blood vessels.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the blood vessels do not want to stop, then rub the area with fresh blood, or you stick a needle until blood comes out, and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they burn; and when you see them fall, sprinkle a bit of ground aloes and incense, or ash, they will fall now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocation.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear son, that foolish physicians throw away this chapter, who never saw any of the old books, nor read a letter from them; and for this reason is the science foreign in our land, because I have never found one good; and I know nothing about it except through the knowledge of the old books, which I studied so much that I have treated the science, and by experience, and by the habit of my life; and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and have summarized at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are mentioned, as I have done in these two previous chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is then necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the words and the chapters where the wise place their understanding, and remain on the truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twisting or crushing comes to anyone, you must hurry to heal the patient from one side and the other, if nothing else kills him, such as weakness of the body, or fear, or old age; or if the weather is not very hot, or too cold; and eat cool things, that is to say cold joints, and meat of birds and veal, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have no fear of a hot abscess, nor of the spreading of matter in the limb; so that the patient returns to his first proper treatment that he has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one feeds the patient with foods that provide thick nourishment, where there is viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and eggs, and feet, and cow's stomach, and birds, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with such nourishment the bone repairs itself and heals faster.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the broken bones of old and decrepit people do not heal or weld well according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children; but it does not matter, reset on the broken bone a thick tendon that hardens and joins the limb together, until it strengthens as it was before; and it does not entirely fail in its task, and therefore it must be nourished with thick meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that go across, and others in a sharpening manner, like the cut of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a small裂隙。 
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And in each manner have his skill, and his proper instrument in the restoration, according to what the remembrance comes into his mind; and the bone fracture is known by the fact that the limb is twisted, and it is clearly seen by deficiency, and sounds at the pressing of the hand; and when there is no twisting nor sound upon touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture; but there may be twisting, or splitting, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	And it is not fitting that you move it by hand, but put on medicines that come hereafter, and then gently reset it now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the fracture that goes upwards, and where the two parts are separated, they must now be put exactly equal, lest hot abscesses come; and if hot abscesses do come, then leave it for some days until the abscess is calmed; then set it equal as you can lightly and wisely, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restorations where there are pieces; then reset it, as it should be done hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if there are broken pieces in the bone, stretch it into two parts, if it is a hand or foot, or by your hand if it is a small limb, or with two ropes, or with one rope and your hand; and place the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the member are separated, reset all additions in their places as much as you can, and beware that through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient; and align well the two ends of the bones in the best way.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And you will feel well with your hand if it seems to you that it is not right: then adjust it properly, and do not bind it too tightly, nor press so much as those who cause by their work a hot abscess and contraction in the limb, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is set, well chastise the patient that he not move it, neither waking nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way; and ensure that the limb is so secure that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels any pain, it is not set, and it must be put in such a position that he feels no pain; and take care that it is set straight, so that no curvature comes when it is restored; and the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs differ in smallness and in largeness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For there are small limbs, such as arms and hands and the like: these must be wrapped in soft and fine linen cloths; and those that are large, such as thighs and legs: these must be wrapped in a broad and hard bandage, for wide bandages embrace the entire large limb and compress it equally on all sides, so there is no defect; then bind around with light padding, three or four turns according to the limb, and press your hand somewhat along the entire bandage, then go above the fracture and tighten less, so that the fracture may move slightly away from itself; then soften the bandage little by little until you take a large part of the healthy area, then take another bandage and wrap it again over the fractured area; then return to the part below the fracture and compress moderately, not too strongly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first passage above; then place between the bandages padding or cloths made of linen until they are all even, then bind everything on top with a strip, and then put your well-made splints on if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, then place a soothing agent for the abscess that is warm and which reduces the swelling, and leave it like this for several days; then apply on your splints, and let them be half the width of a large cane carefully prepared, or made from wood used to make cleats, or from palm ribs, and let them be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	And the splint that one places on the fracture must be a bit larger and wider than the others; and it should also be as long as suits the size of the limb, whether small or large; then apply the splints just as you did in the first place, then bind over with thread appropriately, as in the first place on the break; more narrow afterwards, then less so; and the thread must be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and should be made of soft linen; for if the threads are thick, such as I have seen from the work of fools who make their bindings from twisted linen cords, and it is a great error, because the binding cannot be even if they are too fine, and there must not be less than two fingers' space between each splint.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is wounded by the heads of arrows after they are embedded in their flesh, put under them flax wads, or shredded wool, so that they do not harm.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a fracture, and the skin is broken, I will say the treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not right to extract arrows from all broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limb is large, it is not right to put in arrows until five or seven days later, or longer according to your security against a hot abscess coming; and here you see the method of the ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and torsions: and it is that you take flour that sticks to the mill walls, and knead it with plenty of egg, and apply this mixture, not too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common method of the plaster restoring the fracture in many conditions, especially for women and small children, for it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another manner of plaster restoring the fracture and dislocation and torsion: take three ounces of balsam and ladanum and aneth and asafoetida and gum arabic and myrtle, each ten three-ounces; myrrh and aloes, each five three-ounces; alkanet nine three-ounces; and make powder, and mix them with egg white; if the complexion of the man is hot, then use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, and is useful to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another manner of plaster that is useful for torsion: take myrtle and malva, each ten three-ounces; myrrh and aloes, each nine three-ounces; acacia six three-ounces; Armenian bole ten three-ounces, and grind well, and mix with water or egg white, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another manner of plaster for joints and bones dislocated from their places, and to ease the pain coming, and for cutting the bone, and the fracture: take new wool, and boil it in salt and oil, and put it on the place.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plasters do not restore, but they are good for easing a hot abscess and properly remove the pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another manner of plaster to restore broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earth apple leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another manner of plaster for the restoration of bone fractures and to reduce the remaining abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of vervain, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of beans, of each one part; and grind, and mix with wine, and if the limb is heated, mix it with coriander water moist, or with water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another method of plaster stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of vervain, and flaxseed, balaustine, melilot, and succory, and flowers of violets and chamomile, of all an equal part; and grind, and mix with salt water, or fresh water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its condition.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates says in his book that one should not put on the broken limb to restore strength anything but a salve made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and he says it should be between two not too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen says one should put on the broken limb, to restore, things somewhat dry and warm, such as myrrh and aloe and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another manner of plaster that is good for injury and pain: take mastic and human skull pieces, or bird feathers, and mallows, and sage equally, and grind them, and make a plaster and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then loosen it a bit after, and take care if the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; do not loosen it for many days. And if pain comes to the spot, or itching, without rest or swelling, hurry and loosen it, and remove the plaster now; and take a light cloth, and moist sea sponge, and soak in water, and apply to the area until the itching ceases, and the pain is eased; then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry wool, soaked in water or rose oil, and bind it with a bandage until you are sure of a hot abscess; and calm the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then restart the gentle binding, and a bit of plaster, and do not strain it as much as before; and be subtle until he is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is warm and red and painful and swollen has been completely removed, and you need a plaster and bandage, then start it again, just as you did at first equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if none of what we have said comes to the limb, do not untie it until after three days or four or five or seven; and sometimes leave it for twenty days, according to what you see, until the fracture heals, and the setting of the flesh grows closer; then restrain it more than before, and fatten its meat as I have said before; and if you see the area drying out more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot come; therefore wet it with warm tepid water every time you untie it, and this should be every third day, and slacken the bandage a little; by this work then, nourishment comes to the limb, and quickly mends what the foolish doctor does wrongfully: it is bad, and such work is fearful, and I see nothing else but letting it go and working it rightly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of the various manners of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	There are many manners of fractures and diverse forms, and the causes are distinct; for there are fractures made by the blow of a sword, and the neck removes all the bone to the surface which is beneath the bone, just as an ax does to wood; and therefore this manner of fracture is called "axing.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	When the sword cuts the bone from above without piercing, this manner of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wound of these two fractures is large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded blow, or a split from the neck of a stone, or from falling on stone, or from other similar causes.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if it has a penetrating fracture, which approaches up to the tissue that is under the bone, or on top of the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And there is a wound that is embedded in the bone as fine as a hair, and the split is small, and for this reason, this fracture is called "capillary"; and such a wound can be made by striking with a stone, or by falling, or by similar things, causing the piece of the bone to go inside, and the place becomes twisted like how the hammer marks are left when they strike on pots; the stone enters within.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more to those who have moist bones in their head, such as a child's head; and it happens with all these types of fractures that small pieces are separated like stars; and I will speak about it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we recognize all kinds of fractures by the incision upon them, and the exploration with probes, and by the corrupted flesh that is on them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hairline fracture is recognized by the fact that when the bone is exposed and rubbed over, the fracture appears black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the fracture, take care of the patient’s accidents, and if you see any bad signs, such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, convulsions, sweating, ague fever, and eyes coming out forcefully and reddening, and other similar symptoms in various conditions, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any astounding accidents, and you hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the wounded comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day at the latest.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then you must hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, otherwise the tissue under the bone may be corrupted, and the accidents we have mentioned come about.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the bone fracture extends to the tissue that covers the brain, then you must split the fractured part in this way: and it is that you take the head of the wounded patient, and uncover the bone in every way you can, and over the surface of the wound more thoroughly than you can, and if bleeding comes when uncovering the bone, or there is a warm abscess, assist with what is necessary, and fill the area with cloths soaked in rose oil; let the wound rest until the warm abscess is calmed, and be sure about the bleeding; then begin to remove around the bone, and it is done according to two methods of work: one method is that you cut with a narrow incision first, and this is its form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then make another cut larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have various numbers of cuts, some narrow and others wide, and let them be pointed, and let them be made of Indian iron; and work lightly so as not to injure the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and strong, then you must pierce around it, either by making cuts with trepans, but not so deep that they do not penetrate beyond the skull bone, and there should be a margin or circle at the tip to prevent the point from going beyond the bone; and you must have several of these, each fitting the thickness of the bone, so that you have trepans for all skulls; and this is the form of the three types of trepans:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities for piercing around the broken bone are that you put the drill on the bone and turn with your hands until you know the bone is pierced; then place the drill in another part a little after, and thus do all around, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone which is between the holes, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw out the bone by hand or with any tools that you have such as tongs, pincers; and be careful not to touch the marrow nor the surface.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and extracted the bone, then you must remove the remaining roughness of the bone with another instrument resembling an incisor, but it must be finer and more delicate than other incisors; and if any small bones or scales remain, remove them lightly with some tools; then clean the wound with bandages and ointments that we have mentioned.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of work is that which Galen says, which is more safe; and he praises it greatly, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is first necessary that you uncover a part of the bone where the fracture appears to move, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place under the head of this lenticular incisor, of which here is the form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, and the part is cut on two sides, so that the cutting is toward the bone; then strike with a small mallet, so that you lightly saw the entire bone, and take great care of the tissue underneath; if it is adhered to the bone, remove it lightly, for it can be removed without harm and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not pierce through to the skin, and the bone is only cut on top, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to return that roughness, and remove the scales with a fine scraper which you must have in various quantities, to administer in each place what is most suitable, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Then scrape first with large scrapers, and afterwards with finer ones, and do not stop doing this until it is well.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other hairdressings and subtle fractures, you must administer according to its alignment; and this is something that is not revealed to one who has not devoted their study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the surface is exposed, then you must take a linen cloth according to the size of the wound, and wet it in rose oil, and put it on the wound; then take another cloth doubled two or three times, and wet it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth; do this as lightly as possible so that you don't burden the surface, then administer over it another layer without binding too tightly just enough for it to soak the wound; and leave it like this one day or two until the abscess heat is calmed, then untie it, and apply medicines such as lily roots, wheat flour, incense powder, aristolochia, and similar things; make a powder from these things, put it on the wound, and immediately administer cleansing medicines without irritation; keep the wound clean so you don't leave the ointment, nor allow foam to gather, for when foam gathers on the brain's cloth, it corrodes and harms it, causing great harm to the patient; for when something irritating is placed on the surface, it hardens above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, if any bad accidents come to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if darkness does not come except because of the medicine that has been placed on it, which has such virtue, then you should take one part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and glue one cloth, and put it on the surface; then treat it in the manner of treatments that are necessary until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose above are broken, or one by itself, for these are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, nor does it cause bending or twisting, and then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you must put your little finger in the hole of the nose, and place that break inside with your index finger, and press gently, until the nose returns to its natural form; and do this lightly, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the nose, and the fingers cannot reach the place, then you must make it even with the head of a peg or something similar.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is in two parts, then repair it likewise, and hasten to restore it on the first day if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the inflammation has subsided, then put a wad of linen cloth at the tip of the nose, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	When you place one against the other on the opposite side, if there is a fracture; and let the threads be so thick that they fill the holes of the nose.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some say that one should wet the threads in butter, and change them each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem right to me, but they should be moistened with egg white and flour powder; then leave the thread until the bone is hard and the cartilage is stiffened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes one places goose feathers in the nose instead of threads, and wraps a cloth around it, and holds the fracture, and the patient breathes through them; do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if hot abscesses come to the nose while you are working there, then put a poultice or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in the juice of dittany.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if no hot abscesses come, then apply a plaster for strength, of flaxseed flour and incense powder, mixed with egg white, then put light lint on top, and do not tie the nose; and if the fracture of the nose is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract it with appropriate instruments, then sew the wound, and treat with things that heal flesh and cause union, such as plasters and suitable ointments; and if there is no internal wound in the nose, then cure it with tents, and put strips of linen until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the fracture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is fractured below, and there is no wound outward, and the fracture is only outward, and is not broken into two, but rather bent inward, it is recognized as a slight one.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, that you put your index finger in the patient’s mouth; and if the fracture is on the left jaw, then put your right hand's index finger, and push the fracture inward slightly, and align it with the other hand outward, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is separated into two, it is necessary that you administer extension with two parts, until they are equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if movement of the teeth happens, or rupture, then extract them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then put on the broken jaw cerote, and put on the cloth double; and put on the cloth a large well-made splint, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it up as much as you can, and command the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, then untie it on the third day, and then reset what has changed; and put a plaster on it, of the powder from the mill with egg white or flaxseed flour, after you have removed the cerote; and put on the plaster light wool, and if the plasters dry out, and the disposition of the patient does not change, leave it until he is healed; many times it is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if hot abscesses come, then administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, examine whether any piece of the bone has been removed; then carefully remove with appropriate instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then widen it with fire according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and none remain, sew the wound if it is wide, and apply appropriate poultices to promote flesh growth until it heals.
de la forcele	of the strength
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The force breaks often before, towards the shoulder, and the break is according to three manners: where it is broken and separated in two, and there are fragments, and it is the easiest to restore; or there is break with wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the work is when the break is without wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder where the force breaks; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then put equal the break in your hands, so that the form be as it should be, and there be no appearance nor misalignment.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend more, then place under the shoulder of the patient a round sphere of cloth, or of wool, and let it be large according to your necessity; and extend and lift the force, and hold the sphere in your hand, so that you put equal the break as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the clavicle to its place due to it being swollen, then the patient must lie often on his back, and put under the shoulder a medium pillow, and the attendant pushes the shoulder down until the bone of the clavicle is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then align the fracture with your hands, and if you find it shattered, you must cut above; and pull the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join due to any impediment, then cut it with one of the incisors that you have; but place this instrument under the clavicle to protect the skin.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and it resembles a spoon, and is not closed, and should be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and let it have two ends, as you see, and one should be wide, and the other narrow, like the opening of the wound you made when pulling the bones; and when you are sure of a hot abscess, sew the wound, and if the opening is small, or you suspect a hot abscess, apply cloths and bandages to the wound according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses come, then moisten the cloth with rose oil and lard and wine, and put on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The binding of the bone, when it is without wounds and without incisions, is that you put on the bone the plaster of the powder from the mill and egg white, and put light bandages on, and place a sphere under the sound splint if you need one; then take a very large band three palms wide, then put a double cloth on top of the bandages and the plaster; then take a slender stick three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage so that the head of the bandage hangs down; and put the stick on the fracture, and turn the bandage over the neck, and under the sound splint and under the diseased splint; and hold it firmly from each side, and when you see that the ligature holds the fracture properly, and you clearly see that the stick does not move over the broken bone, reward it every day, and when the binding loosens, then tie it again; and have the patient lie on his back, and put a small pillow under the splint when he sleeps to raise the shoulder up; this will lighten the fracture by the lightening of the shoulder, or you bind his arm to his neck, and do not untie it unless bad accidents come, until twenty days; then start the plaster again if you see that it is needed, and hold it tight and leave it so until it is restored; and it is restored in as many as twenty-eight days, and less for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	Of the fracture of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	It often happens that the shoulder is fractured either at its edge or in the middle, and one does not know it except by touch; then set it according to the shape of the fracture, and reset it according to its natural form in every way you can; then put on the area flour with egg white, and light bandages, and place a double cloth over it; then place a wide and fine board slightly larger than the shoulder, and if there is any unevenness under the board at any point of the shoulder, use flaxen hair to level it so that the board lies evenly; then bind it tightly with a large bandage so that the board does not move from its place, and check the binding every day; and every time it loosens, tighten it, and if the board moves from its place, adjust it equally, and have the patient lie on their side; and the shoulder will be restored in twenty or twenty-five days. And when this number is completed, then untie it, and be sure, for it is not bone that moves easily out of place.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone sticks out and points below the heart, cut above it, remove the bone, and do what we have said in the fracture of the finger to alleviate an abscess when hot.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture of the breast
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The bone is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; however, it often breaks at the top.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it hangs downward, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks strength, and immediately, and perhaps vomits blood, and the marrow appears in the broken bone, and it can be seen clearly.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that the patient lies on his back, and a cushion is placed between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and align the ribs from both sides with your hands, and carefully adjust equally in all ways until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then apply plasters and bandages over the thin stick of salt, or another light wood, and wrap it in a cloth, and place it on the broken bone so that it does not move; and turn the binding around the back, and tie it gently, and renew the bandage every hour, and if it loosens, then tighten it; and if it needs to be untied due to corrosion or itching that comes to the area, or pain or abscess, then hurry and untie it, remove the plaster, and address what has come from methods of treatment; then reapply the plaster, and tie it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	Of the breaking of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the breaking of the ribs only occurs in their thick parts behind the back, and at the head inward, and they do not bend except because they are slippery; and one feels it well upon examination with the hands.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is that you set the break evenly as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster, and bind it with a splint if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the breaking of the ribs is inclining inward, then the patient feels great pain and piercing, like pleurisy, because the bone pierces the lining; and they have sharp pains, and quickly vomit a great deal of blood, which is a severe sickness, and the ancients put great ingenuity into it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And there are some who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, to push the breech downward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not cause an abscess to become hot if it has not already become so.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has come to be there, then I heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some say that we apply leeches to the place to bleed thoroughly, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the leech may draw the superfluities to the place due to the condition of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some say that we should cover the place with wool soaked in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to distribute the heat evenly, then treat it with the treatment of pleurisy, with food and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear from the bone piercing the tissue, and there is doubt in the patient, then one must cut above the site of the broken rib, and it is necessary to place an instrument underneath to protect the surface; and then one must cut the bone, and extract lightly, and then suture the two edges of the wound, if it is large, and treat with plasters until healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if hot abscesses come, then put cloths soaked in rose oil on it and apply to the area; and treat that place as is necessary for an abscess, and let them lie often on their side where it should be until healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the break of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes the vertebrae of the neck are fractured, and it often happens that they bend; and similarly with the spine.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then beware if you see his hands softened and swollen and numb, and he cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is mortal in many conditions, and if they move and feel well when they are held and pricked, know that the bone joint is saved, and that the patient will be cured if treatment is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if similar things happen to the spine of the back, and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then beware if the legs are weakened, and if the symptoms are present that occur in the hands, and on the back there is ventosity and involuntary evacuation; and when they are examined on their stomach, there is involuntary evacuation.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is lying on his back and he wants to girdle, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is mortal: do not labor too much in his care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to him, then the thing is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that you apply, if there is a hot abscess, rose oil or egg white oil on it until it is calmed; then put on one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and do not let him sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone is dislocated, it is necessary to cut on the shoulder; remove the bone, then sew together the two edges of the wound if it is large, then treat with a poultice until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the collarbone," place your left hand pouch there, and make it equal to the other side as much as you can, then apply the plaster and the splint if needed; then bind it tightly, and if any bone is dislocated, cut into it, remove it, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the break of the bone of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It rarely happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it does happen, there is only a slight thinning at the top; and it makes a long bruise, and inclines outward, and causes pain to the patient in the area, and numbness, and swelling where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it until you are above the break; and you know what the break is and its shape; and if the break is only at the top, then make that break equal so that it is in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long, or it inclines inward, then make the patient lie on his stomach until the restoration of that break is aligned for you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have made it even, then put on the plaster, then place a board of wood or horn over it, and hold the splint so that it does not move; and use the space under the ribs, until the edges are aligned.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side, or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if hot abscesses come, do not touch them until the hot abscesses are calmed, and put on what we have said before; then return to the restoration, and hold it as appropriate, if there is no bad accident; and this is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the break of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder joint is that which is between the arm and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, then it should be restored according to one of the two methods: one of which is that you take a stick of medium thickness, in this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two ends with two ties, and pull them upwards, and have the patient sit on a chair; then throw his broken arm over the stick until it reaches the armpit, and place in the middle a wooden support, then hang something heavy or have an assistant pull downwards; then the doctor places the splint evenly with both hands together, until the splint returns to its proper position.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is to have the patient lie on his back, and tie the hand to his neck, then command two assistants that one holds the part above the splint with their hands, and the other holds below at all times, and each stretches their respective part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction should be stronger, then tighten the ligature under the fracture and above the fracture, and extend each of the helpers to their side.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the fracture is near the top of the shoulder, then you must place one ligature midway under the armpit, and another toward the side, below the fracture; and likewise if the fracture is toward the side, you should put the ligature lightly, without effort, until the fracture is equalized on its place, and on the side; then set the break equally as it should be, and bind it, unless there comes a hot abscess.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if a hot abscess comes, then do not bind it until seven days, and place wool moistened in vinegar and rose oil on it until the hot abscess is calmed; then bind it, and the method of binding is that you put the plaster on the fracture, then bring the arm to the aid device, and put your hand on the shoulder or on the chest; and place the bandage, and bind it on the aid device and on the arm so that the arm is in its proper place, unless something prevents it, or if the bone has not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you fear that the bone may move, use splints, and place on the fracture a splint larger and stronger than the others, and have one inch of space between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it extends three inches beyond the break on both sides; then draw tightly over the splints as I said at the beginning of this chapter about the fracture, more strongly and not spreading apart.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the placement of the splints and their tightening, as we have said, at the time when you restore the broken limb, and you fear a hot abscess, then leave it bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine every three days the binding, that no itching or swelling arises in the area, nor nourishment cannot reach the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If it is addressed, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accident occurs, do not loosen it until after three days or more, and have the patient sleep on his back, with his hands on his stomach; and place under the shoulder one cushion full of wool evenly, and check every hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken limb does not move, nor are the ligaments softened; address it by the power of medicine, and give him the food we have mentioned before, in such a way that the food is at first subtle; and when he begins to recover, let it be coarser.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be reset within forty days entirely; and then one must loosen it and administer baths and medicinal ointments to properly address the area.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the constriction is tight and embedded, it remains to untie for one day or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the breaking of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "forearm bones," of which one is small, and it is the one that goes to the wrist; and the other is large, and it is the one that is below, toward the little finger; perhaps only the large forearm bone is broken, or the small one, and perhaps both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small forearm bone is broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, the healing is bad, and more grievous than when they are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the small splint that is merely broken, then it must be slightly extended gently and made even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large splint, then it must be pulled more tightly; and extend it on the cushion, and raise the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small finger lower than the other fingers, and let the patient cross himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any strain; then extend the minister's arm to the part below his hand, or at the joint, and another minister above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then the physician makes it even, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture there are pieces, then place each in its proper place, and if any detached piece pricks the heart and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut above it and remove it, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the splinter in the wound, I have spoken of it in a special chapter; then take care.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if at the beginning of the healing process abscesses occur, then glue a cloth with cerate made of rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard or too soft; and apply the cloth gently over it until the hot abscesses are calmed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the cerate, and apply a plaster of mill powder with egg white, then place the splints, and let the splint over the wound be stronger and a bit wider than the others; and know that there must be six splints on the arm in various arrangements: whether the wound is in one of the bones or in two; and bind tighter over the wound than elsewhere, and always less tight as you move away, as I have said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the cloths that are over the wound be soft and moist, not hard nor rough; and let the thread with which it is bound be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the joint after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accidents come to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, then you must spray the member with warm water, until the itches are soothed; and let the member rest not tight.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then restart the binding, and if the joint is softened and the bones separated, and similar things, then adjust it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And take care if the nourishment cannot reach the member because it is too tight, then you must soften it a bit, and leave it this way for some days until the nourishment flows there, and then bind it tightly.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not release him until twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And then he can put his hands on his neck, and let his necks be equal, and beware of movement and agitation, and sleep on his back; and know that this break is restored in thirty days or thirty-five, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the break of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and the knuckles of the fingers there are few breaks, and they do not come except by bending many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, then it is necessary that the patient sit crosswise, and sits straight in front of him equally; then place his hand on the stretched cloth, and the minister extends the broken bones, and the doctors make them equal until they are well joined; and apply the plaster and bandages, if abscesses do not come, then put a splint according to the size of the area; and wrap it in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the break is on the outside around the belly of the foot, make a ball of cloths, and instruct the patient to press it against their broken foot; and then bind it with a long cloth, and let the stake be as thick as the palm of the hand, and bind it tightly, as is appropriate.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is on the top, then you must put a stake on top and another underneath in the sole, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it all around the hand, and stop the binding between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the break comes to any of the joints of the fingers, if it is swollen, then set it straight as appropriate; and bind it with the sole, and if you wish, put a small straight stake to raise the break, and do not move it; and if the break is on the other fingers, such as in the index or one of the others, then set it straight, and bind it with the healthy finger that follows; or you bind them all together as one holds, which is better, or put a stake on top, as with the thumb; and take care in the restoration and placement of a hot abscess, and support what comes to it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The bone of the thigh is often broken, and it is well seen when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is such that one ties a bandage above the break, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his back, then each minister extends his bandage equally on his side; and this is when the break is in the middle of the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near the root of the thigh, then one of the bandages should be towards the groin, and the other bandage below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And likewise if it is near the knee, then the bandage should be near the knee, and the extension downward; then the physician places the bone straight with both hands until it is according to its natural form, and then applies the plaster, and binds it, so that no abscess comes.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it calm down then return to your work and your treatment; the procedure is done in such a way.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	You must wrap around the fracture with a thick bandage doubled over II or III times, and leave the excess, then turn the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the knee, and place I long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee joint, so that the ends of the thread come above; then wrap the bandage around the leg and the thigh, then put splints on the fracture, and put one splint on the bone of the leg; then use a soft cloth to fill the empty space between the leg and the thigh to make the compression even, then begin to tie III or IV turns firmly over the fracture; and as you go up from the fracture, tighten less; then hold with II ends of the thread that you placed between the leg and the thigh, and tie III splints that are above, then come back down to the top of the thread until you reach near the foot; and compress so that it does not move from its place, then leave it like this, provided that no abscess or swelling or similar occurs.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, then untie it and set right what comes, as we have said many times; and if there are bone fragments that cause pain, they must be washed out if one can; and if one cannot, then the area must be split open and force used; and treat it as we have said until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the thigh is broken in such a way that pins are inserted, as in the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, in the restoration done this way, the patient does not limp.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored in 50 days, or a little less or a little more, according to the various complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the groove of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the area of the knee there is little breakage, but it bends often.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is no more than a crack, or perforation, and it happens to all wounds, both apparent and hidden, and this people feel well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is to put equal pressure on what is round at its ends until it is assembled as much as can be moved; then apply the plaster, and place a rounded stick if you need one, and bind it as necessary, then treat all the conditions we have mentioned in other fractures, such as hot abscesses and others similar; apply to each incident what suits it until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called by the proper name "tibia," and the other is called "fibula"; and it happens all alike as it comes to the arm, and for this reason the restoration is just like that of the arm equally, and the work is entirely so. And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all parts.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the slender bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the thick bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it is clearly seen; and it turns downward.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then apply extension, and make it equal, and bind the splints evenly; but nonetheless, if the fracture is bad, and there are many pieces, the extension should be smaller and lighter; and adjust according to your strength.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have fully completed your work, take two splints that fit the leg on both sides and are as long as the leg from the knee down below; then wrap around twice with one bandage above and below, and tie it in the middle likewise, so that at this point the leg cannot bend to the right or left, and thus is well secured; some apply a splint of the length of the leg, which is made of wood, and place the leg there to prevent movement, and they do this properly in the break where there is a wound; and move the leg each day to see if there is a hot abscess or other accident; thus treat it until it heals.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle no fracture comes, but in the bones of the foot sometimes a fracture comes and on the toes a little, and there is force that breaks in many positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there comes a fracture in the bones of the foot, and you see these bones protruding over each other, then put this patient's foot on the ground as if he wanted to walk, and then place your foot on his, where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their places; then apply the plaster and bandages on top, and place under the sole of the foot a small tablet with two fingers full [of something], then bind it to the advancing foot after you have wrapped cloths around, and other things you need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days will have passed, then loosen the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken, or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the toes are broken, then restore them as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then place a splint along the length of the toe, and let it be a bit wider; then put under the foot that board I have mentioned, and bind it appropriately; and if there are two or three, or more, broken, then place a splint on each toe according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and bind the board under the foot; and let it remain so that the top of the board raises the belly of the foot, so that it holds it firmly.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things I have said to other breakers, from when we have spoken; and aid each incident as it befits.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	Of the fracture of the bone of the wrist
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of the female's natural part is fractured, have her sit extended, then incline her towards the back part, and hold her from behind; then fill the space with cotton for the woman’s affected area as thickly as a thumb; then make the woman stand up, and raise her back little by little, and thus the cotton jumps until it reaches the entrance of the natural part, and the bone comes back into place; and when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and put it back after she has urinated, and do this for seven days or around that time: the fracture will be restored. If you want, take a bladder of a deer, tie a cane to its opening, and insert the entire bladder into her natural part; then blow into the cane forcefully until the bladder is inflated inside: it will restore the natural part to its place; then fill it with cotton and leave it this way for some days until it heals.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the wrist of the man is broken, or of the woman, restore it thus as we have said in the bone of the hip; and these fractures are not hidden to one who puts his study and use into it, and understands my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the fractures indicate in various positions the right way of restoration: understand it then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose's throat and insert the penis into it; then wrap cloths around it, and leave it for three days or even longer, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or the shoulder or similar, that he be bled now, so that the bleedings we have mentioned testify to it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, then staunch it with vitriol, if you have nothing else, then resume restoring the fracture in that same hour, or on that day, if no warm abscesses come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if warm abscesses come, then delay the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscesses are calmed, and do not touch it on the third day nor the fourth, for you would cause a harmful accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible on the open chest, then you must set it lightly with your hands, with slight stretching.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the stretching is not suitable for setting with your hands, then reset it with this instrument which is made of iron, seven or eight inches long, and its width according to the size of the wound; and therefore it is necessary for the physician to have three or four, according to what is needed for each fracture treatment; and let it be round and a bit thick, so that it does not bend when compressing the limb during your work, and let it be sharp at the front, and thicker from the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called “palainche”, for which the head of the bone should be placed on the visible part of the bone; and it is pushed once, until it returns, and is equal one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is delicate, and the instruments cannot properly grasp the bone, then you must cut the head of the bone so that the instruments may have power over it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring back the bone as we have said, then cut it with a suitable instrument, whether an incisor or saw, to your ability; then scrape what remains in the bone of roughness and small shards.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is put back, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	So do so that it is in its place, then moisten the cloth with black astringent wine, and clean if it is in iron; and do not put on the wound plaster or anything else that has oil, lest it cause putrefaction and corruption; then administer iron when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut the covering all around according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not constricted with the fracture; and many times foolish doctors have done this, and have caused death or sometimes corrosion on the patient; and let the constrictions be softer and looser than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you fear that adverse accidents may come, as we have said, and you find pain in the place, then it is not right to put iron on; but wrap around, instead of iron, hard cloths, and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one day or two the swelling at the wound, remove what you have put on with all wine, and apply a healing salve for wounds, such as tetrafarmacon and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you must loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be arranged in such a way that the swelling runs down lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if many days pass and it cannot heal but repeatedly swells, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which you must probe the wound with a tent, and remove all these loose pieces that cause the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the place, or any other kind of corruption, then you must cure it, according to what he says in his chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and appears on the limb, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and other similar large limbs, then do not handle it, for many times death comes from it, but leave it until it rots; perhaps it will fall off by itself after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of burns that come upon the joint
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	They often come after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a hideous thing to see the appearance of the limb; and perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Take care then if the knot is fresh: give him medicines that are styptic, such as aloes, frankincense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acacia, and similar others, so that you take any of these things, or all together, and mix them with styptic wine or with egg white or with oil; and put them on the knot in pledgets, and bind it well, and do not loosen it for many days; then remove it, and start another one, until the knot is removed; or you pour it onto a piece of cloth well made; for the property of the cloth is that it removes all the swellings over the limbs; and if the knot has already turned into hardness like stone, and it needs to be removed, cut above it, and split the apparent excess; or shave it with some razor until it is removed, and treat it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb which is weak after the healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the bone fracture is restored, and the limb remains weak and delicate afterwards, it happens for many reasons: one of which is that it was bound too tightly, and not bound as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, and nourishment could not reach the limb; or due to excessive bleeding; or due to excessive movements, not at the right time; or because he has little blood in his body, thus being weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the treatment is that you make the patient eat and make the body soft, so that blood multiplies in him; and administer baths, and give joy and rest; then apply pitch on the limb so that the pitch attracts abundant nourishment, and frequently wash it with warm water, so that nourishment flows to the limb; and restore it to its natural form.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	of the limb twisted after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone is exposed, and the form of the limb is ugly, it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb all over again, and many foolish doctors have done this in our land; and this work is blamed, and great harms come from it, and perhaps death; nevertheless, if the knots and tortures are fresh, they should be soaked in hot water, or herbs with softening properties should be cooked, such as leaves of mallows, and roots, and melilot, and similar things; and he makes a softening plaster, just as dyakilon does well, and you take the mucilage of mallows, and cook it with goose fat or linseed oil, and make a plaster on top; or you take fat figs, and crush them with flaxseed, and similar medicines that reduce swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the swelling is removed by rubbing continuously and for a long time with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let the limb be moved every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the curvature is hardened and stiffened like stone, and it is necessary to remove it with iron, then it must be cut down to the bone, with a subtle and light incision; and apply care and attention in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, then it must now be brought back without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the limb swells, and by chance it is reset with difficulty in its place; therefore, it should not be moved when it is swollen: many times this brings on spasms and other pains; nevertheless, when this happens, have the patient bled, then leave it until the swellings are calmed; then wash the limb with warm water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each limb as the treatment comes into its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters of the dislocations from the head to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	It often happens that the jaws are dislocated here, and the dislocations of both are according to two manners: whether they are slightly out of their places, and softened a bit; or they are entirely dislocated, and hang towards the worse side, and saliva flows from the mouth which he cannot hold, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped up with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns by itself through various positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is complete and full, then you must reset it quickly, without delay; and in such a manner that the assistants hold the head of the patient, and the doctor puts his thumb of one of his hands at the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is of both parts; and the other fingers of the hand should be spread out to make equal; and instruct the patient to soften his jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the physician puts it equally, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are together, then moisten them with warm water and oil, until you reset them lightly; do not delay the reduction, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are equally reduced and the patient’s mouth closes well without softening, then place cloths moistened with a salve made of rose oil and wax on them, then lightly bind it with soft bandages; and let the patient sleep on his back, with his shoulders between two cushions so that he does not move to either side, nor exert himself to chew, but take light food until the pains are removed and the jaws are healed; and then eat whatever he wants lightly, and do not strain to open the mouth while eating and drinking until the jaw is well healed and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be perfectly reset within an hour and are not returned to their places, then fevers and usual sweats occur, and perhaps diarrhea, and perhaps vomiting of pure bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is destruction; and many times the one to whom it happens dies within nine days.
de la forcelle	of the forceps
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot dislocate from the side within the continuity of the breast and the chest, and it sometimes dislocates outward, and this is well felt.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is such that the patient lies on his back, and extends his arms; then press the area firmly with your palm, and it will return; then apply the plaster and bandage it tightly; and the joint on the side towards the shoulder cannot dislocate; if not, and if it sometimes does dislocate, reset it to its place as we have said; then apply the plaster and bandage it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until he is healed; and in the same manner is returned the joint of the spine when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	Know that the shoulder is dislocated in only three ways: one of which is when it dislocates at the part below the axilla; and the second is at the part of the armpit; and occasionally it dislocates at the upper part, but this happens rarely; and it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor does it dislocate inward towards the nerves; and most often it dislocates downwards towards the axilla, especially in those who have little flesh, because for them it happens quickly; for those with enough flesh, it happens hardly, and returns hardly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And occasionally it happens to some men that there is a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Then you must test it until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And the dislocation is recognized when it moves down towards the armpit, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find between them a manifest diversity; and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and beneath the armpit by touching the head of the shoulder, as if it were an egg; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his neck, nor move in any movements; and likewise, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it manifestly by touch; and this kind of dislocation is not difficult to reset when it is new, or if the person is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the minister lifts the patient's hand up high, then places his thumbs under the joint, and raises the joint forcefully upwards to its place; and the minister lifts the hand, stretches it upwards, then puts it back down; it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and the attendant should use a softening and relaxing lotion, such as a decoction of hellebore, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and apply it; then the patient is placed on his back, and under the joint a piece of wool is put, not too soft nor too hard, then the doctor places his heel on the wool, and lifts the shoulder head forcefully, and pulls the patient's hand; and another attendant holds the patient's head so that it does not move down; this shoulder returns completely now, and if you wish, repeat according to this method: and it is that you make present a person who is taller than the patient; he should stand sideways, and put his shoulder under the patient’s joint, and lift the joint up so that the patient hangs on the arm; another attendant pulls the patient's hand downward towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, then with him a heavy object can [be used], and the dislocation returns immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And it is also reset in another way: and that is to plant a long stick in the ground, so that the shoulder is as round as a spigot, neither too thick nor too thin; then it is placed under the patient, but he should have cloths underneath, and the patient should be lying along the length of the stick; then his arm should be stretched out downward on the other side properly, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it does not want to return for all these things we have said, then do this treatment: take a stick two arms in length and four fingers wide, which has the head round enough to move easily under the armpit, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then tie over the head of the staff a soft cloth so that the staff does not injure the patient, then place it under the armpit of the patient; and extend his arm over the long staff, and secure the shoulder over the staff, and the arm at the wrist, then place the arm on the step of a wide ladder, and let the hand hang down, and let the body hang from the other side: the joint will now return.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, however that may be, you must put under the armpit a sphere of equal wool, then apply a plaster mixed with mill powder, along with incense and egg yolk, over all the shoulder and around it, then press gently under the armpit, and wrap the bandage over the plaster, and bind the hand to its neck, and let the hand remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary that he eats little, until the limb is strengthened, for it will heal faster; and then eats more after five days or seven, and moves it; and if it is stiff and not softened, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is displaced due to moisture that has come there, or for another reason, then you must apply cauterization at three points, as it is set out in the chapter on cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it loosens after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift his arm up, then know that the nerves at the head of the shoulder are cut or stretched or weakened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation which is towards the armpit and the breasts, or at the back, is made by pushing and stretching of hands, and another place administers it; and treat until it heals.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing cracks appear in the limb and delays in movement occur, then the patient should bathe many times until those cracks are alleviated and return to their original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated bit by bit and returns bit by bit; and if it is completely dislocated in all directions, especially in front and back, and the dislocation does not settle back, because one can see it well and feel it well; and it dislocates according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick part with the healthy one, then you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is locked, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch his shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you must reset it before hot abscesses occur, for if hot abscesses were to come, then it would be difficult to reset; and perhaps it cannot be entirely reset, especially when it is at the back; it is worse than other dislocations, causing greater pain, and perhaps death may come.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is such that when it can be reset, you extend his arm with both of your hands; and his arms should be spread out, and the hands of the healer around, above and below, and push the joint to its narrow parts together, or to the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and trust in the root of the palm the thumb which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension; and it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold it tight with two ministers so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm on each side, then wrap a long and wide cloth; and when the joint is joined to his hand, then anoint it with some oil to soften the joint, then forcefully put the joint in place until it returns; and when it is in its place, then apply a dry poultice with egg white, bind it tightly, and hang the arm around the neck of the patient, and leave it for several days, then unbind it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firm in its place, then loosen the bandage and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, then reapply the poultice and the bandage, and leave it thus for some days until it is firmly set; then untie it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if he feels stiffness after the relocation of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is eased; or you put on the joint a piece of fat sheep's wool, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and make him enter the bath; and when he sweats, rub the joint gently, then put the wool back on, and then enter the bath again; and do this two or three times until he is healed; and if you wish, you can put on cow's fat mixed with butter, heated and applied; it will return to its proper position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The joints of the hand dislocate easily, and the reduction is lighter than other joints. Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place quickly, in the same hour that it dislocates, so that the area does not swell or a hot abscess form.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the reduction is such that you place the affected hand on a table, and the assistant stretches the hand, and the doctor places it evenly, so that they put their palm on the surface of the joint, and push until it returns. Nevertheless, it must be checked if it is properly in place; then have the patient lay the back of their hand on a table during stretching and reduction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, then place the patient’s back of his hand on the table, and the doctor places his hand on that part of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, that is good. If not, then apply warm soothing plasters to the abscesses and leave it thus without restarting.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot place it back in its place after some days, then the joint remains twisted; and it does not harm the patient’s strength as long as the hand is weak, and cannot grasp anything at all: then know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries; there is no other remedy than to cauterize near the wound, and perhaps nothing else will help.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, then put on the plaster that we have said, then bind it and leave it for five days, then unbind it and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is any crack, then soak it in warm water, and rub it until it heals.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on each side, sometimes at the back of the palm or on the front; then stretch the finger and push the dislocation with your fingers until it returns, then hold the tip of the finger and pull towards the part where it is separated; and leave it for two days, and then make it equal that day; and bind it at night as we have said, and unbind it during the day, and make it move, and bind it at night again; do this often until it becomes tight, and do exactly the same if it is dislocated on the front of the hand, and do as you did before until it heals; and do the same when it is dislocated from another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Of the dislocation of the vertebrae of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the vertebrae of the back or neck are dislocated, or there are several dislocations, there is no treatment, for death quickly claims the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the sign is that excretions occur without control, and cannot be held, and often some limb, or both thighs or both arms or one, becomes weak; and often the vertebrae shift in four parts; the one that shifts at the back is called "humpback": the treatment is that you reward if the humpback came from childhood: there is no treatment or healing at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And for those that come from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient methods of treatment speak with great words, which do not have much benefit in all cases; but I have abbreviated according to my intention, and have formed various instruments in different ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the hunchback which comes to the chest first, there is neither wit nor health; and likewise that which comes directly on both sides, and none can cure it except properly who comes to the back, as I said; and it is that the patient be stretched face down in an equal place, and have padding underneath him so he does not injure himself; then plant one stake at his head firmly into the ground, and another at his feet, and tie a rope under the boards of the patient, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles; and two assistants hold the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two stakes; and they should be well secured, the stakes as we have said, and the doctors place their palms on the hunchback firmly until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return by this cure, then take a board of three arms in length, and place it under the rib, and let the patient be on their side, and put the head of the board under the rib, then place the middle of the board upon the spine; and have the doctor put his feet on the other end of the board, and press firmly until it returns to its place; and if you see, do it in a twisting manner that turns with the hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And it is that you fix two stakes at the head of the patient's large bed, and towards the feet two others, and have between each stake, above and below, a palm’s space in length; and have in each stake one hole, through which the axle turns, and let the stakes be firmly in the ground so that they do not move; and between each two stakes have one turning stake, on which the ropes turn, and have in two axles two small stakes of a palm's length to turn the axle; and then tie the rope that is among the boards to the axle towards the head, and the other rope towards the feet at the other axle, and each of the assistants turns his axle with all the rope, and the master adjusts the spine evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, then apply a drying poultice with an abundance of egg, and then the wicks, and then the rod from a tablet three inches long, which should touch the area of swelling and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage as we have said, and let the patient use subtle nourishment until he is healed; and if anything comes at the end of healing, then one must administer softening and soothing medicines with the rod that we have mentioned above; and sometimes one administers a piece of plaster, and sometimes the appearance comes in the rear spine of the back, and one thinks it is dislocation; and it is the bone that appears, therefore one should not be presumptuous: perhaps death might result.
des dislocations de la hainche	dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Know that in the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only dislocations occur, not as in other joints; and the joint of the hip is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, and front and back; and more inside than others, and less dislocated front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of its internal dislocation is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it appears longer, and the sick knee is more open than the healthy one, and the sick cannot bend their knee to the fire; and the area next to it is swollen with a hot abscess, because the head of the thigh comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of the one to whom it comes to deceive, so is this accident contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the sign of the one to whom it happens in front is that he extends his leg according to the fulfillment; however, he does not bend his knee without pain, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot go forward, and he retains his urine, and the ankle swells, and when he walks, he steps on his heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of the one to whom it happens at the back is that he cannot extend his knee nor bend it, and that leg is more bent than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the hip joint is in a position below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The remedies for this kind of dislocation are that you reward if the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its position, there is no treatment; and it does not require any expectation.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in the one where the dislocation is fresh, and it is of the four types of dislocations, you should hurry to return the joint, extend it inward and outward, and move it left and right; perhaps it will return, and no other treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, you must prepare one assistant strongly, and extend the leg forcefully with two hands, or with a rope tied above the knee; and another assistant extends his hand in such a way that he places his hands under the bones, then tightly binds a strong rope on the thigh; and another holds the end of the rope; and they extend upwards and downwards all at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground at once and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to the four types, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not, then one must attend to its type. When the dislocation is outward, you should have the patient lie on his healthy side, then place the band at the root of the thigh and the spot below the angle, then extend the band upward toward the angle and toward the force; then take another assistant's arms, grasp the thick part of the diseased thigh, and stretch it upward forcefully: thus it will return to its place now; and this type of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot secure it in the manner we have said, then you must bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong band above the two heels and above the two knees, and let the diseased leg be stretched out twice as long as the other; then let him be hung from the top of a pole, and let him be raised up two arms' length off the ground; then command one assistant to grasp the head of the thigh, and have another assistant hanging with the patient who grasps the thigh forcefully, for the joint returns quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocation is in the thigh, the patient lies down, as we have said in that which has gilbositeit, and holds tightly the limb on the sick leg properly, and on the foot also; then places II sticks, I at the head and I other at the feet, then inserts I stick between the thighs of the patient inside the form; and has planted with moist cloths around, so it does not hurt the patient, then stretches each minister towards him, and the physician puts equally in his hand the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put it on the table, and press it as we have said in the gilbositeit, and lay the patient on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the diseased leg quickly, as I have said; and let the doctor place his hand on the diseased angle, then press with the other hand, and stretch downward towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is behind, it is not necessary to extend the patient downward or lift them up from the ground, but they should be positioned as if the hip were dislocated behind, just as we have said about lying on both hips; and let them lie on their face, and the limb should be extended as we have said before, and one must press on the joint with a table; and it will be correct when the patient extends his legs, and they will be equal; then align the thighs, apply the poultice, and strap it with a bandage so that the hip does not move; and let them rest for three or four days, then unbind them, and apply the poultice again; and if you see that they are equal, strap them as before, and leave them for three days; then unbind them, and make him walk gently until the limb is strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: to be known, inward and outward, and backward; and it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the sign thereof is that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not join with the thigh, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all such cases is that you make the patient sit upright, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back against his face, and put his foot on your feet; then take his knee in your palms, and pull between your hands, then bend both sides of the knee firmly; and another minister extends his foot until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that it joins well with the thigh lightly; and apply a plaster over it, and make the leg join with the thigh, and bind them together tightly for three or four days, then release the binding; and let not the patient work at walking until the limb is strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not fully healed, apply strong extension as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is mended.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heel is sometimes displaced, and sometimes completely dislocated, inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and protrudes forward at the part where it is dislocated: the realignment is light, and one should gently extend it by hand when it is only displaced.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is entirely dislocated, then you must make the patient sit upright, and one minister holds firmly by the leg, above the ankle; then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left twice, then extend it upwards, and gently push the foot upwards; and do this twice, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, then repeat the work, for it will return; and if it cannot be returned thus, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and place one stake firmly in the ground between his thighs, and wrap cloths around it so that it does not hurt the patient; then have the ministers hold the thigh, and another minister extends the foot with both hands or with a rope which is tied above the ankle; then each minister extends equally, and the stake should be between the patient's thighs to hold the patient in place when he is extended; then the doctor places the dislocation evenly with his hands, and another minister holds the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is at the right point, put the plaster and bandages on, bind it properly, tie the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves that are above the heel behind, so the binding is not too tight; then leave it for two days or three, and if the binding softens, tighten it again; then untie it on the third day or fourth, and forbid the patient from walking for four days; and if he walks before this time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if hot abscesses come, you must soothe them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When both are dislocated, they must be gently extended without effort, and this is an easy thing to do.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any joint of the foot's back, then you must make the patient sit on a flat place or on a table straight up, and put your foot on what appears of these joints, then press with your foot firmly until it returns; and when it is aligned, and nothing appears, then place under the sole of the foot a board at two points, then stretch it firmly, and leave it for three days, then release it; and make it rest until it is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with the dislocation and you want to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies: so do not be presumptuous in the treatment if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for long, and if you are not merciful and compassionate and cautious, not bold; and use at the beginning things soothing hot abscesses, and leave the patient in God’s hands if you see no hope of health; and when you see hope, then reset now the limb to its place, even as the hot abscess comes; and when the limb is in place, then administer things soothing hot abscesses, and treat the wound with desiccating ointments as it should be; and if there is a fracture with the dislocation and small bones are detached, remove them, and do what we have said in simple diseases; and beware of entering into a path of fear according to what I have said, for this does not serve you well according to your Creator, and for the wisdom of your art and body.
Amen	Amen
