O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	To you, my dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical science together with its fulfillment, and I have made an end through its explanations and by its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in vision that I complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is strong in our region and entirely foreign everywhere else, the science has perished and been cut off, and nothing remains of it except the small descriptions in the books of the ancients that hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this have come the errors and the vanities, and closed are the attentions and alienated is the science.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	It seems to me that I want to revitalize together the arrangement of this treatise according to the method of exposition and declaration and abbreviation;
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	and will come together the forms of the cautery irons, and of the other instruments of the work with the adjustment of the explanation and preparation of them, as is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is distant.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for one who interferes to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galens says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, and their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and brains and their number, and the movement and the moving veins and the resting ones, and the place of their origin.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And for this reason Hippocrates says that the name with the name is much, and with the work is little;
et meismement en l’art de main.	and especially in the art of manual skills.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously mentioned should beware lest he fall into error and harm people;
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	Thus, I have seen many times those who are involved in this science and abandon their knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I saw a foolish doctor who cut an abscess of scrofula on the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of the neck;
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	for which so much blood gushed out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And I saw another doctor extracting a stone from a man's eye, and the stone was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	he carried away with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if it were cut out he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And I saw another doctor who took under his care a duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound;
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and the doctors full of ignorance bind the fracture on the wound with splints by strong force, and leave no salve to the wound at all, and so they leave it thus terminated;
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	and he commands that he does not loosen it;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and leaves it thus until the leg was entirely swollen and the foot came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come to loosen the leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	and when I untied it, he was at ease and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But in any case, the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and could not be healed;
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	and the corruption did not stop traveling through the limb until the limb was entirely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And see another doctor who bursts the infected abscess and then inflames it due to the malice of his rule.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a chancre, when it is pure of melancholic humor, should not be touched with iron unless it is in such a place where one can entirely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And for that reason, dear son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two parts:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	that is, work where there is danger in various positions;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For that reason, it is necessary that you be careful so that foolish physicians cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	So take up your weapons in self-defense, and undertake your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best method so that by the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised;
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	and leave the appalling diseases of severe sickness;
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	and remove your doubts from what makes you fear, and have faith in yourself so that you may come from this world to the next of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galens says in some of his admonishments:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Do not take on a bad disease, lest you be called a mad doctor.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have divided this treatise into three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapter is about fire cauterizations and medicinal cauterizations, and the chapters are ordered from head to foot;
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and of the forms of ointments, and the instruments for cauterization, and everything that is necessary for the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things;
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	and the chapter is organized and the forms of the instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and torsions, and similar things;
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	and it is ordered from the head to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	In order for us to remember the work, it is necessary that I speak of the quality of the aid and the harm of each temperament.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of aid and harm are the longest discourse and most subtle science and the secret responses;
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	and about this many wise people have spoken and agreed upon it;
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	and they soothe a bit with their words, for I fear the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that cautery universally helps all complexions where there is matter, except for two complexions:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	that is to say, a hot complexion without matter, and a dry complexion without matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In a complexion that is both hot and dry with matter, some have argued that cautery provides great help;
et li autre dirent le contraire:	and others said the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	that cautery is not useful for diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be treated with heat for a hot disease, nor with dryness;
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	and says he who says the opposite that cautery provides great help to hot and dry disease that comes into the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you compare the body of man and its moisture to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it to be true by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And in any case, let no one interfere except those who have experienced it and who understand through long use the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of human temperaments, and the conditions and causes of their diseases, and the occurrences and the span of time;
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	we have no fear of other temperaments, especially in cold and wet diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the physicians assembled and agreed on the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that cautery together with fire is among the secrets of treatments, and of greater goodness than burning medical cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple, and does not affect any other part except the member that is burned, and does no harm to another member if it be small.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	Burning medications come from one member to another in distancing and cause serious ailments in the member that require severe treatment;
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	and perchance kills the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	Fire because of its height and because of the goodness of its substance does not do this, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And this have I found by experience and by the length of service and the study that I have put into the art, and it was on the truth of things;
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	and for this I excuse myself for the length of the speech, for it does not please me to take away the secret that is contained in the fire, and the quality of the work, how it cures the diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating;
or le recevez en vos pensees.	or receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on when the cauterizations should be done, and chose propitious times.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harmful things coming underneath are placed by the help of the cautery;
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	and especially if the cauterization is for pains necessary outside and urgent that cannot wait the time until greater damage comes to the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And never think, dear son, as foolish doctors do;
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	for the disease that is healed by cauterization has no return;
et il le dient ensi;	and they say it thus;
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it is not as they believe, for cauterization is merely a medicine that changes the temperament, and dries the humors which are the cause of the pain, and it is more effective than other medicines because of its quick action, and for the power of its effect and its sovereignty.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And it is possible that the disease may come sometimes according to the temperament of the patient and the site of the disease and its power;
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	and the excesses are gathered in him through the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered at the site where there is little excess and moisture, such as dental cauterizations for pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return;
mais ce avient poc.	but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last resort of medicine, and it is true;
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	but they do not believe that cauterization is effective after medicine, but their understanding is false, and cauterization is the last resort of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment in any disease and they are ineffective, then we apply the cauterization, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Then it is clear that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the intention of foolish doctors.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancient said that cauterization with a gold instrument is better than with iron, and they said this only because of the quality of gold and the excellence of its substance;
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	and they said that the fire of the cauterization does not cause putrefaction, but this is not true because I have experienced it, and have found that it is true in some people;
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	and cauterization with gold is better than with iron, just as they said it is.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	And nevertheless, when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it cools down quickly;
et s’on le chaufe trop;	and if it is heated too much;
si font au feu;	so they do with fire;
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	and thus there is enough obstruction.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use fire cautery which we have prepared appropriately for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or I have ordered this chapter from head to foot so that the way may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of the olive cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is effective for moisture and cold on the brain, and it is used twice due to a disease called "soda," and because of various humors that descend from the head to the eyes and ears, and for numerous dreams, toothache, throat pain, and especially for all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a dissolving medicine modifying the head for three nights or four, according to what the strength and the age and the habit of the patient can endure;
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	and then shave the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then make him sit between your hands crossed, and place his hands on something light;
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	afterward place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	and there where your middle fingers will come, bleed from the elbow then heat the cautery which is called “olivary”, of which this is the form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	and place it on the marked spot with ink, and do so by loosening and tightening your hand little by little while turning it around;
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	then lift your hand gently, and reward the spot if you see the bone a little small;
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	and if you do not see it, repeat the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you;
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	after take a little tar, and mix it with oil and moisten cotton inside, and place it on the spot, and leave it for three days;
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	after put upon cotton moistened in butter;
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	and leave on until the burn is removed;
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	after treat the wound with the ointment which is called "tetrafarmacion", until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And the ancients said that the longer the wound remains open, the more it purges;
et por ce si aide mues.	and for this reason, it aids movement.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some say that one should let the cautery linger until part of the bone is burned, and then remove what is burned from the bone, and it should be cleaned.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	and others say that the cautery should be left on for so long and pressed so hard that it abates the bone as wide as the spindle that women put in their spindles so that the humors may move out;
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	and one must leave the wound open for a long time;
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	afterwards, it must be cleaned and soaked.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to be entirely good in every case, except in some people where there is a need for fear;
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	and it seems to me that I should leave it alone;
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	for the shoulder is weakened by continuous natural dislocations, as we testify in other limbs;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	and likewise when the shoulder of the patient is weak by nature, and the first method of cauterization is safer and better for me, and with this method I operate then to achieve salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When throughout the head comes chronic pain, and lasts for a long time, then the patient should use yarrow and pills which are called "cochie", and cleansing of the head and oils and plasters;
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	and if the cautery that we mentioned before is done to him and it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Take care if the shoulder of the patient is of strong nature, and that it is not too cold;
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	then cauterize below that cautery a bit as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	After make cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and make the cautery at the place which is called "vasselz";
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and there are places where leeches are applied;
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	and hold your hand so that you do not see until the bone:
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than the others, and I will speak of it later;
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	and it is necessary that the cautery needles for the horns be finer than those used to cauterize the middle of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	Of the cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When a sudden pain comes to a part of the head, and the disease spreads to the eye, and the brain is cleansed with purifying medicines, and all other treatments that I have mentioned in the division of diseases are performed, and none of this helps:
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	then he makes cauterizations according to two methods, that is to say with medicinal fire and of fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	The cautery of medicinal fire is such that you take an onion, and remove the skin and grate it to one part with two shoulders, and then cut into the temple where the pain lies in such a manner that you can place the grated onion under the skin;
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	and when it is placed, bind it tightly and keep it that way for twelve hours;
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	and then untie it and remove the grated garlic, and leave the wound in this way for two or three days;
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	then apply cotton soaked in butter so that the pus may come out.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the treatment of anointing until he is healed;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	and if you want to do this with some burning medicines that I have written about in the twelfth treatise on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The cautery with iron is according to this method.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the cautery of which this is the form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a ball where it has a bit of curvature, and in the middle, there is a small appearance;
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	and place it on the painful area, and hold your hand and turn the fire slightly, so that half of the thickness of the kerb is burned;
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	and lift your hand so the artery does not burn, which is on the outside, and let an abundance of blood flow out.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	After put cotton on awl of seal, and put on the place for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	then put moistened cotton in butter, and then clean the place of ointment until it is healed;
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the cautery which is called "cultellare," at the entire tip, and beware of cutting the artery in this recent migraine.
de emigraine	of migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat a migraine as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not help, and you see that the cauterizations previously mentioned of medicine and iron do not suit him, then you must heat the cautery which is called "cultellare" until it is white;
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	and mark beforehand on the painful place a line of half an inch long, and remove your hand once, so you do not cut the artery and do not reach the bone;
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	and beware of the jaw that moves when one eats, and the nerve should not be touched so that it does not cause spasms in the patient, and beware of blood flow from the artery when it is cut, for cutting has great fear especially for those who are inexperienced, and who are not scholars and experienced;
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and leave the work halfway;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	but I will tell you how to stop blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it applies in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that this cautery does not help the disease, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed;
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	And if you see fit, administer the cautery that we have described in the chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two blades;
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	and this cautery is better and more helpful than the other one.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain in the ears from coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain from cold comes to the ear, and one has applied solutive medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery which is called “point”, of which here is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After puncture all around the affected ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and move a little above the root of the ear once you have marked the spot for insertion;
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	and let there be ten points around each ear;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	after care the place until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	Torture which should be treated by cauterization is none other than those that move phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases;
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and do not perform cauterization on those that come from dryness and spasms of the nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you treat this form of torture which moves phlegm with hydros and purgatives from the head and gargles, and if this does not work, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauterizations:
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	one at the root of the ear, and the other a bit outside the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips;
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	and place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make a cautery directly at the head of the ear below the horn of the head by a bit, and another one on the temple as long as a thumb;
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	and leave the cautery on top until the middle of the heart is burned;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And it resembles the scalpel that we have described before, but it is a bit finer and it is necessary that the blade be a bit thicker;
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	after treatment the place as I have said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not help, and the patient does not have fever, then make four cauterizations:
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	two on the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one at the place called "vasselz" as we have said before, and the last cauterization on the mouth of the stomach;
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	and let it be treated as we have said before.
de litargie	of lethargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this disease, it is necessary to give the patient large herbs and purifying pills for the brain;
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	after raising the head of the patient all, and place on the occiput the mustard plaster which is written in the treatise on plasters;
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	and this is the method of the cautery:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	if he is healed thus, it is good;
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	and if he is not, make three cauteries on the head descending to the neck, and have one inch of space between each cautery;
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	and treat it as the others, and if you see to add, and the patient is enduring, make one cautery in the middle;
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if necessary, two others on the two corners, and treat until it is healed;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	and let the cautery which is called "olivary" be as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	from the cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is necessary that the head be cleansed of sores and what we have said before;
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	afterwards raise the head of the patient, then make a cautery in the middle of the head and on each corner, and one at the back and three on the spine of the neck;
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is enduring, and the disease is strong, make four cauteries on the spine of the back;
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	and he leaves it until the most of the heart is burned, and lifts your hand;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	after the treatment until it is healed, and let the cauterization which is called "olivary" that we have mentioned before be done.
de l’epilempsie	of the epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epiletics should not use fire cautery except those who are phlegmatic, and one must first modify the brain with herbs and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section when the patient is large and suffering from a need for medical treatment.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is a child who cannot withstand it, give him gargles and chewing, modifying the diet frequently with good foods;
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	afterwards, cut the head in the middle, and make the cauterization according to what we have said before, and the cauterization on the vessel, and on each horn;
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and if the patient is strong and enduring, give him cauterization as I have said for one who has paralysis and weakening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauterization be olivary according to the method that I have described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is inflamed, then apply a fine cautery according to this method:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When by the cause of melancholy the excesses or the moisture is corrupted and phlegm becomes thick, then cauterize with such cauters as we have said to him who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by the cause of melancholy the excesses are declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him to drink something by which the brain may be purified, according to what is stated previously in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After raise the head of the patient;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	after make the linen bandage well done, just like the circle, and put it around the head;
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	and the patient is crossed, and be well held on all sides;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	after present the liniment, and it is worth using wool of old barberry;
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	and heat it at a moderate fire, so that when the hand is placed on it, it can be tolerated;
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	after empty the circle inside around the head, and let it cool;
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and do this for the patient once each week with other good treatment, until he is healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	For if you wish to cauterize it, make multiple points all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This method of cautery moistens the brain equally;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	and then put on wet cotton in butter and in goose fat.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eye lid
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When awe comes to the eyes first by the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and give the patient something purifying for the head, and protect it from all moisture, and make him sweat in the bath multiple times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	Afterward, instruct them to lie with their head backward, and perform cautery within the head, and make two cauterizations on both temples if the dripping of the fluid is to both eyes together, or one if it is to one eye;
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	and cut all the veins and arteries that are beneath the heart completely, and let the cauterizations be long according to the width of the temple;
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	and beware of the flow of blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop it with whatever power you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in the incision how you will widen it;
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And sometimes a cautery or hot iron is used under the two rear bones.
dou cors des larmes	from the body of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears of the eyes are old and habitual and are on the veins, or near the arteries that are on the outer appearance of the head;
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	and one sees that they are cold, phlegmatic excesses, then he makes the cautery that I have mentioned at the beginning of this chapter below the eyes:
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	One cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries on the two temples, and two cauteries with a hot iron under the two bones;
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	and if there is need for more, then cautery it wisely above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	from the body of tears inside the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you treat it according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient to drink three nights of decoction;
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	after the king's head, and make a cautery in the middle of the olive-shaped cautery;
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	and make two cauteries of the cautery which is called "clavilis" on the two eyebrows, a little below the hair.
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	and be careful of the artery that you do not cut it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the membrane of the eye is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize it with this cautery which is called "olivary".
de coi ci est li forme:	of which here is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you want to make two cauteries on the two eyebrows as long as the eyebrows are;
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and do not leave your hand there except until a third part of the paper is burned, according to the method I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair that pricks the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	Sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyes turn inward and prick the eye, and a cautery is performed according to two methods:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	that is, with fire, or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they have grown and are even, then put the patient in your care;
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	after apply on the eyelids a figure that is like the leaf of myrtle, and let the beginning of the sign be near the hairs;
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then put moist cotton in egg white and marjoram ointment on the eye, then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	after cautery on the figure that you have marked little by little many times, so that the burn be there in the place;
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	and the signs of the health of the work are that you see the eyelid retracted, and the hairs raised at the corner of the eye;
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	then lift your hand, and leave it this way for three days, then put moist cotton in butter until the burn is removed;
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment of ointment until he is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	and if afterwards the hairs come back and the scab softens then restart the cautery on the same place just as you did first;
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	and if the hairs are weaker, then cauterize until the scab is lifted to its natural place and is even, and the hairs do not prick the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The fire cauterization is when you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are long and even, then make a shape of mirtle leaf from parchment;
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	then take French soap and fresh calf's fat, of each one third, and grind them together well;
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	and do it quickly so that it does not cool down, then stretch over the form that you have made like a myrtle leaf, and place over the eyelids;
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	and if the illness is in one eye only, then it should be treated in that one, and if in both equally;
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	and place under the eye cotton moistened in egg white;
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	and the head of the patient should be in your hand and place your finger showing on the medicine, and press the pouch and the lump every time the patient feels a bite from the medicine, for it feels like a bite from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, remove the medicine at the appropriate time.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the bite has passed, then lift the area with water, and check if you see the paper lifted as though it were lifted by the constraint of fire or by an incision;
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	and if it is thus, then it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	and if it does not, then apply more medicine to the place where the medicine has not worked, until your work is equal and your eyes are set properly;
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply moistened cotton in butter until the burnt area falls off, after which treat the ointment site called "dyafenis" and others until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if it is necessary that you guard well your work with great care so that no part of the medicine falls into the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the parchment becomes soft afterward, and the hair pricks the eye, then reapply the medicine to that area which has been softened by the parchment properly, just as you did before;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat it until it is healed;
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	and this is the form of the leaf of myrtle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	and know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this be your constraints;
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and the right way should not be revealed to one who is not dedicated to this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of fistulas by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat fistulas as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then it is necessary that you perform cautery on them according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	Instruct the patient to place his head on your thigh;
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move, nor does he remove his head;
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	afterwards, put moist cotton in egg white or in celery juice on the eye;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	after heat the cautery which is blue:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and it is shaped at the head like the form of an eagle's feather, together with which should be the cautery;
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	if you wish, it should be pointed from one end to the other, and if you wish, it should also be like a tent;
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	but nonetheless, this one that is shaped is much better for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	after press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus, and dry it;
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	and if it is closed, then open it, and draw out the bowe forcefully;
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	after put on the cautery very hot, and hold your hand on the cautery at the part of the nose below the eye, so that your hand does not do folly;
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	and put the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery until the bone, it would be well.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If not, then repeat the cautery once more, and another if you need it, and leave it for three days;
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	after put on moist cotton in butter, and treat it with the drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, then apply a strongly corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed;
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	and treat it according to what would come in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a method of cautery for fistulas that some of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Understand about fistula, and open the area;
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	after put in the slit some subtle camphor of which here is the form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and apply an amount equal to three spoonfuls;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	and hold your hand on the camphor firmly, and the patient should not move at all, so that the melted substance does not run into their eye;
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	and it is necessary to put on the patient's eye cotton moistened with egg white or with oil;
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	the plaster thus heals the area of the fistula, and it heals with wonderful health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	If not, it is necessary to administer a probe to the wound, and to bring the fistula back to its proper place in the body according to what is appropriate.
des crevaices en levres	cracks in the lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Very often cracks appear on the lips which are called "hair", and especially on the lips of children.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cracks that we have mentioned in divisions, and the treatment does not help, then heat the small knife-shaped cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And he quickly puts them into those cracks until they reach the bottom;
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	after treat the area with cerote until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess comes to the root of the tongue or in the throat, or in the palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it becomes putrefied and rotten and is corrupted and becomes a fistula;
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	and you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it does not help:
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	then you must have the cautery according to the size of the fistula;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	after you apply it to the opening of the fistula, and hold your hand until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and at the deepest part;
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do thus once or twice after the treatment of what we have said in treatments, until he is healed;
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	and if it is treated thus, it is good;
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	and if not, it is necessary to uncover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	of the movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines and that does not work, then place the head of the patient on your knee;
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	after heat the cautery in such a way that you place a cane on the tooth;
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	and put inside the hot cautery quickly, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	after lift your hand and restart the cautery according to your will;
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	after the patient fills his mouth with salty water, and keep it for an hour and spit out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such a way the tooth that was moving is confirmed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupted moisture is dried.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When tooth pain comes from cold, or there is cold in the gum, and medical treatments do not work, then it is necessary to use cautery according to two methods:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	and butter cautery and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	Butter cautery is such that you take cow's butter, and put it in a iron or bronze spoon;
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	after take cotton and wrap on the tip of a tent, and dip in bull butter, and put on the painful tooth quickly and hold until it is cooled;
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	and thus do often until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you want, dip wool and cotton in cold butter, and put on the painful tooth, and put hot iron on top until the fire reaches the edge of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The cautery with fire is such that you take a pipe of iron or brass, and it should be thick so the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient;
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	after heat the cautery, of which the form will come afterward, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled;
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do this often, for the pain will be removed on that very day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter during the urgency of this cautery, and then rinse forcefully;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And make a cautery of the head as you desire, and according to what you are able;
et c’est li forme de la caine:	and this is the form of the probe:
des scrophules	Of the scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When the scrophules are of phlegm and cold moisture, and do not respond to digestion through medicines, then heat the cautery as described hereafter comes the form, and have two openings for the smoke to exit from the other side of the cautery;
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	and put the hot cauterize once on the abscess, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess;
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	and if the abscess is small then put the cauterize according to the size of the abscess, and leave it like this for three days;
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	and put on cotton moistened in butter until the burn is removed;
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	aftercare the area with ointments and bandages until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When the moisture overcomes the channels of the phlegm, and especially when this comes from a cold temperament, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first with solutive medications;
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	After you make the cautery at the root of the throat, and take care that you do not go as far as the throat itself, and do not burn the heart but a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After you make another cautery at the joint of the neck to the top of the spine, and let the cautery which is called "clavile" be as we have the form before;
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat the area as we have said before until it is healed.
de la toust	of the toast
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all the diseases of phlegmon are from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or dryness, and the disease is old, then you make two cauteries on the forearm in their places;
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	and the other cautery between the two breasts;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	and let the cautery which is called "clavile" be according to the form that was previously described.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you wish, make a cautery by pricking with the entire cautery which is called "poins" of which the form is mentioned earlier in the disease of the ears;
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	and let there be up to thirty pricks, or around that number.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After treating the place according to what was previously said, let the cauteries be three inches in accordance with this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And for that reason, the cauterizations are lighter, because you do three at once.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot remain in place, instead returning and dislocating again with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first treat the dislocation repeatedly.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	After, let the patient be placed on their back and on their side;
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	then lift the heart that is inside the titillite with the fingers of your left hand;
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if the joint is dislocated inside, heat the cautery which has two horns like this is the form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	and cauterize the wound until it penetrates to the bone, and the figure of the cautery comes together with four cauters;
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	and for this reason, the cautery is made with the cautery that has three horns, so the figures of cauterization are six cauters;
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the form of the cautery that has three horns:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And sometimes it is placed on this one nerve so there are eight cauters.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After put on the cautery poultice ground with oil;
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	after make rest the patient, and not be moved the limbs for long time until it is well strengthened.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, which rarely happens, then make a cautery on the thick part of the collarbone, or many cauterizations at the base.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When in the stomach come cold and much moisture that it changes its temperament, and are multiplied the catarrhs to him, and in the usual ways of treatment it does not benefit, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on his back, and extend his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	from this on you make three cauterizations one below the nipple of the breast for the quantity of a doe, to all the cautery clavicle, and two cauterizations outside the two sides so that the figure of the cauterizations be at three angles, and have such space between one and the other that they are not joined together when they will putrefy;
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	and let the cauterizations be so deep that they reach the two parts of the heart, and let the figure of the cauterizations be according to this form without adjustment:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	and he who will have fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and bleeding on the stomach one spot according to the quantity that you wish to release;
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	then cauterize with the entire cautery which is called "point".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the care that we had before, until he is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	When the liver suffers pain from cold and moisture and excessive windiness, to the point that it is forcefully displaced from its natural temperament due to excesses;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and the patient is treated with what we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit him, then the patient must be bled on his hepatic vein;
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and bleed from three cauteries according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, outside the hypochondria, where the ribs of the person come;
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	and there should be the thickness of a finger between each cautery;
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	and let the cauteries be along the length of the body, and do not press too hard with your hand over the entire cautery;
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	and let only half of the heart be burned, and let the patient stand straight on his feet;
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	and if he cannot, let him lie down, extend his legs, and raise his arms;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	And if your will is to cauterize these cauteries of the cutellaire, if you are subtle and wise in the art, beware that you do not burn the entire heart, for you would cause the whole body to wither;
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	and that it does not reach to the eyelid, for the skin is very thin there, and you know this to be true.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When it has an abscess in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain but not too severe;
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	and if it is in the membrane, then the patient feels intense pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And when this treatment is needed by the physicians, it is necessary that the patient be shaved on their head;
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	and then apply a poultice to the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles the sun, of which this is the form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And cauterize with the cautery until the pus is burned, and it comes down to the siphon, until all the corruption is completely out;
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the treatment according to the treatment of the cloths until he is healed;
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	and it is not appropriate that anyone but those who have studied long in the art of medicine should use this cautery, and by whose hands these diseases have sometimes run their course.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he may boldly operate, and nevertheless it seems better to leave them alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	of the cautery for pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancients said that one should make plasters of cautery from the roots of aristolochia, and in such a manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	take a root of aristolochia, the longest that you can find, and let it be dry, and as thick and as long as your thumb;
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	and the mole in oil, and apply it to the fire, and cauterize the cautery between the shoulder and the neck, and two small cauterizations a bit downward in the part which is under the beard;
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	and two cauterizations between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining backward a bit;
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	and one cautery in the breast, and another on the stomach, and one between the two shoulders, and two on the sides of the breast outside the cautery which is between the two shoulders;
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	and do not press your hand, but do it openly as in an unguent.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And some ancient ones say that some people use a fire cautery resembling a razor, and they heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess;
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	and the pain jumps out, just as we have said about the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work, there is fear that the patient may die immediately, or an ulcer may come which cannot be healed.
de la mice	about the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse in the ways we have described for the treatments and it does not help, then there are three types of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	and one method is that you make three cauteries, or four, along the length of the mole, according to the shape of the liver cautery that we have mentioned before;
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	and do not press your hand over the entire cautery, and let the patient lie on their back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	and another method of cautery is that you heat the cautery which has two prongs, just as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and lift the area where the mole is located, or where the side of the patient comes towards the left, and let the elevations by which you lift the area be according to the shape, according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After you put the two burning nerves until the heat penetrces through to the other side, and then pull out the cautery, and thus there will be four.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you wish, then cauterize the entire cautery to three burns.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has discharged pus for a long time, and this is worth more than the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	Cautery is not useful for dropsy, except in the method which is called "asclytes.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you treat it according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then you must make four cauteries around the boil, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one at the armpit.
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	and let the cautery be close to the surface of the heat.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	After leave the cautery open to expel pus for a long time, and do not neglect the patient’s treatment after the cautery;
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	and healing would be hastened, and the two intentions will be together with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The form of the cautery for the belly should be the key that we have shown before;
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	and the one for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what is set forth above.
de l’enfleure des piez	about the swelling of the legs
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical, and are full of yellow water, you should cautery on the back of the foot between the little toe and the ring toe;
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	and lift your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply with the point, so as not to go beyond the yellow bile, and let the cauterization be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	After make on both legs two cauteries in each leg at the point of the kneecap;
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	and let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other on the outside, in the middle of the leg;
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	and leave the cauteries open for a long time without healing, until the pus comes out;
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	afterwards heal with the other treatments that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	of the meanness
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	When the evacuation of the bowels comes from cold and moisture, such that the retentive and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be cured by means of treatments;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	and you see the patient well suffering and of great virtue, then make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been spoken here before about the stomach cautery, at the circular cautery;
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	and four subtle cauteries around the buttock to every subtle claw cautery, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each thigh, and two small cauterizations on the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	For the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When the hemorrhoids are in the anus, one or more, and they are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and they are treated as we have said in the divisions, and it does not help, then make cauteries:
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	three on the spine of the back, those which are entirely outside under the almedate little by little in a triangular shape, and one cautery under the buttock two fingers;
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	and if you think that his stomach is chilled, and the meat does not cook, and swelling appears on the face, then apply a large cautery on the stomach as was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with the entire key-shaped cautery;
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	and leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After treating, heal the place until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the fleshiness which is named "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you cut an abscess, heat the cautery that resembles a razor, and then place it fully ablaze on the cut abscess;
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	and keep your hand there until the cautery reaches the origin of the vein, from which the blood flows;
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	do this once or twice, and if there is much abscess, cauterize each one as we have said;
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	after the treatment of beneficial ointments until they are healed;
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	and if you cauterize with a large cautery on an ulcer, it will have greater help.
de plaie mal curee	of a wound poorly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure surgery or incision, which we will discuss in its place, such a disease comes that cannot be healed other than by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When an abscess occurs in someone and it is open and discharges pus and corrupted moisture, you should probe it thoroughly with a slender tent, and be sure to know the full extent of its depth with the tent.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	after heat the cautery that resembles a razor, and insert it into the fistula according to the amount of pus that has entered, and repeat the cautery until the corrupt and putrid flesh is burned, once, or twice or three times, according to the quantity needed;
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	and beware of burning the nerves that are inside, and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	if the fistula extends to the bladder and the intestines, then beware of these areas, and do not perform this outside the flesh, and consider that it is not penetrable;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	after treatment the wound until it is healed, and if the wound is sealed, and the materials are removed for a long time, then know that the wound is completely healed;
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	and if the materials are not removed, know that the wound is deep, and the bone is corrupted at its source;
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	and thus as one of those we will mention in its place.
de la maladie des reins	about the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When cold pain comes to the testicles, and from great windiness, and he shows no interest in women, then you must make a cautery on the testicles on one side and the other with the key-shaped cautery that we have mentioned before;
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauters in a line, and they will provide greater aid.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is weak and thin from cold and moisture, so that the patient holds urine, then make a cautery on the outer part above the bladder, where the hairs of the groin begin, and one to the right and one to the left, and let each cautery be as long as the width of a thumb;
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	and make one cautery on the back, or two if you need them;
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	and let the cauteries be key-shaped according to the form previously described.
de la marris	of the spleen
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the matrix is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception because of this, and the flowers are corrupted and their periods are delayed;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	and when they do come, she feels great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	then it is necessary to make three cauteries around the boil, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries outside the back;
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	and let the cauteries be made like a key, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When the viscous moisture descends into the hip joint, and for this reason it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together;
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	and the place of the separation is found to be wide, then you should cauterize the patient on the hip joint with a cautery resembling a circle, and mark in front of the place around the joint as it turns, so that the joint is inside the circle;
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	and let the cauterization be such as those with which one has cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	and if this cauterization is not available to you, make three large cauters from the olive oil, and let the cauterization be as perfect as all the others;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it until it is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes to the joint of the hip, and it is from cold and moisture, and the patient is treated with what we have said in the division and the treatment does not work, and the disease is old:
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	then you must purge the patient of the thick humors with foul pills, or other good similar pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	After you make a cautery;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	and the manner of the cautery is according to two ways:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	that is to know together burning medicines, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	Fire cautery is according to many ways, of which one is as follows:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	that you cauterize on the joint of the hip three triangular cauteries according to this form, and make good depth and large, and leave between each cautery a space the size of a thumb, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped;
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	sometimes one makes a cautery in the middle on top of the head of the hip, which is why there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you wish, then cauterize it with the circular cautery that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the hip;
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	but do it in such a manner that the circle contains the entire hip, and all the thickness of the flesh be burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the method used for sciatica, when the pain is in the hip and does not extend to the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it extends to the thigh and the leg, then make two cauteries there where the patient says the pain holds them, and one cautery above the ankle four times, on the left side a bit;
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	and let the cautery be knife-shaped, and let the thickness of the flesh be burned;
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the toes of the foot or close by, then cauterize where they feel the pain three points or four with the cautery which is called "point.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if necessary, do more to them;
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if he knows that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, do a cautery with a knife-shaped or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauterizations that you do not leave the cautery so long that you burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause more harm and constriction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And myself have seen many who made a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and left it so long that the leg was entirely swollen, and the foot as well, and all the foot was perforated and corrupted.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a purgation of the belly from which he received death.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pains are in two parts together, make a cautery in one and in the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the wise ones say about the cautery of the hip, here is the method: make such an iron and let it be at the head as thick as a date stone, or a bit less, and let it be with indentations, and let there be between each indentation the space of a knuckle.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	and let the splints be covered with two parts, and also like knots, and there be one well-made iron strap;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	and let it be heated until it is all red and gives off sparks, and then place it on the hip joint of the diseased side, and turn it towards the healthy side;
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and cauterize it once with a red-hot cautery and leave it for three days;
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	and then make a poultice of butter, and leave the wound open for a long time;
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment of anointing until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasis says that we use little of this cautery because of the fear of its regard, and we see few who use it;
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	and nonetheless this is one of the good cauterizations, which he can endure, and where it is necessary.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The cautery of burning medicine is that you make the instrument to be interwoven in which descends the margin of the door, and it should be of brass or iron with one side long, and in the height have two fingers, and between each have the quantity of the thickness of a thumb;
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and they should be open below and above, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	After put on the box of the hip of the patient lying on his healthy side, and press your hand very much on the box of the hip;
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After throw between the two circles of the warm awl which is heated by fire one pot, and let it stay for one hour of time, and allow the patient the heat and the dryness of it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	For there he finds a burning as if from fire;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	and when the burning has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and lift the hip with a gentle awl, and leave it this way for three days, and put butter on it until what is black from the scalding is removed;
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	and leave it for three days so that putrefaction may come out;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and this would be the last aid after the treatment of ointments until he is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain has spread to the thigh or to the leg, make an instrument that fits well according to what you have done on the hip equally;
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	and this is the method of hot water, and I have written it in the treatise on the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and vitriol, an equal amount of each, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	where there is a small opening for the razor's blade to be able to enter;
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and place on top of that pot another pot well sealed, and put alkaline substances and heat and sweet water on it, until there is a thumb's length above the powders when you have thoroughly mixed it in your hand;
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	and leave it thus until it descends into water and falls into the pot, then take all that water, and throw it on heat and on alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And then it will be very diluted and is administered in many medical works and in cauterizations of other limbs.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For it performs similar work as fire, and it has other medicines with which one cauterizes the hip well like sesame and anacardium juice and heat with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galien tells us of a treatment where a man was cured of the pain in his hip and sciatic nerve, and he praises it greatly, and says that no other treatment was done, and that he was healed at once when this treatment was performed, and he bathed himself as he teaches hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And it says that you should take green litharge fresh and dry, and grind it well with a little fat, and apply it on the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is, and leave it;
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	and he leaves for three hours, and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then have him enter the bath until his body is somewhat warmed, and have him enter the bed, and the pain will completely go away and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use fire cautery of such medicines, if it is not after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's fat, it helps greatly;
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	and the cauteries should be made in such manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take wool and anoint it with old oil, and place it on the crease that is between the big toe and the other one which is called the instep.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After take dried goat's fat, and heat it until it becomes charcoal, and put it on the wool, and leave it until it melts;
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	and do it again in the same way, and do not stop doing this until you think by feeling that it reaches to the hip, and that the pain has ceased;
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	and this kind of cautery is called "goat cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain of the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or from impact or from too great an evacuation, or from similar cold matter spread out, none of these cases is suitable for cauterization, because it is caused by the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	It is necessary after the patient is emptied of foul pills or others similar, that one makes on his back, where the pain holds, three lines marked with ink, and in each line five cauterizations or more according to the strength and quantity that the patient can endure;
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	and let the cauterization be done according to the cautery which is called "point";
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	and if you wish, make three or four cauterizations with the medium-sized clavicula cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	Often this disease comes to small children, and the signs of the beginning are that they have tight sinews when they rise, and fear;
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	and you find in the last spine of the back and in us the appearance which comes upon the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and wish to treat it, then cauterize it with the circular cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cautery touches each part of the spine equally.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you wish, then cauterize around the spine with a sharp cautery two lines or three, and let the points be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treat the area until it is healed according to what we have said, and beware that you do not apply cautery to a swelling that is in spasm of nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	When pain in the joints is from moisture that has spread to each member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which the physician properly calls "gout," and when it is of cold cause and treatments of medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in such manner:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need for you to prick at the sole of the foot, then make a cautery on the entire area called "point.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains come down to the knees and other joints, and this happens often, then make a cautery on each knee three or four cauteries on each part, all the cauteries olive-shaped;
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	and if you need more, do more, but do not hold your hand out any longer than it takes for the heat of the heart to be burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knees and the back, then the practitioner applies the cautery that we have described in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	and if the pains are in the hands, make points around the armpit two inches;
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	and if any pain remains in the fingers, make points on each joint and on the palm of the hand;
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	and if the pains come down to the ribs or to the shoulders, then cauterize each part, and give good care to the patient and administer medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give him good care and you purge phlegm, he will be healed by the grace of God.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the rupture of the sphincter
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	When rupture comes in the groin, and the bowels descend to the testicles and this is new, then it is necessary that when you wish to treat it, he should not eat that day;
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and he uses things that loosen the stomach, so that the bile descends from his stomach;
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	after he makes him sit on his back between your hands, and commands him to stretch his armpit until the boil stops growing, and you repeatedly move them with your hands, and mark from underneath the rupture on the bone of the wrist, and make a sign that resembles half of a circle above the body;
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it is white and it gives off sparks.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	then repeatedly move the boils to their place;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	and the minister stretches his hand so that they do not return backwards;
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	and work well the thighs of the patient, and put under him a cushion and another on the thighs, and another on the part that holds the hands;
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	then place the cautery on the mark with your whole hand, and hold it straight and keep it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, then repeat again until you come to the bone;
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and beware carefully that the blister does not burst when you make the cautery;
que tu ne le brulasses;	that you do not burn it;
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and that because of this the patient does not die, or suffer other evils.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it is necessary for the cauterization of children to be fine according to the measure of eggs, and for large people also large according to their measure;
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	After three days, treat the area of the cauterization with butter until the scald is removed;
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	after treating with other ointments until it is healed, and the patient lies forty days on his back until the wound is well sealed;
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	and it is necessary for his nourishments to be weakened for a long time, so that the scabs do not protrude when he begins to move around in rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, have an attendant provide a well-made bandage, and wear it for another forty days;
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	and let him have good rest, that he works little and guards against too great a filling of drink and food, and from shouting too loudly;
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	and when he follows this teaching, he is entirely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say hereafter the treatment of cutting in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the abdomen
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When ruptures occur in other parts of the belly and are known, and you see that they do not grow larger, then apply fire cautery according to its size, and let a third of the area be burned;
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	afterward, treat it according to what we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	and some of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a three-cornered cautery in this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but first mark the place to be cauterized and make a line across the width above the rupture, and another one outside, and hold your hand in the middle of the key-shaped cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cautery is lighter and gentler.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, either from falling or being struck, and that pain lasts a long time, and medical treatment does not help, then it is necessary to cauterize it with the cautery called "point," and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and virtue and location of torsions and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	if he is healed from the first cautery, it is good;
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	if that name, repeat another cautery on that spot, for such is the custom that it must change to the member that is nearest, therefore you must make the cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	of mixing
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The mixtures are sometimes cured by cautery with great help, and especially the diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	When you see to cauterize, beware if the disease is in its beginning, and if it is treated according to what we have said in the division, and it does not lessen nor remain stationary, and you fear that the corruption may spread throughout the patient, then make five cauteries on the head:
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	one in the middle of the head, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hair;
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and two on the two horns, and one behind on the haunch.
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	and leave your hand there until the cauterization reaches the bone, and until the scabs come out so that the vapors of the thick humors can escape;
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	and cauterize on the joint according to what is described above.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the mange is spread everywhere;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	and if it is clearly lost, then you must cauterize it with these cauters that we have mentioned at the head, and one cautery on the neck, and two cauters on the spine of the neck, and six cauters on the spine of the back, and one large one on the rump and another nearby, and two on the two shoulders;
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	and two on the elbows, and two on the tendon of the breast, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands;
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	and be careful of the nerves that are on the rear heel, that you do not burn them;
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	and sometimes one makes a cautery on the bone of the wrist, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And know that when I do more cauterizations, I provide more help, and it benefits the patient;
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as the healthy person feels it, because the body is already entirely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it is necessary that the cauteries be large and small according to the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in methods of the irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After treatment, apply the place with flour of violets and honey and other treatments until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When swelling comes in any limb and is treated with medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not healed, then make cauterizations on the limb according to the size and smallness of the limb;
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	and let the cauterization be slightly penetrating into the depth of the flesh;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And sometimes a cauterization is made on the hand and foot and back, at the point where the nerve that moves the limb issues forth, and thus the swelling is removed;
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	and in any case, do not let anyone interfere if they are not knowledgeable about the limbs and the points where the moving nerves issue forth from the body.
de albaras	of arthritic gout
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the disease which is called "albaras" is awakened, and medical remedies are of no use, then cauterize it with a hot iron slightly, according to the thickness of the tumor, until the swelling is removed, and its color changes;
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	then treat it with flour of vetches and lentils with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood of pigeon and blood of lark, of each one part;
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and mix everything together, and bind it with a cloth, and apply it to the place until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment of chancres by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When chancres appear at the beginning, and you wish to stop them, then cauterize them with a circular cautery all around the edge of the chancres.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And always the wise say that one should also make a cautery in the middle of the ulcer;
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	and nonetheless this does not seem good to me, for I fear that it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already seen it happen sometimes;
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	and a more direct thing is that it be cauterized around, with the cautery which is called "circle," as we have said much about cauters.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When someone has a disease which is called "adubelati," and it delays in healing either due to the excess it causes or due to the age of the patient when they are decrepit (that is, too old) and have little blood, or due to the time;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you want it to heal faster:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	then cauterize around with many small cauteries while pressing;
aprés le laisse ensi.	afterwards leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	For she will hasten to recover.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you wish to pierce it with the entire cautery, then heat the cautery in this manner which is its form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of that disease which is called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it externally in such a manner that the course of the corruption may be cleansed.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment until he is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire treatment by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another kind of disease there is which is called "corrodens," and it is nothing other than a consuming of the limb, for it eats away at the limbs as fire does to dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this disease in a place that can withstand fire together with cautery, then heat the cauteries both very small and large, according to what is suitable for the place where the disease is;
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	afterwards cauterize all around until you reach all the corruption, and none of it remains, so that everything which is corrupted be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then leave it for three days, and put on the cauterized areas powdered frankincense with oil until the burns from the fire are removed, and all of the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	Afterwards, apply ointments that promote flesh growth.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if you see after three days that no healthy flesh grows, it is good;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	and if not, then repeat the cautery on what remains of the corrupted areas.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this mange condition has sometimes been cured by medication instead of fire cautery;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	but nevertheless fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already mentioned the cure with medication in the section:
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of the boils that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times, a disease called "clos" according to our understanding arises on the feet externally, and it is a large swollen thing that hurts the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterization for this disease is according to two methods.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, fire cauterization, and hot water cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Fire cautery is such that you heat the cautery to the point where it resembles a goose feather, and it should be made of good iron in a size that can penetrate the nail from all sides, with fine edges;
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	afterwards place it entirely hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until you reach the base of the nail;
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	and leave it thus for three days until it begins to expel pus;
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	then make a poultice of crushed wild mallows with oil, and leave the poultice on all night, and the nail will fall out and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the ointment place greasing flesh until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they are turned outward on the body, and this often happens in hands and feet, then you must apply a cauterization with hot water;
et est en teil maniere:	and it is done in the following manner:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	take a cane of boxwood or iron, or a feather of an owl, and place it on the nail and the wart, that is to say, plantar warts;
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	and put the cane on so that it wraps all around, then put a pot of warm water, and hold your hand well, and press your hand by turning so that the edge of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and may find the warm water way deep to the root;
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	and let the patient endure the bite of the warm water for an hour;
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	then leave it thus, and it will be uprooted entirely from its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Thus do one after another until you strengthen all those that are in the body, then treat them with ointments that generate flesh.
li cure dou trembler	the treatment of trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When someone shakes with cold or nerves, or from quartan fever or another, then you must make four cauterizations on the spine, one between each vertebra;
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and for the cautery on the foot, and on the stomach with the olive-shaped cautery;
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	let it tremble, and the health hastens from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of smelly pus-filled boils
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes there appear on the outer part of the body bathed, or smelly pus-filled boils, which come from corrupted thick materials.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	so it is necessary at first when they appear to make a cautery on each head of the pustule:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	a fine cautery of myrtle wood, with which the tip is grasped by fire, or of the long root of aristolochia, or a lentil-shaped cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear, in this manner, and they cannot grow any further, but the excess from which they come is broken, and they are healed;
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Many times there are great flows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound that comes to the surface, or in the incision of an abscess, or in the cautery of the limb, and similar things;
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	and it is a very difficult thing to stop.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And nevertheless, when this happens to anyone, you must quickly place your index finger on the wound of the vein and press very hard until the blood is stilled beneath your finger, and no drop comes out;
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	then put the olive-shaped cauters of various sizes over the fire until they are all red;
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	Then take hold with your finger, whether large or small according to the wound and the place where the artery is cut, and put the cautery on that vein where you keep your finger, and hold the cautery so long until the blood is stanched.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps out when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauterizations that are on the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And do not stop doing this one after the other until the blood is stopped;
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	and be careful not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient;
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be easily stanched, especially when the artery is large, unless it is done by one of the four methods we have mentioned:
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	Or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong binding with thread, or by medicines placed on it that have the power to stop blood;
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	and let it be tied and bound appropriately.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will administer compression by tightly binding with cloths or placing burning things upon it, or other similar things, does not help if the pain is not reduced.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens to someone and there is no doctor or medicine present, then one must put their index finger on the vein wound as we have said, and press well until it is stopped above the wound and above the vein;
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	and he should not move it, but apply cold moisture often that is very cold until the blood is frozen and thickened and stopped;
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	and make preparations in advance for what he needs of cauterization and medications.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book on the treatments of wounds.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have told you in the first chapter all diseases in which it is necessary to use fire cautery, or burning medicine, and the indications and causes and the materials and forms of the cauterizations;
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	and I have placed this chapter from head to foot, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same method so that one can find more easily what one wants.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And before I begin this, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of cauterizations, and for this reason greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things;
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I warn you that you do not undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come to treatments.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	such come from those who despise so much their illness that they change easily because of the madness they find in their illness, and the greatness of its malice;
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	and from these one must have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And there are some among these who give you their opinion and say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	wait, I am healed";
et li maladie est despitouse.	and the disease is deceitful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you with this manner, but place greater value in your honor than in your desire, and do not open foolishly but wisely about that which you are certain of, and from which you can gain praise;
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	and use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients to whom health is restored;
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	and this will help you to acquire good reputation, and glory, and praise-worthy memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear son, May our Lord grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if he wishes to inspire you with the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter in dividing by chapters, according to what is before in the chapter of cauteries, that I have divided from head to foot, so that you find more easily what you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from the head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	Know that this disease often comes to children at birth, and when it forcefully pulls the child's head;
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	and sometimes this comes from an unknown cause that one does not know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I have never seen this disease except in children, and in all those I have seen, death was swift;
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	and for that reason, it seems to me that I should not linger in such cases.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I saw the child whose head was filled with water, and his head swelled each day until he could not support it;
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	and the moisture swelled so much that he died, and this moisture gathers under the bone on the sphenoid, between the heart and the bone;
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and the work is such that if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscess is small, that you split the head in half with a wide cut;
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and let it be as long as two fingers, until the moisture flows;
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and here is the form of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	And if the moisture is thicker, and the abscess is larger, make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs that you see are the corners of the head open on each side, and the fluid jumps out forcefully when you press it with your hand from the inside, and this does not return to you:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	then you must split the head in three places according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all the moisture out.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After extracting the cloths and powders from the wounds, and put wine and oil in them, and leave it this way until the fifth day;
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	then untie it, and treat the wound with threads and ointments, and continue to bind the head evenly, and give the patient dried meat of little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another method of incision is to look where the swelling of the abscess opens, and where the fluid gathers;
car aucune fois est elle devant;	for sometimes it is in front;
aucune fois derrier;	sometimes behind;
aucune fois en destre;	sometimes on the right;
et aucune fois en senestre.	and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Cut then there where the abscess opens, and the accumulation of the fluid, and make the incision according to your ability;
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and beware that you do not cut the artery;
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and let blood flow so that the patient may die from the loss of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of rheumatism
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When it happens to anyone a disease which is called «catarrh» in the eyes or nose, and the disease is old, and the medical treatment does not help, then the last resort is cauterization with cutting those two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	Then when you cut the veins, the patient should tilt their head back;
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	then rub the area with a coarse cloth until the arteries appear, then have the patient tighten their neck around the entire cloth;
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	then look where the vein swells, and the areas on both sides are behind the ears, and they are positioned close;
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	then mark the areas to incise, then cut both sides with a sharp two-edged instrument until the cut reaches the bone, and this should be done across the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you wish, place the spatula under the artery and cut above it, also cutting through as two times across.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, the blood springs up continuously outward.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not appear upon feeling, then you must measure the space of three fingers, then mark to incise and cut until the bone;
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	and the amount of blood that should be let out is six ounces, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the replenishment of the artery;
puis regarde la plaie:	then look at the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	if any of the syphac remains on the bone, cut it so that a warm abscess does not come, then drain the wound and tie it up, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of migraines
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migraine comes, and a sharp catarrh, due to the moisture of tears and the heat in the temples and old sordes forced out and similar things, and it is treated by methods of medical cures and all this does not help him, then we draw the arteries of the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the method of extracting them is that the patient should part the hairs on his temples and pay attention to the artery that opens in the temple, for it shows clearly by its pulsation, and it is a little farther out than in some men who are too cold;
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	and if it is replaced, then the patient tightens its neck with some cloths, then rubs the area with some rough cloth, and rinses the area with warm water until the artery appears clearly;
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	then take the spatula of which this is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	then peel the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it up with the tweezers, and separate it well from the tissues that are beneath it on each side;
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	and if the artery is thin, then turn it with the tip of the hook, then cut it from that part according to the quantity of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, the sinew does not jump entirely all over.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	and draw blood from six ounces down to three;
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	and if the artery is large, then you must tie it in two places with a strong double thread of silk, so that no putrefaction comes before the wound heals, and there be bleeding of blood;
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	then cut off the excess that is between the two ties at that same hour, and then, if you wish, cauterize it with a knife-shaped cautery until the head is cut off;
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	and it is the most difficult work if the patient does not have fever and is of a hot temperament.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For cauterization is a help to finish the moisture:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	for that reason it is of greater help for the moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	For the extraction of arteries, it is necessary to fill the place with old cotton and put well-made bandages on top;
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and when they are untied, be careful with dry medicines that promote flesh growth and bandages until it is healed;
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	and if there is bleeding from the artery as long as you work on it, hasten to cut by cautery, or use green vitriol in the place and press with your hand until the blood is stanched;
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	and if you do not have that present, then put your thumb on the place until the blood is congealed, and wash the place with cold water until the bleeding stops, and press as necessary;
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	And what is more effective and quicker in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize this vein with a sharp cautery cut in two parts, but let the cuts be well thick to preserve their heat for longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too weak, they hold less of their heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And there should be one inch of space between the two knives, and then when you have marked to insert the two places, and you place the burning iron until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places;
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	and they should be separated between the two shoulders because it is not entirely sewn together by this cautery;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears of the eyes descend from the veins that are on top of the head due to heat, and medical treatment does not help, and you see the face of the patient redden, and feel a trembling on the forehead as if shivering;
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	and when the eyes are inflamed and moist so that the hairs of the eyelids fall out, and the eyelids are heated, and are peeled by the ardor of tears, then this treatment is needed.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And the ancients called it "contusion cure," and it is that you remove the hairs from the forehead of the patient who has this disease, then make three cuts on the forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead;
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	and one of the cuts should be about two inches right in the middle of the forehead going downwards to the nose, and the other two at the sides above the eyelids, and be careful not to cut the arteries that are on the two sides above the eyelids;
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	and keep your hand away from the joining of the two jawbones, and let each wound be the quantity of three fingers across.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	and have prepared a piece of sponge and much cloth for wiping the blood, then apply the sharp spatula in two parts where this is the form:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	from the incision which is above the temple to the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	and peel everything that is between the two cuts to the entire surface which is on the bone, then make another cut from the middle incision to the other second one, and then extract with this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	so put in the first cut the instrument which is called "cultellaire", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is blunt, not sharp, and this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And put the sharp side towards the flesh affected by the disease, and the blunt side towards the bone, and insert it until it reaches the middle cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	And cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the eyes so that the incision is continuous up to where it opens from the heart, and then make another one in the middle cut up to the other side;
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	and then draw blood evenly, and press the area for the blood taken;
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	then put in each cut a wick of old cotton, and place on top cloths moistened with wine and oil and assafetida, and be careful that no hot abscess comes near;
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and on the third day loosen the bandage, and apply a great deal of warm water, then treat it with basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other treatments used to heal wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	of the realm of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When a person frequently gets acute catarrh, and you see the eyes dull and small, and weakened vision, and the eyelids burned;
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	and the hair falls out, and on the head it causes a painful headache, and the patient sneezes;
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	then you know by these accidents that those materials and the catarrh do not come from anywhere else but from many veins, and the remedy that is best, is this one.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you instruct the patient to lie down with his head backwards, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another on the wider side.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And begin from the temple on the left to the temple on the right, and let the incision go as far as the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move during eating;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, and then separate the two edges of the cut and put old cotton and linen threads in between;
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	then bind above with cloths moistened in wine and in oil, and beware of a hot abscess;
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	when it is removed, then you must rub the bone until cartilage begins to grow, then treat it with drying substances, which promote the hardening of the cartilage.
En teil maniere:	In such manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	take two parts of wheat flower, and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster;
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	and administer it to these wounds to promote the hardening of cartilage throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the treatment for ear congestion
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	All that falls into the ears is one of the four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	or grain, or animal, or stone of mine or similar things such as iron;
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	or seed, such as beans, peas, lentils;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	or fluid things such as water and oils and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When a stone or any other kind of thing that does not fit in the ear and does not grow in the ear falls in, place the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see the stone, then distill a little violet oil or flaxseed oil, then apply extraction;
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	and make the person sneeze with condyse, and plug the nostrils when the sneezing comes, and place around the ear pieces of cloth or wool;
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and pull the ear upwards.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Very often force comes from this treatment;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	and if force does not come, the administrator should perform extraction with fine tweezers, of which here is the form:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If force comes with the tweezers, it is good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	if not, then perform the extraction with a fine needle of small double thread;
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	and if it does not come out by this means, then make a tube of lead and put the end of the tube into the opening of the ear firmly, and plug what is around the tube with soft wax so that air cannot enter with the tube;
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	then strongly draw the force, for often comes force as we have said;
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	and if it does not come with force in such manner, then take glue from coagulated substance used by fowlers, and place some instrument that is sharp for this purpose, and put a piece of cotton around;
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	then press the glue on the stone or whatever it may be, and draw force.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	and if it does not come out by force from all these things that we have said, then hasten to split the ear before a hot abscess and spasm comes.
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	and the method of the splitting is that you first bloodlet the patient from the cephalic vein, and draw blood according to the measure of his strength, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear in the fat where it hangs.
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	and let the cut be like a moon, until you come to the stone, then remove it according to your ability, and suck it hastily with your mouth;
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if it is grains that are inside and it swells, then administer extraction;
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	and if it cannot come out, then administer the spatulum gently according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and to administer an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not do this when you think the grains are moist due to the moisture of the ear, until you have made many pieces;
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	then extract with fine tweezers and the sucker, as we have said, so that the extraction is light.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the case of water that enters the ear, it is necessary for the patient to use sneezing with preliminary condiments, and plug the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And lie down on that same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it jumps out through that, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	If not, then take many stones according to the length of your thumb, thin and light, and warm them a bit in the fire;
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	and place them in the patient's ear orifice, and strike with one of his feet from the other side, and hit with another stone on the stone that is in the ear;
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	and do not stop striking stone with stone until all the pus comes out completely, and thus it will come out entirely;
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	and if you wish, take some reed, and put one end in the ear, and the other end press against fire until the softer part of the reed is burned;
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	then make another part of other incisions until all the pus comes out, just as we have said about the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In the extraction of the creature, if it is of small body, such as a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the section;
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	but if it is of large body that can be felt, then apply the extraction with tweezers;
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	and it is the easiest thing to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In the extraction of earwigs from the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the section and in the treatment of distillations, and the treatment does not help, then you must look into the ear in the sunlight:
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	If there are any hairs visible, pull them out with fine tweezers, and if they do not appear, then take the tube of which this is the shape:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And let it be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And put the finest end into the ear according to the extent of the patient's suffering, then suck forcefully on the entire tube;
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Do this often until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not obey to come out, stuff around the tube with cotton as I have said in the stone;
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	and if they do not come out as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have tested in the excision of worms, and you will find them in the treatise on distillations;
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	and so distill your oils and your medicines into the ear with all this instrument, of which here is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	and whether it is made of silver or bronze, it should be wide below the small openings, and above narrower for distilling;
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	and to press inside the distillation, there is an instrument of bronze well made for this purpose, and if you want, take the scraper and wrap around the tip appropriately with cotton;
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	then pour your oil or your juice, and what you want of your medicines into the tube, and the tube should be in the ear;
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	then push the scraper into all the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled into the eardrum;
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	and the patient feels it inside, and let the distillations be slightly heated over fire before they are distilled into the ear;
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	and beware that it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the treatment for ear congestion
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	Some children are born who have no openings in their ears;
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	and the same thing happens to adults due to blockage from a wound, or flesh grown inside the ear, and these blockages sometimes occur deeply within the ear so that one cannot see them;
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	and sometimes the opening is slightly obscured, and one can see it clearly.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	Then that which comes in secret, so that it cannot be seen, is of severe healing in many conditions, and in that which can be seen you must place the patient's ear to the sun;
et regarde dedens:	and look inside:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	if you see the obstruction evident, then the work has all this space where the form is:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And let it be sharp and cutting on both front and back entirely smooth, so that it does not injure the ear;
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	if the obstruction is of flesh or body of the ear, then hold it with fine tweezers, and cut lightly, until all the flesh is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the obstruction is deeply in the ear, then take a fine and light scraper and warm it slightly over fire, then place it in the body of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you feel the need to scrape where the patient feels pain in the ear, do it lightly, and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear;
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	then put in the ear a plug according to the width of the opening, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Do this for some days until the wound is sealed, or you take a plug and moisten it in rose water, and sprinkle powdered vitriol on it;
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and if you see the ear swollen, then you must remove the plug and insert another moistened with an ointment made of rose oil and wax until the swelling is gone;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, soak a sponge and cloths in cold water, and place them on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding which are in the chapter on hemorrhages.
de la char des papieres	of the flesh of paperflies
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	This eyelid that comes over the eyes when they are moist and dry, you should stretch it with tweezers and forceps, and cut it from its roots with a spatula;
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	then apply ground vitriol to the area.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if it does not heal, then cauterize it with a fine lenticular cautery, and the cauterizer after the incision is very useful;
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	and they often recur if anything remains of their roots;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	hail
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Many times come in the eye membranes things that resemble hail in their form and hardness, and for this reason is this disease called "hail", and it is a collection of moisture thickened above and below the membrane;
li ovraiges est telz:	the work is such:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	be careful if the hail moves from one side to another, and it is an easy thing to know;
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	then make an incision widely, then gently scrape each part, then take it with tweezers, and cut it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	if you cannot cut it without piercing a bit of the membrane, then do not worry about the patient;
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	and if the wound is large, then it is sewn with a stitch, and treat until it is healed;
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	and if it is small, then do not use any force, for the ointments restore it quickly and enhance the flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	And if the earwax is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, then invert the paper, and stretch the earwax with tweezers, and cut and press from both sides;
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	and if the paper is moved away by the incision, it does not matter;
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	and when the earwax is cut, then lift the salt water oil, and treat the area with something that enhances flesh until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Exinach is a fat that is tangled in the web of the eyelids above, and this happens more to children than to other people, and greatly troubles their eyes, and they get catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes;
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	and because of this they lie on their faces immediately, and sleep thus, and their eyelids under their eyebrows are moist which swells up and the appearance is covered by the exinach that appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press the area with your fingers and feel the exinach between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the method of the work is that the patient puts his head in your hand;
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	and then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the quantity of exinach contained in each part, then place it on it;
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	and press with your hands from one side to the other, so that the protrusion is gathered within the circle;
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	then cut in the middle of the moisture with a sharp spatula a wide split, and let it not be larger than the wound one makes at the site of the vein;
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	and cut the skin thoroughly until you reach the protrusion;
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	and in various positions, the protrusion comes out of the split, according to the form of a white fatty piece.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Then extract it with a piece of coarse cloth held between your hands to the wind, and turn your hand right and left until it is scattered;
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	and take care not to insert into the fissure, that you do not reach all the way to the spleen until the eye, that you do not injure it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	and if the abscess does not open at the beginning of the fissure, then slightly enlarge the fissure gently until it opens;
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	then extract it as we have said, then moisten cloths with oil and water, and place them on the area, and bind with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And there are such people who grind salt and put it on to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat until it is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes to the place hot, then treat it with soothing plasters until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	the hairs of the armpits
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When on the eyelids hairs grow in a manner other than natural and are irritated, they harm the eyes and cause various diseases such as habitual tearing and softening of the eyelids and leukoma, to the point that it can lead to the destruction of the eyes;
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	and the treatment according to four methods:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	or by cautery with fire together, or by medicine applied according to what is mentioned before in the chapter of cautery, and it is done either by incision and suturing or by splints, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary that you place the head of the patient on your lap, then turn the paper of the eye to your left hand;
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	if it is turned, it is good;
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	if not, then put a needle with the whole thread on top;
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and let it be near the edge of the paper where the hair grows next to these hairs, and pull the thread across the entire paper, and turn it to the razor;
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	then cut into the part below the skin, below the attached hairs, all through the spatiumille cutting, from the large tear sheet to the small;
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	then extract the thread, and place below the skin a small tent of cotton and cloth, then sign on the skin a figure of enche, like the leaf of myrtle, and always it is necessary that the figure be according to the quantity you wish to lift the divided skin.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And there are cases where it is necessary to cut a large quantity of the skin according to how softened the skin is;
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	then cut through the entire spatiumille along the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the large tear sheet to the small;
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	and let one of the cuts be near the natural hairs with the thickness of a root, then insert the lancet into one of the two angles of the boil, then peel it all;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	then bring the two lips together with a stitch of one needle and all the thread of fine wool, and wipe the blood, and make the excess of threads on both eyebrows stick with some sticky things, if you wish to do this;
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	and if not, then do not bother, then leave the stitch and the threads for three or four days;
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	then treat the wound without stitching with drying and binding substances, for the bandage raises the wound at its closure and assembly, but the stitch is weak (as the ancients say), and this is work without fear;
et si a une autre maniere:	and there is another method:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and it is that you mark the paper with a figure which is like the leaf of myrtle, as we have described, at three inches apart according to the form which is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut what exceeds the small forces equally according to the form which is here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	and if you are not able to hold the tweezers, and the thing is not even, then take a needle with a thread, and put it through the figure;
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	and place one thread next to the large eyelid, and the second thread next to the small one, and gather the threads equally between your fingers;
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin where you have marked, as we have described, then bring together the two edges of the wound by stitching, and care for it until it is healed;
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with poultice and similar soothing ointments;
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	and sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyelid turn inward:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	then you must use what we have said about the incision;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	but the suturing in one and the other is more intricate.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The treatment of hernias is according to this method:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	and it is that you turn the eyelid inside and make an incision according to what I have said, and then make two hernias by art, and two subtle threads as long as the eyelid and the width of the spatula are;
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and cut at the two shoulders of two parts where you hold the threads;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	then carefully join one and the other on top of what protrudes from the paper of the eye, and fully extract the two channels from the two parts;
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	and leave it this way for some days, and the skin that was constricted will die, dry out, and peel off, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it takes too long, cut it with force, then treat it until it is healed;
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	and when the wound is sealed, and the paper is removed, the hairs will no longer prick;
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	and this is the form of the two canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	the work is such that you take a fine needle, and put in it a thread of silk smooth and fine;
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	then gather the shoulders and sew one to the other subtly, and let the length of the threads be a palm long;
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	then arrange in the case another fine thread of silk briefly, and sew the ends of the thread;
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	then have the patient place his head in your hand;
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	and place it near the sun so that the work is illuminated, for this is subtle and minute work, then insert the needle all the way into the case at the root of the hair adjacent, and pierce quickly through the parchment until you pull it over the natural hair;
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	then pull out the hair up to the socket, and place that hair in the socket, if there is one or two or three or more;
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	then withdraw your hand until the hair comes out of the socket entirely into the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the socket is pulled and the hair does not come out with it, then pull the socket downward along the thread that you have arranged there, until the socket comes out of the upper hole and you can see it with your eye;
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	then pull the socket and the thread, and close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair burns in its place and new flesh grows over;
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	and if the hair is short, then accompany the long hair with natural curly hair, and lift it with that which you leave, until it is extended and then raise it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the pus from the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or the corruption comes to the eye, it happens in two ways:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens by the suddenness of a wound, or of cutting or cautery, and by similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the method of treatment is that you split that suturing, and separate its lips, and put linen threads inside, and keep it tied until it is healed;
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	and it is not appropriate that you use in its treatment things that dry and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do this, then the illness returns worse than before;
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but use things that soften, such as fenugreek;
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	and the juice of water or alcohol and flaxseed should be cooked, and anointment of aquilon melted in any of the oils, and it is wrapped in a cloth, and it is cured with this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the treasure of your care is that you take heed that it does not heal in the same form as before;
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	and these works that we have mentioned are only precautions for this illness, so that it does not return in the same form as before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes into the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This illness that is beneath is truly called "axacrati," and it is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	The accident comes from wound and cut and cautery and similar things;
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	and the method of the work in it is that you take a needle, in which there is double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left eyelid to the right, so that the thread comes out two fingers away from the flesh;
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	then stretch the flesh above all the needle, and cut it with a spatula wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the shape of the paper returns according to what is necessary, it is good;
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	if not, then take a scraper and put it in the cut, and turn the paper, and make two cuts on the side within the paper;
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	and let the heads of the two fissures from the two corners of the incision you have made be such that when they are joined together, the figure is like that of a letter called "Greek I";
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	then remove that flesh according to the amount its sides are sharp beneath, from what lies under the skin, then join the two separated parts, and sew them with a thread of wool;
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with what we have said about mollifying medicines and poultices until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the disease comes from a fissure or suture or cautery, then you must make a complete incision beneath the hairs of the skin, according to what is stated above;
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	then separate between the two sides of a tent, as I have said;
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	and one must perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters devise by all their power how they might restore the figure to its natural shape;
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	and the patient himself, according to what is required of work and instruments in various arrangements.
dou soudement de la papiere	of the suddenness of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this soldering happens to men in such a way that the eyelid above is welded with the white of the eye, and cannot move nor perform its natural functions, then you must put the point of a razor under the eyelid, and lift it up;
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	and you stretch the eyelids, until you cut that which is hard with a fine spatula, which should not be too sharp nor too cutting, so that the patient cannot bear it if the spatula too sharp does not wound the eye;
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	and let your incision, with which you peel that assembly, be slight, so that the paper returns to its natural form;
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	and the entire assembly is healed, and they sometimes use salty water in the eye, and wash it with fresh water, and with collyria;
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	then place between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and put on the eye wool soaked in egg white;
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	and after the third day use the collar and of sudatory things until he is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	Know that the nail grows in two ways:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	it is nervous and similar to hard skin, and another that is not nervous, but resembles white frozen moisture, which when touched with iron and thought to be treated with tweezers, one cannot.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	and both appearances begin near the large tear duct, and grow little by little until they cover the entire sight and all the light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the method of the incision is that the patient place his head in your hand, then you operate on the eyes;
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	and lift the paper to your hand, then bend the nail with small tweezers, and stretch it out above;
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	then take a needle, and put horse hair, or cow hair, or ox hair, and strong thread;
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	and double the tip of the needle a bit and insert it into the nail, and pierce through the entire nail, and tie the nail with thread and stretch it out above, and scrape all the hair along the side of the nail that faces the eyeball and sew the hair to the top, then cut the remaining part at the root of the tear duct thoroughly and with small force, and leave the natural flesh in the tear duct so that tears do not come from the usual path due to the incision;
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	and sometimes the nail extends only to the ounce, and to the thread, as we have said;
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	then one peels off all the spathumille from which this form is made:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	and be careful that the spathumille does not touch the flesh membrane and break it, and that the pupil is not perforated;
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	and after the incision, put a bit of ground collyrium in the eye, and of the collar made of litharge, and leave it until the next day;
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cleanse it with what is necessary until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	and if the nail is not firm, and you cannot insert the needle, and the forceps cannot enter, this nail-like condition is often treated with medicines;
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and they grow as I have described in the division, and if you wish to cut them, then work the eye of the patient, and take the spatula light point sharp according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And scrape the nail above carefully, and if you see that it does not become finer and the rasp is pressed in, then drip from your mouth into the eye a mixture made of litharge and red collyrium and well ground, and plug the eye until the next day;
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	then begin the other work according to this same method, until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If anything is not contrary in the eye, such as a hot abscess, then leave it alone and first treat the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the flesh of the lacrimal apparatus harms the eye greatly, then suspend it with an awl, and cut part of it but not all, so that tears do not come from it;
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	then distill into the eye red collyrium which is made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows on the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	In the eyes of some men sometimes red flesh grows, and covers the pupil and rises up on the eyelids and turns them outward, and looks like a pomegranate flower;
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	and the procedure is that the patient puts his head in your hand, then you work on the eyes, and cut all that flesh with appropriate forceps for this, and hold it firmly;
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	then cut the first layer of flesh, and keep cutting down to the scraper until the end, and be careful not to injure the eye during the procedure;
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	and let the incision of the spatumile, which we have described in the incision of the nail and the small forceps with which the sebel is removed, be as the form after this chapter demonstrates;
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	and when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, then apply oil of selvedge ground in which you add red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines, and place on it oil-soaked cotton with egg white, so that it is secured from a hot abscess;
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	and if anything remains and the skin swells, and you fear a hot abscess, then leave the oil and treat the abscess with things that soothe a hot abscess;
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do when flesh is attached by this method.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	but nevertheless, you must lighten the treatment of each weak eye along the natural course;
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and of the accidental vein, in ironwork;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this limb is able to endure the work.
des voines des eulz	the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	Films are red veins that cover the eye, and they hinder the sight's work and weaken the eye all day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	It is then necessary first that you look if the eye in which the cataract is, is protruding, and there is no other disease except the cataract;
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	then treat it in this manner:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	instruct the patient to place his head in your hand, then suspend those veins for all the ancon according to your wisdom, and let the ancons be finely doubled according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two incisions by degrees on the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	then when you bind those veins subtly with force, and wipe the blood hour after another, until you see those veins move out of the eye;
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	and be careful not to injure the eye with the tips of the spatulas, and do this work at midday in front of the sun, and be very diligent in your work so that you do not cut outside those veins;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	and when you have done this, distilled green and red collyrium in the eye to corrupt what remains of the bile.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you are not able to extract all of this in that hour, then apply a plaster on the eye made of things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is soothed and you are sure there is no risk of a hot abscess, then restart according to this method described above until he is healed;
et c’est li forme des forces:	and this is the form of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	The doctor calls a fistula "arissati":
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	when you treat it with cautery and hot medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then it is necessary that you cut into the abscess where it should be opened, and draw out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and the blackness, then remove it all with this instrument of which here is the form;
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	and it is called "aspre chief," and it should be made of iron to the length of the head, and pointed like a file as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And put on the place of the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers, and press your hand a bit until you know that that corruption is removed;
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	and do this several times, then restore the place with drying medicines.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	if the wound is sealed, and flesh grows, and the core of the boil is sealed, and remains thus for forty days, and it does not renew or become an abscess, and no adverse incidents occur, know that it is healed;
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	if not, then there is another method to bring the fistula to the opening of the nose in this manner:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	and it is that you uncover the bone for the second time by iron, and with aqueous medicines, and when it is uncovered then take the burin in this manner, and let the head of the iron be three-angled, and the handle be tapered to the tip as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	then place it on the bone near the eyelid, and remove your hand from the eye by a little, then turn the entire drill until it penetrates the bone and the patient feels it because wind comes out if he holds his hand over his nose;
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	and then restore the eye with dry medications, as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and the eyelids harden, the matter goes to the nose;
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	it is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the exit of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eye is fully opened and nothing obstructs the nose, nor any reduction, then you must bind the patient;
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	then heal it, then apply cupping or a hot poultice without bleeding to suction, then place on the eye a dressing made of acacia, aloe, frankincense, and sarcocolle, and then close the eye, and cover it with bandages and cloths;
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	and the method of the cloths is that you take cloths sufficiently soft, and fold each in four, and then put one on top of the other according to the amount that the eye may need;
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	then strain it over a hard bandage firmly, and begin the suction cups to suck without pricking;
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	then remove the suction cups and leave the eye strained day and night, and if the swelling softens, you must strain it very tightly;
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	then remove the bandage after the day and night, and if you see the eye improving, it is good;
se ce non;	if not;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	so begin again the plaster and the cloths and the binding and the cupping until he is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	Of the rupture of green thread
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When disruptions come to the uvea, it opens up, and small pieces like grains of resin appear, which are astonishing to see;
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	then if you see to cut it, the procedure is such that you insert a needle at the root from the lower part up to the upper part, then insert another needle where there is double thread from the tear area;
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and have it pierced, and leave the first needle according to the position;
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then cut the area of the double thread and tie a part of the uvea around it tightly, then remove the needle and put on the eye moistened wool in egg white;
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and leave it until the flesh falls with the grape, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound is healed;
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and sometimes the wound is restrained by the grape all around with a circle of cloth until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the eye shows great opacity, pierce it with a fine needle that comes through the pupil, and draw out the white moisture and lower the eye, and let it enter at once;
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	then extract it until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the white of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease which is called "alcunnati" is nothing more than phlegm gathered in the eye, resembling descending water, but it is not water;
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	and the manner of the appearance of the work is that you make sit the patient on the prepared and straight seat, then take the head between your hands from both sides, and move it until you see the vein come up to your eyes;
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	then let it be fixed, and do not lower and let the light be dispersed, and the patient sees things as he was accustomed;
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	and if it does not descend below, know that it is acute, and if the descending of the vein is not prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	then make the patient sit between your hands, then take the fine spatula and cut on the corneal membrane a spot by the continuity of the conjunctiva with the corneal membrane and the corona until the vein appears;
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and when it is issued, then let distilled into the eye hot water mixed with honey, or water in which fenugreek has been boiled and honey, then be cleaned by another cleaning until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the eye waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have seen the likenesses of waters in the division, and what is needed for piercing;
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	then work according to the health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from the sunlight, cover the healthy eye and press very hard;
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	then place the eye paper on your left hand if the eye is left, or on your right hand if the eye is right;
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	then take in your right hand, if the eye is left, the instrument which is called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eye is right;
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	then place the tip of the instrument near the crown by the thickness of a nail in that swelling of the eye at the part with fewer tears, then insert the instrument which is called "almagda" forcefully, and turn your hand until it pierces into the swelling of the eye, and feel that almagda comes to the empty space;
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	and it is necessary that the length of the path of almagda be exactly according to the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the black part;
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	and it is the crown of the eye;
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	and you will see the bone on that paper because of the clarity of the corneal membrane, then place the instrument just where the fluid is, then press under one way after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	If the aqueous humor is now dislodged, the patient sees in front of him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After rest a little, and if the fluid rises through the second pathway, apply force with the instrument, and when it is fixed in and does not rise, then extract the substance gently by rotating your hand little by little;
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	and then put in a bit of clear gem water, and bathe the eye with it.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then apply to the eye wads or wool soaked in rose oil and egg white, and bind with a healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	We, and those of our time, apply ground cumin with egg white.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if the almagda cannot enter into the eye because of its hardness, for there are such men who have too hard eyes, then you must take the instrument which is called "alberit", of which here is the form:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And pierce only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deep, but make the place delicate, then insert the substance as we have said;
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	and at the completion of the work prepare the patient so that the doctor is suitable, in which he sleeps on his back in a dark place;
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	and be deprived of all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and be bound according to his condition until the third day;
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	then untie him in that same dark house, and test his sight, and make him see some things, and then bind him again until the seventh day;
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	and it is not right that you do this at the hour of the treatment or after the incision now, but you must lighten this, because the fluid rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	When abscesses become hot, that you unbind the eye before the seventh day, and apply what alleviates abscesses;
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	and when it is calmed, then unbind the sight and place on his face a bandage to cover for some days, and let him remain in that dark room.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	And then let him leave the house little by little, and he should return to his normal activities;
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	and know that no student should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And one came to us who was from Yemen, who told us that in his country they make a device pierced, to which one sucks the water, but nevertheless I have never seen any in our land, nor have I ever read about it in the books of the ancients;
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	and by chance it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagda, for those who do not understand them see them;
et soient d’arain proprement:	and let them be properly made of bronze:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the head of these be of the same fineness, and the back in three acute angles.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh on the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	Sometimes diverse charmed objects are born or arise, some of which resemble scorpions with many legs;
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	and there are some in which a fox-colored charm is embedded, and it has a good-colored sow.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	In that case, with the charm that is in the form of a sow and not embedded, you should make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun;
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and works its nostrils, and throws the incense at those cars, and pulls them away;
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	then cut what you can support with the subtle sharp spatula on one side, until you know that the car is completely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if anything remains that cannot be cut, then open it with all the subtle light instruments, so that nothing remains;
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	and if it swells up, or the abscess is hot, then treat it accordingly;
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	and if these are malignant abscesses, then hurry and cauterize it until the swelling is subsided and all the cars are removed, then apply salted water or vinegar or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the nose bleeds, and moisture comes up to the palate, know that he is healed;
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	and if moisture does not come out as it should, know that there is new flesh in the bone above, which the instruments do not reach to cut:
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	then it is necessary that you put in a slightly thick linen thread, and it should be tied by skilled hands, and have between each knot a space of one inch or less;
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	and have the patient place the end of the thread in his nose with some force, and pull it through until it comes from inside the mouth;
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	and often children do this in schools, and it is an easy thing for one who wants to do it;
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	Then hold the head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and pull one after the other along the threads that are in the string.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	Do this until you know that the gnats have corrupted that flesh, then pull out the string, wipe the blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, and put it back in the nose as before;
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrode all that remains of the flesh;
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	and then put a plug of linen in the nose for several days until it is healed, and if it needs drying medicines, use them;
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	and this is the form of the instrument for cleansing the head, to which one drips oils and medicines at its base:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	and whether it is of silver or bronze, resembling an open lamp, like a tube, and the conduit likewise;
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	and if you wish, make a closed tube, and let the instruments be full to cleanse the head;
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	and let it have a handle at the head to hold when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the flesh on the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Often, a disease called "telul" arises on the head from the base, and it grows and becomes large quickly, so that it is a noticeable thing to look at;
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	and for this reason you must shave it at the beginning, and completely remove all hair, then apply the cautery or burning medicine to it;
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	and if you delay cutting it until it is large, be wary if it is hard, of a dusky color, with little sensation:
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	do not touch it with iron for it is an infected abscess, for when it is cut sometimes, great harm comes to the patient;
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	and if the abscess is of a moist nature, not of a dusky color, and you see that it can be completely cut out, then empty the patient and cut it without fear, and treat the area with drying and binding substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nose is cut and sewn.
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	Know that when continuation solutions come to one of these cartilaginous works, it helps little, for in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	It is then necessary when this happens to someone, to look if the wound is fresh with all its blood;
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then join the two lips with a stitch, then treat it until it heals;
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	and if the lips are already separated on both sides, then you must peel all parts of their surface until they heal, then join the two lips with a stitch, and bind them, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder and ground incense over;
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put the powders under a piece of a strong plaster or another adhesive plaster, and leave it until it falls off by itself, then treat it with ointment until it heals.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The manner of the suture is that you bring together the edges:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	or with needles, as we have said in the suturing of the belly;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or with thread, as I have made known to you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	In some men, there appears inside the lips an abscess that is hard, resembling grains of wheat, and smaller and larger;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	then it is necessary that you turn the lips inside out, and cut into each knot, and take them with tweezers and cut in each part;
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	then apply the area after the incision with ground vitriol until the blood is stanched;
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then wash with oil, and treat the area with dry substances until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the gum flesh
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	Many times, flesh grows on the gums, which the ancients call "albulus";
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	you must hold it with tweezers, cut it at its root, and allow the pus or blood to flow.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	then apply ground vitriol or other binding and drying powders to the area;
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	and if that flesh returns after the incision, which often happens, cut it again a second time and cauterize it:
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	it will not return after the cautery;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	and these are the forms of the instruments for cutting.
des sordens	of the dirty ones
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Sometimes there are gathered at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, crusts which are ugly and rough;
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	and sometimes the teeth are black and yellow and foul, until the corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth are stinking;
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	so it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his head be in your lap, and clean the teeth or the crusts appear, until nothing remains;
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	and thus do for the blackness and the greenness, and the yellowness and other stains, until they are cleaned;
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	and if one removes what is there at the first reason, it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	if not, then start over the second day and the third, until you have it all removed;
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	and know that teeth require various forms of instruments for cleaning, according to what the work demonstrates, because the scraper used to clean between the teeth has different shapes than those used on the surface of the teeth;
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	It is necessary when you treat the tooth for its pain that you delay extracting it as long as you can, for this is something one should never do;
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	For it is a very high quality substance so that one has no excuse for failure.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is constrained to extract, you must be certain of the painful tooth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times the pain deceives the patient, and they think it is in the tooth, and have the good tooth pulled;
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	and nevertheless the pain does not leave because of this, until the bad one is extracted, for we have already wanted to do this to these saints;
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	and when you are certain of the painful tooth, then you must peel around the tooth about one finger's breadth strongly to protect the gum on all sides;
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	then move it with your hands or with fine tweezers little by little until it is well loosened, then firmly grasp the tweezers;
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	and let the patient's shoulder be in your hands between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extract the tooth straight without breaking, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these instruments and gently insert it on each side, and move it as you did first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	and if the tooth is perforated and decayed, then you must fill it with cloths, where the holes are;
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and then grasp it subtly with tongs so that it does not break when grasping;
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	and you must work very carefully around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And be careful that you do not break it and leave a part behind, which may cause the patient, by the cunning of the root, greater pains than before.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	and beware that you do not act as the ignorant surgeons do, who by their hastiness and boldness sometimes break the jaw, and do not administer what we have recounted;
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but sometimes bring great illness through the extraction of those due to the roots that remain, or from the carriage they break, as we have often seen;
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	and when the tooth is pulled, wash the place with wine or oil and salt;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, then apply the area with ground vitriol;
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	and if that does not work, then cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The forms of the instruments, with which one pulls teeth first, should have long points and thick handles, so they do not bend when you pull the tooth;
et ce sont les formes:	and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And they should have thick parts so that they do not bend when pulling, and they should be made of good iron, and they should be toothed to hold the teeth firmly.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	When the root remains in the wound, you must put cotton moistened with butter on the spot for one or two days until the tissue softens, then use the forceps called “algefri,” which makes the head resemble a bird’s beak;
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	and let them be made inside like a file and this is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not wish to come out completely with these tweezers, then you must uncover the flesh all around the root, and place the instrument which is called "althali", that is to say a lever, of which this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And let it be strong and thick so that it does not break, and if the root comes out by this means, it is good;
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	if this does not work, then use all the instruments, whose forms come after here:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And one makes use of this instrument which has two prongs, of which the form is here:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other tools which are mentioned earlier in the discussion of teeth, and of this instrument which resembles large tweezers, of which the form is here:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And let this instrument be strong so it cannot break, and know that many tooth instruments are;
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also of other instruments which are not mentioned;
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and the wise subtle masters find their own instruments by themselves, according to what their works and the diseases show them, for there are such diseases where the ancients taught no instrument due to the diversity; and if one breaks a cartilage or other bones where it might, then he seeks out the appropriate instruments that I have told you about, and is aided by gestures, of which here is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And let them be thick and well gripping to hold the bone so it does not slip away, but can hold and remove it;
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	and then restore the place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, and it is small, scrape it all with this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the teeth appear not according to the natural body, and the form is ugly, and especially in virgin women, then you must know if the tooth has come after the other tooth, and it is not in the right place, and cannot be smoothed or filed:
adonques lou raie;	then extract it;
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	and if it is loose with the tooth, then take this instrument whose form is shown here, and it resembles a small beak, and let it be of iron and sharp at the tip:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And you cut little by little over several days because of the hardness of the tooth, and so as not to move the others, and if it appears that it can be ground, then grind it with a file like this one whose form is here:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	and it is also like the steel with which needles are made;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	and little by little I file the tooth lightly over several days so that it does not move until it falls out;
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	then smooth it at the end for any razor, and if the tooth is too sharp and it wounds the tongue, then you must file down the roughness until it is even, so that it does not wound the tongue nor corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the teeth loosen
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the front teeth loosen, either by impact or by falling, and the patient cannot bite down on what they eat without them falling out, and you have treated them with constricting medicines, and it does not work;
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	so they must be restrained with a gold thread, for the silver thread turns green and rots, but gold never changes;
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	and let the thread be neither too thick nor too thin according to the quantity of space between the teeth;
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	and if you wish to align the teeth, take the thread and place it doubled between the two healthy teeth, then insert the head between the loose teeth, if there is one or more, until you carefully reach the other healthy tooth;
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	then begin the wrapping until the part where you started, and withdraw your hand subtly and carefully, so that it does not move at all;
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	and let your ligature be at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	Then cut the head of the wire with pliers, and join them together, and insert them between the healthy teeth so that they do not hurt the tongue;
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	and then leave it so tight as long as it can stay in place, and if it loosens or the wire breaks, tighten it with another wire;
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	it will remain and serve him in this way for his entire life, and this is the form of the teeth and the alignment of the two healthy teeth, and the two misaligned ones, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when the tooth falls out, it is reset in its place, fresh to fresh, as we have said;
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and let no one interfere who is not wise and patient, and sometimes the shape of a bovine bone tooth is made, and it is placed in the place where the deficiency is, and it is held tight as we have said, and remains and serves thus for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cut off the tongue's ligament
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Sometimes this ligament comes under the tongue naturally, that one is born this way;
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or by accident of a sutured wound;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the work is such that you operate the patient's mouth, and have his head in your hand, and lift his tongue;
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	then cut the nervous ligament widely so that the tongue is separated from its place, and if there is hardness or knot, and this is from wound suturing, then use the hook to insert and cut widely that ligament;
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and take care that the incision is not too deep, for the artery which is beneath;
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	and when you have done this, wash the area with rose water and alcohol, or cold water, then place a linen cloth under the tongue;
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	and the patient should comb every night so that the wound does not close.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if bleeding occurs, apply ground vitriol to the area;
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	and if the sinew gives way, cauterize it with a lentiginous cautery, which is good for this;
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	then treat it with other treatments until it is healed,
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	and if you see it of a greenish color or black or hard, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is a cancer;
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	and if it is declining towards the cheek, and there is moisture, then apply an ointment, and cut it with a fine spatula, and release it from both sides;
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	and if the sweat hinders your work, then put ground vitriol on it until it is dried out, then return to your work until you draw all the moisture out;
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then lift the area of ash and seal it, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	Sometimes come into the throat balls which are called "godath", and they are properly called the two almonds, and when you cure them, as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	if it is a hard abscess of small sense and of flesh color, then do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if it is red and the root is large, then do not touch it with iron, also for the flow of blood;
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	but leave it until it is ripe, and then you will open it, or it will break by itself;
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	and if it is of white color and the root is fine, then prepare the instrument to cut, but first check if the warm abscess has settled and is calmed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then make the patient sit facing the sun, and his shoulders be in your hands, and work the mouth and let the servant take hold of him between his hands, and press the tongue underneath with all the instrument, which is its form;
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	and let it be of silver or fine brass like knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	When you press the tongue with all this instrument, and you see the abscess, then take the lancet and put it in the middle, and pull it out above as much as you can;
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	and pull out some thing from the cloth with it, then cut it with the instrument, which is its form, that resembles forceps;
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	and all the same the heads are curved, and one part the other, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or steel:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, cut it with pliers, of which here is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	and be sharp on one side, and the other not;
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and when you have cut one of the almonds, cut the other in the same manner, and after the incision, gargle the patient with warm water, and water mixed with salt, and if bleeding occurs, gargle the patient with water in which pomegranate peels or myrtle leaves have been boiled, and similar things, until the blood is stopped;
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then cure it until it is healed;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And sometimes other abscesses grow in the throat besides the two almonds, so cut them then just as you would the two almonds equally.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman for an abscess that had grown inside her throat, that is to say one small abscess;
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	and it had nearly closed her entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe because the passage was blocked, and she could neither eat nor drink, and she would have died if she had remained thus for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess had risen so much that it had forced two fingers through the two nostrils.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I then hurried and inserted a lancet into it once, then drew it out, and brought out a large portion of pus;
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	then I repeated the procedure in another spot where it had grown, and I opened her mouth and pressed her tongue;
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	after insert the lancet into these abscesses, and cut away a part, and no more than a little blood came out;
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	and thus the conduit of the woman's throat was cleared, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting into that abscess for a long time;
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	and the abscess grew again, filling the place that I had emptied, until it became very large;
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	then I incited it and cauterized it inside the throat:
ensi demora sens croistre;	thus it remained without growing;
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	and I departed from those parts, and know not what God did with her after me.
de l’uve	of the grape
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When arthritis affects the vein, and it is swollen and elongated, it is called "perpendicular";
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	and if it is beneath, thick and round, it is called "grape".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the hot abscesses are calmed, and they are subtle, then you must cut it;
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	and the one that is round and gathered and is not elongated;
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	and it is bloody or of yellowish color or black, then you must avoid the incision of it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	Then when you see it, according to the method I have said, of its blennorrhea and length, you should make the patient sit before the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier;
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	then insert the needle into the eye, and draw it below, and cut it with one of the two instruments I mentioned in the incision of the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And you must not cut too much so that the excess which is beyond the natural limit;
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	for if you cut more, you harm the voice and speech;
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient fears the cutting, then you should use ingenuity in the cautery of such fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is sharp and wet.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And it is that the patient puts his head in your hand, and then you press his tongue with the instrument we have mentioned in the chapter on cautery, and moisten with hot aqua fortis so that it is not too thick nor too clear;
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	and use the movement of this instrument, of which here is the form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And let there be on the head a bristle where one places the medicine, like the bristles of a spoon, and place the instrument with all the medicine on the eye;
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	and let the patient lie on their side so that the saliva and mucus flow out of their mouth from the medicine inside, so that it does not go down to the throat and harm them;
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	then hold your hand on all the medicine and press it on the eye, the quantity of half an hour, until you see it swelled and the irritation of the medicine be calmed;
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, and moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument with all the cotton into the canal above, until the cotton burns on the eye;
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	and do this often until the cauterization is complete, then leave it to dry, and it will fall off after four or five days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you need to restart the cauterization with the medicine, then restart it, and after that, cauterize around the eye with cotton wrapped in butter, and clean what is around with the medicine;
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let it be soaked in cold water, and treat it with gargles until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This treatment is more skillful than the incision, or the cautery;
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	if it is treated by fumigation according to this method, take calamus and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and lovage and similar herbs, and gather them all or some of them in a pot, and put oil in it, and make it boil;
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	and the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and in the middle of the pot have the instrument placed according to this method:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	and it should be made of silver or bronze, and one end should be placed in the patient's mouth so that the vapor rises to the eye through the tube until the eye is mortified;
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	after the bleeding starts again frequently until the pus dries, and take care not to do this at the beginning of the emergence of the hot abscess, for many things happen;
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	and do not do this only because the hot abscess is declining.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not present, then take a reed and put inside the head a chicken egg, so that the patient's mouth is not too hot;
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	for the eggshell does not let the heavy vapor affect the mouth, and it is a good and healing treatment altogether.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Many times, a bone or spine of fish, or some other thing, gets stuck in the throat;
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	so it is necessary that you draw out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument so that you may see the movement of the thing;
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	and what is not visible and is hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the food is cooked in the stomach;
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	perchance the burned thing may be expelled by vomiting;
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navelwort, or a root of lettuce, or a morsel of dry bread;
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and tie a thread to the sponge and then have it swallowed;
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	and when it comes to the place, it will ignite, and then you will pull forcefully;
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not come out forcefully from what we have said, then take the suction instrument according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And let the instrument be curved at the head so that it may enter the throat more easily, and have the head lifted upwards;
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, lest it cause choking, nor push the bone inside;
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	and it is better that the patient insert the instrument, so that they may move it where the thing is burned;
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	If the swelling is below, or it is drawn equally by all the instrument until it is even.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the phlegm from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	Sometimes the blood is medicated, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	and when this does not help, then look into the patient's throat in the sunlight, since you press their tongue with the instrument that I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the sinew, then draw it out with a small hook, or with subtle tweezers that are suitable for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, then take a horsehair cord, and put it in the patient's throat, then insert the end of the cord with a hot iron, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient sweats all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	then take a full glass of cold water, and wash the mouth, and throw it inside to swallow, and move it around with his hand often;
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	and as soon as the blood feels the water, it falls.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if it does not fall as we have said, then sub-fumigate the patient with asafoetida, with the instrument that I have mentioned in the fumigation of the grape.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	Do this many times, for it will fall without delay.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the method of the fumigation is that you take a pot with live coals, and let the pot be covered with a lid pierced in the middle, and in that hole be the head of the instrument;
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	then throw your fumigation in it, and the patient puts the end of the tube in their mouth, and closes the mouth so that no smoke escapes, but goes down to the blood;
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	and the blood will now fall, and if it does not fall, then restart the fumigation many times;
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	and let the patient endure thirst, and eat salty and sour things, and not drink any water;
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	and then it will be necessary for it to leave through this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the form of the instrument with which one draws blood is, when it can be seen, similar to curved pliers designed to easily enter the throat;
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	and it should resemble the beak of an eagle, and have the roughness of a file, so that what it grasps, it cannot release;
et vez ci la forme:	and see here the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapter of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	Many similarities of abscesses exist, according to what the memory comes after one and the other in this book, and they differ in puncture and size;
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	and it is in two ways, one of which is in its own appearance and from what it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for the places where they are on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	for the abscess of the head is different from that of the fundament, and the abscess of the fleshy part is different from that which comes in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And there are abscesses that one should not pierce until the pus is dead according to its completion;
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	and there are such that it is necessary to pierce when they are hard, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses that are near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come near joints, and they are left until they spread around, by chance the ligaments and nerves of the joint may be corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	When the abscess is near the main member, and if you delay the puncturing until it is dead, it will harm the principal member;
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	When it is near the fundament, pierce it before it becomes dead;
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	and it is not right that you pierce a hard abscess without completed digestion, except for the one near the fundament, so that it does not perforate completely and extend inside, and result in a fistula;
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and cannot heal over a long period.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And you must know the time for puncturing an abscess that is dead according to its completion, and this is when the pain is calmed, and the departure of fever, and the lessening of the pain and redness, and of the swelling and sharpening of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	and you must place the puncture at the lowest point of the abscess, where it opens and moves;
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	and let the puncture be of the length of the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all similar places where there is no pus.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those that bend, according to that limb.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in a fleshy area, it is best that you leave the perforation until it is confirmed in complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you pierce it before this, the body's venom will be spread, and it will be full of much filth;
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and perchance the lips and the depths of it may harden.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And so for some abscesses that are pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limb requires.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	and you must treat small abscesses with small punctures;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and in large abscesses, large openings, and many slits according to the resemblance of the size of the abscess;
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and there are such abscesses where it is necessary to shave the area and cut;
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	when it has become as yellow as a rag, and is softened, then it should be treated as one treats buboes:
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	and there are such that are split into three corners, and there are such that are cut like the leaf of myrtle, as abscesses of the armpits;
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	and there are such where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar cuts.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those who have no head, such as a superficial abscess, you must pierce it completely;
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	and it is necessary when the abscess is large, and it has collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus at that hour, but draw out a part;
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	then plug the abscess until the next day, then draw out something again;
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	do this several times gradually, until all the pus comes out;
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	especially if the patient is of weak strength, or pregnant women, or small children, or old frail men.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For the fever sometimes rises with the discharge of the pus, which may cause the patient to die, and you would not be aware of it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Beware therefore this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, wipe the wound, and look if the abscess's wound is small;
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	and if it is a smooth cut, then apply linen cloths or old cotton;
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	and if it is a large abscess, and there are many openings, then you must insert a cloth into each one so that they come against each other;
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	and if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin and you have shaved around it, then you must fill it with old cotton or lint from linen cloth without moisture, and bind it until the third day;
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the bone, and treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs in your work, then apply cold and light water, moisten the cloth, and place it on the bleeding area multiple times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the discharge of blood persists, apply treatment and care, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it is during winter, and the area or the abscess is very inflamed, then you should put on cloths and drapes soaked in warm wine and oil;
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	and if it is in summer, and the area is fleshy, then you should put on cloths soaked in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said;
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then drain the abscess and wipe it and treat it as appropriate until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And this must be universally known in the treatment of abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And I have told you how one should proceed in the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	of the sewers
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	When small abscesses come from the head, and they are kinds of sores that are on webs, like the wattles of a hen, and there are many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are some that are fatty and of such kind that they have moisture like pus;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	and there are some that are hard and stony to cut, and there is no doubt if the artery does not oppose it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the work of the waist is that you test with all the instrument which is called "intromittor," whose form comes after, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, then cut it open above the length.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture is emptied, then scrape without leaving anything the skin that contains that moisture, for it returns immediately when something is left;
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present;
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	if not, use water and salt, apply it to the wound, and leave it until the next day;
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	and this will dissolve what remains from the night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And then restart the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that nothing remains from the night;
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the wound with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	and if the abscess holds hard matter, then cut it according to this form, lengthwise;
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	and apply your ointments, and scrape it from all sides, and put all your effort into drawing out the matter where it lies;
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	and if the artery acts against you, then do what I have told you after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And do the same for the abscess if it is stony, and in cutting and cleaning as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cut into the stony and moist abscess, it is lighter, for they are full of blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And some of these abscesses on the head have no moisture, and there were such dry abscesses that I cut from the head of an old woman;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and I found the abscess like a hard, rough, and white stone, and it could not be broken;
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	and if one had hit it, it would have made as much of a wound as hitting a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other abscesses coming on the head, such as those that come at the tips of children's heads and at the roots of the ears, the opening should always be in the lowest place, so that the pus may flow out;
et les cure si com il covient.	and treat them as appropriate.
des scrophules	Of the scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Often this abscess occurs in the neck, and beneath the jawbones, and in the glands, and sometimes they appear elsewhere on the body, and they are large, and are clustered together.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each scrofula is properly within its coat, like the knot and the abscess of the head, as we have said;
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and the similarities of these scrofulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are such that contain moisture, and there are malignant ones that do not wish to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	in that one then which you see of good disposition to the touch, and is similar in color to the skin, and moves on each side and is not adhered to the nerves of the neck nor to the artery nor to the channel, and is not deep;
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	then you should cut it from above, and peel it on each side, and stretch the two lips of the wound with probes, if you need to, as we have said in abscesses of the head;
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	and you pull it little by little, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve or the vein, and let not the spatula be sharp or cutting, so the hand does not slip, and do not go too far forward, lest you cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	and if you cut the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to work, then put in the wound ground vitriol or some powders that stop blood, and bind up the wound;
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	and leave it until the abscess is calmed, and the wound is softened, and begins to pus.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	and when the blood is stopped, return to your work until you complete it;
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	then examine closely if any small scrofulae remain there, cut them off and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, then you should not cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, and let it hang down by itself without harm;
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	then dress the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut all the scrofula, then you must bring together the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, since there is no remaining surplus due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	and you must understand to cut the root of it, and pull hard, and sew it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those scrofulae that hold excess, pierce them where it appears to be worst;
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	and pierce it in the same way as the one mentioned before, hanging down, then apply bandages with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption;
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when the wound is well cleaned, then treat it with an ointment that promotes flesh healing until it is healed.
de squinance	of dislocation
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The ancients spoke and talked about the structure of the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those who have a tracheotomy, it is necessary that the fold of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be cut;
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	and one does not provide aid by this, because all the veins and the phlegm of the patient are hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the two tonsils for those who have an abscess.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the windpipe, it is necessary to cut the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	Therefore, when we wish to split the epiglote, we must split it below three circles or four a small slit across, between the two circles or by the quantity of the slit from the surface, not in the cartilage;
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and that place is suitable for the section of the epiglote where there is no flesh, and the vessels are long within.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the master is fearful, then it is necessary that he stretches the skin of the throat for the entire inch, then splits the heart until he comes to the windpipe;
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	and avoid the blood vessels if you see anything, and then cut the surface as we have said;
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated by the cutting of the phlegm from the throat which jumps out through the place that is broken, and by the lack of voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour has passed in which one fears strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound of the throat, and sew it all alone without the cartilage;
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then administer medicines that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis says one should not do this until the throat is completely blocked, and the patient is judged to be dying, and the defect is evident.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then cut the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe, and they breathe through the wound, and thus are saved from death;
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	and for this reason the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease had passed, and it passes in three days or four. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and treat it, until it was treated;
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a maiden took a knife and stuck it in her throat and cut part of the glands of the pharynx;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called to treat her, and I found her as if dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound and found the blood that had come out of it, and I knew she had not cut any vein or artery in her throat, and the air was escaping through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hurried, sewed up the wound, and treated it until it was healed;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and it did not happen to the young lady that she became hoarse of voice, and afterwards returned to her normal state;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	for that is why I say that in the area of the epiglottis there should be no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This abscess is called "throat hernia," and it is a large abscess of the color of jaissé, and it often occurs in women;
et est selonc II manieres:	and it occurs in two ways:
naturez, et accidens;	naturally, and accidentally;
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	the natural one does not have any danger.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accidental one occurs in two ways, of which one is similar to fatty pus, and the other way is similar to an abscess that comes from arterial pus;
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and there is fear, and it is not right to work with great force except in those who are small, and he proves and examines the entire insertion:
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it like an oily knot, and it cannot enter any vein, cut it as you would cut knots, and pull it out entirely with its covering, if there is any;
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and examine it thoroughly, and treat it as appropriate until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	from us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	There are many kinds of knots, of which I will describe all the similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and now it is necessary that I say the entire difference that exists between a knot and an issue.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that heat and fever persist until the ebullitions have passed, and the putrefaction is complete;
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the knot, there is no heat, fever, or pain, and it contains the scab, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the flesh, and begins like a blister, and becomes large;
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and they appear in two forms, dry or moist, and their colors are much like what I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the wound, that you examine and inquire first about all the instrument which is called "intromittor," according to what its form will come in the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the method of examining abscesses in the nose is that you take the moistest part you find in the abscess, and gradually turn your fingers, until you know that the instrument has pierced the center, according to the size of the abscess;
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	Then extract the intruder, and take care to not use too much force.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If running moisture appears, whatever color it has, cut it open as I have said for other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if after extracting the intruder no moisture comes out, know that it is fatty, so then cut it in a cross shape, take it with tweezers, and peel it lightly from each side and watch the spot where it lies that you draw it out clean with the root;
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot draw it out clean, then pull it out in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything remains, the pain will return many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if some remains and the sinew troubles you, use some corrosive powders on the wound, bind up the wound, apply things to soothe a hot abscess, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if the wound is large, sew the two lips of the wound together, and treat it with what promotes flesh growth.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	and if the pulsating vein opposes you or another, hasten and use powdered green vitriol, and leave it for two or three days until the wound becomes putrid, and stop the boiling of the blood;
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	then return and scrape off what remains of the putrefaction.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	See here the forms of the instruments for insertion, and they are of three kinds:
grans et moien et petit;	large and medium and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	and there are three squares which are called "albaret," and one which is called "breb," and there are of three kinds:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	large, medium, and small, to probe the abscesses of fistulas;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are also like the needles with which one sews the sores, and they are of amber citrin, or of iron, or of silver, and those that are yellow are better suited, and those proven more effective are of black plum for probing the ulcers of fistulas;
et sont de III manieres:	and they are of three kinds:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the openings.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The forms of tumors are very diverse, as you see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	large, medium, and small;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	and there are tumors that have two curves in three ways as well;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	and there are tumors that have three curves, and they are also of three kinds;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	and there are tumors that have two curves, and tumors with only one curve, and they are of three kinds;
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The heads of these are sharp where one cuts, and there are some that do not cut strongly except from one side, for which one strips the knuckles so that one does not cut the vein or the nerve;
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and of these introducers, the needles are placed in sleeves so that the patient does not feel them during the opening of abscesses;
et sont de III manieres:	and they come in three manners:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	large, small, and medium, as you see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and they are not used except in fleshy parts, such as legs, and arms, and breasts, and armpits, and similar areas;
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	And sometimes one makes another small instrument resembling flax bark, according to this form, with which one stops blood:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is placed sometimes at the site that heals with cutting of veins, and arteries, and sometimes according to this large form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to be corrupted, so that they resemble a woman's breasts;
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to treat them must sew according to this form from this line 2 up to 8:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then remove the fat, and apply a healing medicine to the wound, then sew the two lips of the wound together, and treat it until it is healed;
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	and if the breast sags down and is softened due to its size, as happens with women, then cut it open in two places on top, with two similar incisions;
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	from which one is held to the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line 2 up to the line g;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then peel the skin that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary for the treatment until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if it is not healed, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive ointment;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and leave it until it consumes the remaining tissue and fat, then clean it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of the abscesses of the armpits
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come under the armpits are kinds of hard scrofula with edges, and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line .b. up to line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the pus that is in the abscess has been drained, apply the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scrofula, cut it as we have said for incisions of scrofula, and if the wound emits pus, apply cauterization as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is torn, and the skin above is sealed, abscesses often result, and similarly it happens with a swollen vein and an abscess;
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and it is recognized thus for the artery, the abscess is long in appearance;
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	and when you feel it with your hands, you sense the constriction;
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when it is for the vein, it appears soft and more prominent;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is foolish to cut this abscess, especially when it is under the ribs and in the angles and on the neck and in many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	It is necessary then to avoid the iron treatment, and that which is at the head should also be avoided, and in that which is of arterial swelling cut above the skin of the long;
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then work the size at the incisions, and carefully separate the artery from the tissues until it is exposed;
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	then place a needle underneath it and make it pierce to the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread in two places, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples;
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	then puncture the area between the two ties with an introducer until the pus that is inside comes out, and thus the abscess is relieved;
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then administer the treatment that causes vomiting, until the bowels release;
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat it with an ointment similar to this, until it is healed;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	and if the abscess is the size of a vein, then you should stain with your hand as much of the abscess as possible to the whole skin, then insert the needle under the area that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and have double thread so that you pull it from the other side;
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	then tie the abscess, as I have told you, with the thread of one of the two ends of the doubled filament;
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	and if you fear that the thread will not come out, then insert another needle along all the thread under the entire abscess at the incision of the first needle, and hold the threads in four places;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then cut the abscess until the excess flows out, then cut the excess from the heart and leave what is tied;
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then place a wet cloth in wine and oil on it, then administer treatments of bandages and ointments until he is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of the abscesses of the nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As abscesses come in the artery and vein, so do abscesses come to the nerves when they are wounded, or by too great labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this happens more often in the shoulders and hands and all places where there are joints, and it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles the color of the flesh, and it is in various conditions without pain;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when it is pressed strongly, the patient feels pain, and it is not throughout the body, but under the heart;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	and moves well from all sides, and does not go forward or backward, nor below or above, and that which is in the joints should not be cut with iron:
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	perchance there might be contraction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and for that which is on the head or forehead, cut the skin with a spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers, and cut it at its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, suspend it with a lancet, scrape it, then remove and stitch the wound together, and treat it until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	large hanging swellings
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	Sometimes it happens in bellies and not elsewhere, which is a disease called "fungus" by resemblance to fungi, and the roots are subtle, and the heads large;
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	and in it there are small and very large ones;
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw a man who had two in his belly that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had a fine root, and were gashed open, and immediately moisture flowed from them.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I cut them and found one weighed eighteen ounces, and the other six and a half, and the work in the incision is to check if the patient is moist and the color of the joint is white and moist with a fine root;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	If you cut with a wide spatula, and let the cautery by fire be present before you.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For in cutting, there often comes too great a flow of blood, and if the blood overcomes you, then hasten to cauterize;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	and if you see the patient is fainting and fearful of the incision of the iron, then take a well-made thread of linen, and tie the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	and then bind it, and do not stop tightening the linen thread until you cut the artery, and it will fall off without any effort;
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	and if the roots are large, there is fear in cutting, especially for the abdomen, but you can cut off half of it, then cauterize so that it does not grow back;
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	Then treat the wound, and be careful not to cut the tissue which is of a reddish color and has poor sensation and looks moist.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess infected, and I will come to the treatment of the sore afterward.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the boil is about to burst.
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of pus comes from a cautery wound or a tear in the skin, and it is on the stomach where some of the pus comes out, as happens in other ruptures, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries as mentioned before, or from windiness;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is due to the rupture of the skin and from the discharge of pus, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the flesh, and it is a light matter without pain, and opens with various discharges.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the discharge from the intestines, then it is more varied, and when one presses it with their fingers, it springs back, and then returns, and sometimes it hardens, and greatly expands at the entrance of the bath and with intense labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and it opens well when you press it with your hand, without any constriction;
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	and if it is for blood, then the abscess is large and hard, and it is fixed according to a quantity;
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is for wind, then it is soft to the touch, and the work is such that you observe whether the appearance is due to blood from an artery or a vein, or wind.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	And it is necessary that you leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear in it, as I have said in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	and if the appearance is due to the intestine or the belly, then you must instruct the patient to lie on their back, and be stretched out straight, then sign all around the swelling;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then command them to lie between your hands, then go all around the area you have marked with spatulum, then stretch half of the abscess above with the entire large uncinus;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then bind around it with a strong thread, or a rope of strong silk firmly, and let the knot of the binding be secure;
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then apply half of the abscess extended over the binding, and put your index finger in it, and seek the interior;
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	if you find it caught in the binding, then untie it, and push the interior outside of the belly;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you find the boil, then take it with the lancet, and cut off the excess;
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery or vein resists you, go gently around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and insert two strong threads, and place the two needles around what you have done in a cross so that you pierce it;
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then extract the abscess in four places above the needles, and if you see them, remove the needles, and leave the area until it becomes pus-filled, and the dead flesh will fall off by itself;
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	when it is thin and rotten, then cut it, and treat it as necessary, and the abscess will fall off as we have said;
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the area as necessary, and sew up the area.
dou chancre	of the ulcer
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have said in the division about the similarities of ulcers, and how one should work with medications, and how one should avoid iron treatment;
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	and we say that the chancre extends into the marrow, and there is great caution in its treatment, and the ancients said that when chancres are in a place where they can be scraped off like chancre which is on the mammary glands, and in the thigh, and in similar places, and it must be completely removed when it is at the beginning;
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	and when it is large and old, then you must not approach it, for I have never been able to heal any;
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	nor has anyone ever healed any before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And the work, when it is in a place where it can be removed, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile;
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	then make it clear if there is evident fullness, then prepare the patient in a good place to perform the work;
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	then throw your lint on the ulcer, and comb it all around, and remove it from all sides without leaving anything;
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and let the blood flow freely, and press the area with your hand or some object, and if the bleeding prevents you from cutting into the artery or vein, then cauterize until the blood is stopped;
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have already said in the division the types of dropsy, and in what manner the accumulation of water is formed, and the signs of each type, and the treatment that is done with medicines, and that which is treated with iron:
si est eclites soulement;	so are fractured solely;
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and one should not touch iron in these two cases:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	that is to know, tympanitis and hydrops, for these are deadly things;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	then when you treat this case of dropsy which is called "fractures" with medicines, and the treatment does not help, look to see if the patient is weak, or if they have another illness besides dropsy, such as fever and diarrhea and similar things;
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	do not use iron, for there is danger;
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	and if you see the patient is of strong vigor, and they have no other illness besides dropsy solely, and they are not too young nor too old, then you must proceed thus:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	Lift the patient upright in your hands, and have the attendant press the belly by pushing the fluid to the lowest part of the breast, then take the sharp spine according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let it be sharpened from two sides.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	The tip, and all the while it should not be so penetrating that it might reach the intestine when inserted, and it should not pierce;
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	then look if the dropsy is spreading towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	then you must make three straight cuts below the bulge, right above the wrist;
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, then your incision should be to the left of the bulge three fingers wide;
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	and if it is for the pus, then it should be to the right, and it does not suit that the patient lies over the opening so that the excesses do not flow to that weak spot;
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and insert it, and lift your hand to spread the space between the skin and the surface as when stripping to the quantity of a nail or around;
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	then pierce the surface until the space comes to the hollow place, and this is where the water lies, then draw it out forcefully, and insert this instrument of which this is the form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it resembles a thin silver chain, and it is made of glass or light archaut, and at the lower part, there is a small perforation;
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and when it is cut from one side, three perforations;
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and two from the other side, and one from another;
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	and the shoulder is cut like a quill, and this is the form of the incision with which the scribes cut the quill:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	at the top above is the alembic, so that when the instrument reaches the liquid, they now raise the instrument;
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	empty then half or a third part, for if you empty more than is appropriate at that time, perchance the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit due to the remedy, or he falls into confusion, or he approaches death;
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	but it is void according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the patient's virtue signify, and his pulses;
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	then draw the instrument and retain the liquid, and it is retained now by the plug that stops the opening which is on the surface, of which I have spoken, that you pierce according to this manner;
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	then reuse the instrument the next day, if you see the patient enduring this, and draw a small quantity of liquid;
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	do this for several days, and be careful not to draw more than a little bit of liquid remains.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you doubt about the patient, and you leave much liquid in him, then treat with burial therapy or hot sand, and cause heavy sweating or bathing in the sun, and dye from drinking;
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	and the treatment with drying medicines until it is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the constriction of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	Sometimes children are born who have no opening in the penis, or the opening is small, or it is not in its proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	It is necessary to pierce it immediately with a very fine instrument throughout according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	then put a fine cloth on the opening, and bind it and keep it that way for three or four days, and when he wants to urinate, remove the cloth, let him urinate, and then put it back;
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	and perhaps none is needed, because the urine that comes forcefully does not leave it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	He whose opening is small is treated with the wool plug, as we have said, so it will widen.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have the opening in its proper place are damaged, because some are born with the opening at the tip of the penis, which prevents them from urinating unless they lift their penis upwards;
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	and they cannot urinate because the matter cannot reach the bladder, and it is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the method of the work is that the patient lies down on his back, then extend the head of the penis and cut it like the length of a feather, so that the hole falls in the middle, as it should;
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and be careful of the flow of blood which often occurs, and if it happens, then stop it with what stops blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	pustules of the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Often this albathe comes in the penis, and it is an ugly appearance of flesh;
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and there are malignant and non-malignant [ones];
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	and you must take them by the sharp point carefully, cut and clean all of them, then put on moist cotton with Egyptian ointment;
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ailment is malignant, of putrid color and stinking, then you must apply a cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have cut it, and if the tumor is at the tip of the penis, with part inside the skin and part outside, then you must remove the part of the tumor that is inside first;
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	and when it is sealed, then treat the outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you treat it all at once, the head of the penis is not securely protected and may be pierced, leading to darkness and corruption in the penis and the groin;
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	so it is necessary to scrape off all that is black and corrupted, then apply the plaster of honey and flour which should be made from pomegranate rind and beans, then treat with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding occurs, then apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	The cautery thus helps in two arrangements together:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	that is, to the flow of blood, and to corruption;
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then you must insert a cane of platinum into the urethra, and the patient should urinate through it;
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	and when the skin is swollen at the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or it occurs due to a wound or an abscess, then you must cut away the skin with a sharp instrument until the tissues are separated, and the head of the penis is freed entirely;
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	and if it is difficult to describe this, then you must peel off a little bit from the head of the penis and the skin with a scalpel;
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	then gently separate them between two, and place a fine linen cloth moistened with cold water, so that it does not dry out again.
de la circoncision	of the circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not the separation of continuity like other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	nevertheless, when we perform this work by our will, and especially for children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the least severe for healing.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of the circumcision of their children, for they do not use it in their law, and we have no more knowledge of it than what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I have seen the majority of masters and surgeons who performed circumcisions around one day, with force, and with an entire novacule;
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	So flee the veins because there are two layers, and perhaps one cuts the upper layer and leaves the lower one.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	Or the recovery is hindered, and the pain is doubled, and in the cleansing which is of the wound, the tip of the member is not securely treated;
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	and in the cleansing of the nail, by chance the iron slips, and the work is ruined, and often they grow back without needing cleansing, and I have seen it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the cleaning that is done with force on all the thread of the ligament I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the force cuts just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand, you cut equally in one continuous motion;
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but that the thread be tight around the skin;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	and let the method of the first work be such that you make the child think, if he understands, that you do not cause him harm by binding the thread around the penis only, and then give him hope in every way that you can;
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	then make him stand between your hands straight, and conceal the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments;
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	then put your hand on the penis and blow on the groin, and pull it up until the head of the penis is inside;
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	then clean it well of the filth that has gathered, then tie the marked area with a double thread, then bind it under one point to another tie;
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	and hold it with two hands by the second ligature at the pocket and the index finger, and cut between the two ligatures, then lift the heart upwards quickly and pull the head of the rod;
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the remedy;
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and put powder on and on the powder one bandage glued with a mixture of a cooked egg white diluted in rose water, boiled and fresh oil rosined, and leave it on until the next day, and treat it again as needed until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The form of forces in purification is as follows:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	the two shoulders should be held tight and should be cutting, and the shoulders should also be as large as the sleeve equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	The mistake of purification is when the blood inside flees at the incision;
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	then you must extend it with your nail, so that the wound forms an abscess;
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	and cut it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, then hold it with tweezers, and then cut it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if it exceeds three days, and what is beneath the penis is swollen, then leave it until the heat of the abscess is calmed, and gently scrape it;
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	cut it as much as you can move it, and be careful of the part of the penis, for this will not harm it.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Then treat the area with a powder that we have mentioned in the chapter on powders, and if you cut beyond measure from the core and it goes above, it will do no harm;
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat it as we have said until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	about the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is due to the obstruction by stones, or frozen blood, or feces, or dead flesh, or similar things that we have mentioned in the section;
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	and if the urine is not unblocked, and you see that the retention is due to a stone in the neck or mouth of the bladder, then it is necessary for the patient to be bent over their knees;
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	and let his feet be placed on the back, and extend his belly from the part above the back, and restrain the patient as tightly as possible;
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and then the neck of the bladder is constrained for the expression of the stone above, which loosens the urine;
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instrument which is called "catheter", of which here is the form:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	and let it be of fine light silver wire, like the feather of a bird;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and let the cane be one and a half palms long, and be fine at the head.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the method of urine extraction is that you take a double thread, and tie at the head a ball of wool or cotton, and insert the end of the thread into the urethra;
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	and cut off the excess wool and insert it to the end of the urethra, then anoint the urethra with oil or butter and egg white, and have the patient sit on a chair, and moisten the bladder and penis with oily water and olive oil and warm water;
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	then gently insert the catheter into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then fold the penis upwards towards the belly;
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	then push the catheter forward until it reaches the bladder, and the patient will feel it reach the empty space, and this is not done according to this method forcefully because the path through which it goes is twisted;
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	then wind the thread on all the wool bit by bit, and the urine follows the wool, then pull it out strongly, and make the urine flow;
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and repeat the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When blood comes into the bladder or corruption is gathered there, and you see aqueous and medicinal substances dripping in, then use all the instrument called "clepsydre", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It is closed, and it has three openings:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	two on one side, and one on the other, as you see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	and the thread is wrapped in such a way that the medicinal cord is suitable to plug the penis well without addition, so that one may draw out moisture and push when necessary;
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	and when you want to introduce your medicine into the bladder, put the head of the tube in the moisture, and draw with the drawer that is inside;
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	so you will draw out the moisture with a catheter, and then forcefully reattach by pulling in;
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	so the moisture will enter, and it will come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	and this is the form of the subtle clyster with which oneclysters the bladder:
si est ci:	thus it is here:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And it is made of silver or brass, and the head is higher;
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	and below the breast where the limb lies;
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture in it with which you wish to clysterize the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts firmly with a strong double thread, and heat that moisture over the fire;
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	then place the head of the clyster in the penis, then draw your hand over the bladder as all the moisture comes in, until the patient feels that this moisture has come to the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	and if you do not have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it roundly around;
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	then put a strong thread through these holes, then close the circle as one closes a lid, and place inside what you wish of oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument;
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and do as you have done with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	about the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have said before in the division the kinds of stones, and the extraction together with medicines;
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	and I have said the difference between the stone in the reins, and all the signs, and in which stone one should operate by cutting;
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in the bladder, and in the penis;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the stone which is lodged in the bladder happens more often to children, and the sign is that the urine jumps from the bladder resembling water in its fineness;
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and there appears sand, and it irritates the patient's penis, and it can happen many times, and then it swells;
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	and to much of these leaps the foundations;
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and the healing of children is light until they are four years old, and it is very severe in the elderly, and it is moderate for young adults, to those who are between youth and old age;
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	and the treatment is lighter for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema, to draw out all the bile that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it sometimes obstructs the search for the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient by the feet, and lift him up and move him downward so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and sometimes it leaves its higher position;
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	then have him sit between your spread hands, and his hands should be below his thighs, so that the bladder is completely tilted downward;
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	then seek it and touch inside;
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	if you feel the stone in the space, then hurry now to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not fall at the total touch, then moisten your index finger with oil from the left hand, if the patient is an adult, or your middle finger, if the patient is a fully grown youth;
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	and insert it into his rectum, and seek the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, then pull it towards the neck of the bladder;
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	then press with your finger, and push it out where you wish to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And instructs the servant to press the bladder with his hand, and commands him to stretch out his right hand the testicles upwards, and with his left hand lift the skin that is under the testicles in the part where the waist is made;
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	then he inserts the spatula cutting, which is of this shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And make an incision between what is between the testicles and the anus, not in the middle but on the left side;
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	and be straight on the stone, and your hands should be close to the anus, and the cut should be wide on top so that it is broad at the surface, and inside narrow according to the size of the stone, not too large;
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	by chance the pressure and the tooth which is at the root, jumps out without effort;
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	and know that there is such a stone in it with angles and edges:
si est griés a issir;	it is difficult to remove;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	and there is such one that is smooth, resembling an acorn, and round, from which the removal is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	For those that have angles and edges, make the incision larger;
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	and if it does not come out, then you must grasp with the forceps that are like a file at the head, to tightly grip the stone so it does not escape;
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	where you place under the I a subtle curved instrument at the head;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you cannot engineer it thus, then widen the small perforation, and if the sinew is dry, then tighten it with green vitriol;
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	and if there is more than one stone, then place the largest one at the neck of the bladder first, then cut above it, then pull it out firmly, and the smaller ones afterward if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, then it must be cut, and a larger wound must be made.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For two things happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	either he dies, or the urine comes out immediately so that the wound cannot heal;
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	but nevertheless exert yourself in pulling it out, or using forceps to break it, until you pull it out in pieces;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	and when you have completed your work, then dress the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it tightly, and place upon it a cloth moistened in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess;
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	then lay the patient on their back, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you release it, wash the area very well with oil and water, then treat it with ointment diaphoretic and basilicon ointment, until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	and if hot abscesses and corroding sores come to the wound and clots of blood in the bladder, which cause the urine to be retained, conceived in such a way as to not pass with the urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	then insert your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder, and cause putrefaction;
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then lift the wound of water and of ashes and of soil, and help it in all ways that you know, until it is healed;
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	and it is necessary that all the hours that you treat it, you bind the two thighs, and apply the medicines to the place.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the stone is small, and it is in the urinary duct of the penis, embedded inside, and the urine cannot pass;
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	then treat it as I said before, that you cut it multiple times, and one is relieved of the cutting through this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proved it thus.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take an iron rod according to this form and let it have three pointed ends fixed in one handle:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	then take a thread and tie it around the penis below the stone so that it cannot move back into the bladder;
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	then insert the drill into the shaft gently, until it reaches the bone;
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	and turn the drill with your hand in the bone little by little, until you can pierce through the other side of the bone;
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	the urine will soon flow, then press your hand on what remains of the bone that is inside the shaft.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	It will be broken soon, and it will come out with the urine, and the patient will be healed;
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie a thread below the bone and another above, then cut the shaft where the bone is between the two ties, then extract it forcefully, and untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood in the wound;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	It sometimes happens that a stone is formed in women, and if it ever occurs, the treatment is difficult, and it is prohibited for three reasons:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	and the second is that one cannot find a woman knowledgeable enough who will expose herself to midwives, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	And the third reason is that perhaps one cannot find a woman well skilled in this art with her hands;
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	and the fourth reason is that the stone in the woman is more embedded than the stone in a man, which requires a deeper incision, and there is great fear. And if necessity arises for this, you must take a very knowledgeable midwife, who is hardly found, and if you do not find one, seek at least a chaste and subtle midwife;
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	and it presents a wise woman in the lives of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and commands her to do what you command her for the inquiry of the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and look very carefully if the woman is a virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then he must insert his finger into the base and seek the stone;
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if she finds it, then she should press it under her finger, and commands her to insert her finger into the patient's vagina, and to squeeze and press her left hand firmly on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	If she finds it, then she must move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder downward until it reaches the root of the thigh;
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	then cut into the stone at the root of the thigh opposite the middle of the groin, where it is most visible, and feel for the stone in that part;
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and do not move his hand above or below the stone, and let the cut at first be small;
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	then insert the probe into the cut, if you feel the stone increase the wound until the stone can come out easily, and know that there are many kinds of stones:
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	that is to say, small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and those that have ridges.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	and know the similarities to understand the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if the pain overpowers you, then apply ground vitriol to the area and keep it there for an hour until the pain is subsided;
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	then return to your work, until the stone is strong, and have the instruments that I have told you in the extraction of the stone from men to help you in your work;
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	and if the blood overcomes you, and it is from the artery that is cut, then put the powder on the place and use bandages of linen and cloth, and do not begin this again, and leave the stone and do not extract it, lest by chance the patient might die;
puis cure la plaie.	then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is calmed, and the eye becomes dry, then return to your work until the stone is removed.
de hernie carnouse	of fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	Aquous rheum is nothing other than an accumulation of moisture or white slime, which is beneath the cover of the testicles, containing the egg;
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	and it is called "syfac", and sometimes it is properly in the web of the eye, if one thinks that it is another egg;
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	and it is the skin of the kernel between the white syfac that we have said;
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	and this does not happen if there is no pus.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this ramica is due to weakness that affects the testicles, and that material is spread out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And sometimes it comes from a blow to the testicles, and this moisture has many colors:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	or its color inclines to yellow, or it is without red, or black, or white watery, and this happens more often;
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is in the white syfac that we have said, then the abscess is hard, the pus long like the shape of an egg, and the testicles do not appear, for it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the inner cloth, then the abscess is hard with part of the egg white, and for that reason, one thinks it is another egg white;
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	and if the moisture is between the skin of the testicles and the white surface, then one feels it well;
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	then when you wish to know the color of the moisture, test throughout the inserted area, of which the form is described above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the insertion, judge of what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we cure it with iron, then it is necessary that the patient be bled according to our ability and the fullness of his body;
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	then lay him on his back, on something slightly raised, and put under him many cloths;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	then sit on his left, and instruct the assistant to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two sides of the heart of the testicles;
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the sharp blade, and cut the skin of the testicles from the long side down to near the wrist, and let your incision be straight, dividing the skin of the testicles until the white surface appears, and peel it subtly according to your ability;
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	then pierce the surface full of water with a wide hole, and drain all the water, and then insert your needles, and stretch the surface up;
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	and do not touch the heart of the testicles, but only the surface;
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	cut it all or piece by piece especially the thin part of it, that if you do not cut it wisely, the ailment will return;
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	and if the eye jumps out due to your work, reset it in place when you have completed the work on the face;
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then sew the two sides of the scrotum together with one stitch, then treat it like other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	and if you find the eye corrupted by another disease, then you must tie the vessels that are suspensorial, fearing the flow of blood;
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	then cut off the testicle along with the suspensor, and remove the eye, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if the fluid is gathered in two parts together, know that these are two branches;
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	cut the other part just as you have done the first equally, then wipe the blood, and put in the wound wool soaked in rose oil;
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put over it more wool soaked in wine and oil, and place on the two sides, and put over that doubled cloths, and tie it up with a bandage according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	Then take two cloths, and stuff them with shredded wool according to this shape and let them be joined by stitching at the waistband, and one of the shoulders should reach from the anus to the back, and the other to the area near the genitals;
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	and the other two heads on the two angles, and let all the binding be confined in the loop of the bridle;
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and sometimes this branch of cautery is used instead of iron surgery, and it is that you take a subtle knife-cautery, and cut the skin of the testicles, and heat it as we have said, so that the white surface containing the fluid is exposed;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that surface with the tongs, and scrape it with this hot subtle cautery:
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	and cut it in all ways that you can, until you clear everything;
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and be careful that the fire does not touch the egg;
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	and know that this work is more beneficial;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and beware of the flow of blood, and be careful with the operations of cutting;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if anything opposes you, whether a warm abscess or a flow of blood or something else, then treat what opposes you according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is fearful and does not want to undergo this work because of its horror, then administer puncture as I tell you, and it is that when you are certain by the signs we have mentioned that watery phlegm is there, then make the patient sit on the raised seat;
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	then pierce the abscess in the part below all around the broad area, and perform the puncture with the long instrument;
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	and let the pores be wide so that all the water flows out;
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then put cotton on the place, and bind it, and leave for the remaining water to flow out, then clean it until the wound is healed;
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	and if the white cloth does not allow the water to come out of the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a quill or the instrument used to draw water from dropsical patients, whose form is described above;
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and widen the wound little by little, knowing that the water returns and accumulates after about six months or so, and when it is accumulated as before, thus will the patient spend his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in the section of this branch there is fear in many positions, which is why it seems better to leave it alone;
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you the work and the similarities of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	I say then that many abscesses come to the body, and especially to the testicles;
et c’est par mout de cas.	and it is for many reasons.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	It is to know due to an excess of sour and watery humors, which spread to the testicles, or from contusion;
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body;
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and finds no pain, and it is a severe abscess;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and by chance some severe abscesses are fearful and stony, and of a fox's color, and sometimes come from artery pus, or vein swelling.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from artery pus, it is known by the condition of the hot abscess, when you press it with your fingers;
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and it is not right that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	The one caused by vein swelling is known by its condition upon the expression of touching with fingers, and one can well perform the incision on this appearance, and on other forms;
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and it is that you cut off the core of the testicles, then the egg rises up, and the thread comes out from the white surface, and release the suspensory from all sides of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	if the egg is already cooked with these thin membranes, then you must draw out the egg, and cut it;
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is airy on the surface, or in what is inside the vessels, then you must release all of that membrane, and cut it roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the flesh is at the rear place, then you must cut it all away and extract the egg, just as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, apply the wound with wool moistened in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the testicles
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess wrapped in a membrane resembling blains, with the softening of the testicles, and the patient suffers greatly when urinating;
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and the treatment of this disease is also very fearful like the one mentioned before, and nevertheless we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	You must make the patient sit on the elevated chair, then place the scrotum suspender below with your hands, covering all the vessels close to the penis, and grasp the main ones, stretching them out firmly;
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	then cut with a broad sharp knife across the vessels until they are exposed, and then peel on each side, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries in the temples;
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then insert a needle with double thread, and tie it at the first place where the vein appears, and then tie it at the other end;
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then cut them in the middle straight, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moisture;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then treat the wound like the others where we cauterize, so that no pus remains that nourishes one of the testicles;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for by this no harm comes, and if pus forms in all the wounds, then it is necessary to extract the testicles from all the wounds;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the organ does not lose its nourishment due to the incisions of the wounds, and they dry out and cannot heal.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the rupture of the sphincter
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The consequences of this procedure are by the section that comes to the groin, or the extension on the belly in the area of the thighs, so that the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the testicles;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	And this rupture is either on the surface or from the extension of it, and these two kinds come from many causes:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	or from percussion, or from jumping, or from straining, or from lifting heavy weights, and by similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is from the extension of the surface, are that it happens little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and the abscesses are equal until they are ripe, because the surface presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the sign is when it is from the cut of the sphincter, that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear diverse underneath the skin near by, and this is due to the exit of the intestines and the body beyond the sphincter.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the hernias come out with the intestines, and are held there, causing great pain to the patient, especially when they are pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments there is fear, therefore one must avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the method of the work is that you instruct the patient to keep the intestines inside with their hand in the wound, if they can insert it;
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then remember on his neck. between your hands, and lift the thighs;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then bring the heart above, and cut all the skin of the scrotum lengthwise;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then insert into the sides of the waist hooks according to what you need to open the wound, and they should be such that the pus may flow out;
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then peel the surface that is under the skin of the scrotum until the white hard surface is completely exposed on all sides;
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	then insert your index finger into what follows the testicle, between the white surface that is under the skin of the egg, and the second surface, and separate what is behind the egg, and between the second surface;
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and then move the right hand inside the kernel of the testicles, and stretch the white surface upwards with your left hand, and lift the egg to all the surface towards the waist;
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and command the minister to stretch the egg upwards, and loosen that which is air behind the binding;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and feel with your hands if any of the intestine is wrapped in or on the hard white surface, and if you find anything, then push it into the belly below;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	then take a needle with which there is thick thread made of several threads, and push it into the back part of the surface, which is behind the skin of the testicles;
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	After castration, then cut the shoulders which appear from the veins, until there are four veins;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	then gather them one on top of the other in the shape of a cross, and tie the syfac, which we have mentioned is under the skin of the testicles, with a strong binding of two parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	then wrap the shoulders of the veins and tie them firmly in two parts so that none of the vessels that nourish them can enter inside, so that no hot abscess may come;
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and place the binding according to the first binding long two fingers from that, and after these two bindings leave of the syfac which is under the skin of the testicles a length of one finger;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	and after all the other according to the roundness that the eye bears;
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	then cut in the part that is under the skin of the testicles, as much as the sinew and the bowels, just as we have said above;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then apply wool moistened in oil, and place it on the wounds, and apply the linen that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white surface that we have mentioned is cauterized after the incision, out of fear of blood flowing.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this happens often, and leave the linen until it falls off by itself;
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if it is slow to fall off, let it be soaked in warm water, and put on what we have said until it falls off;
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then treat the wound with another treatment until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch, I have never seen anyone who dared to perform the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said that it is made like the branches which are together with the screw, in such a manner that you bind the vessels, after cutting lightly underneath;
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	then cut in the middle, and treat the abscess of the one who works, until the vessels flow;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	Sometimes rupture occurs in the muscles, as we have said, and the wound opens;
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and none of the intestines should descend to the testicles, and if they do descend, it is a pouch, and repairs itself continuously;
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and if it remains too long at this stage, the wound or swelling grows, so that the intestines descend;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this happens by the extension of the swelling that is in the veins, as we have said, for it is extended, then the flesh softens and swells and opens;
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	and the treatment is by cautery, as we have said before;
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	and it is that the patient lies down on his back between your hands, then cut the swollen area of the rupture lengthwise according to the quantity of three fingers;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then extract the sebaceous substance that is beneath the skin which follows, then take the rait and put it on the area where the sebaceous substance appears;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press it to the perfection of the belly, then sew the two areas where the sebaceous substance appears on top of the head of the rait, and sew one and the other;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then extract the head of the rait, and do not cut into the sebaceous substance nor stretch the egg or anything else, as I have made known to you in the treatment of the removal of intestines;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	then treat it according to the treatment of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the hairs, wash and treat the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The suture is tight, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cauterization is softer in this place, and closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the testicles
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Often, the skins of the testicles in some men become soft because the substances inside are softened, and it is clear to see;
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	and it is necessary, when one wishes to treat it, that the patient lie down on his back, and cut the skin which is softened over the natural skin;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	then bring the two lips together with a suture, and if you see, first sew the excess of the softened skin with three or four firm sutures;
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	then cut between the sutures, and treat it like other wounds until it is healed, and remove the thread.
dou chastrement	about chastisement
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	Know that castrations are disapproved in our law, and for this reason I would prefer not to speak of it in this book;
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	and it is not necessary except for two reasons:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	where one is that the doctor should know how to answer when asked, and know the treatment;
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	and the other is that we often need to carefully use certain animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I say then that castrations are performed according to two methods:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	either by attraction, or by incision.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In the one that we do by attraction, we make the animal sit in warm water until the testicles are softened and hanging;
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	then take them in your hand until they are removed and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	Of the treatment of hernia:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	you must dye the animal, and press the skin of the testicles with your left hand, then tie the suspensory ligament, and cut above each egg when you have properly skinned them;
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and leave some of the fat from the intestines and the thin membrane that is on the viscera;
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	and this method of castration is better than that which is done by traction, because with traction sometimes some part of the testicles remains, by which the animal desires lust;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	then treat the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	about hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Hermafrodite exists according to two ways in men:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	one of which is that between the two testicles appears as the form of a woman's opening, where it has hair, and sometimes the urine flows from there.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And another manner is in women, and it has on the wrist like a rod and two coins.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the treatment for the man and the woman is that you cut away all the attached flesh, and treat it like other wounds;
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	in the second way, for men whose urine jumps over the skin of the testicles, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	of the tendon
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	Tentigene is a piece of flesh attached to the natural part, such that it is too ugly to see;
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	You must dye the excess of the tendons with your hand or needles, and lightly cut them;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do not go too deep, so that bleeding does not occur, then treat it with other treatments until it is healed;
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	and for another growth that appears at the mouth of the molar, and it is painful, and sometimes it swells, and it resembles a kernel, and for this reason the ancients called it "kernel disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	So you must cut it, as we have said about the tendon, and treat it until it is healed.
de erratique	erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	It is erratic when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the opening is small;
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	and it is caused by birth, or accidents by disease that has occurred;
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	or it is attached by glue, or of fine or thick silk, and it is made in perfect form on the forehead, or on the sides, or underneath, or wherever;
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	and it prevents conception, and childbirth, and perhaps the flowers to have;
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	and the knowledge of this is by the look at the bile.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the swelling appears close, you may want to treat it with your hands or with a rasp.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is of fine silk and it is close to the two temples, then hurry, and do it thus:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	put your two index fingers together, and the woman should be on her back, with her legs spread apart;
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	then stretch the two temples properly, until the fine silk is round, and above the stitches;
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	then take wool, and moisten it in oil, and place it on the area, and have the woman lie with the man each day, so that it may not heal.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the surface is hard and thick, then you must shave it with a sharp instrument resembling a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	if the swelling is from new flesh, then suspend it on a lancet and cut it;
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	and have blood-stopping medicines, such as quicksilver, dragon's blood, frankincense, all mixed with egg white;
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	then apply a wide bandage to the wound so that it cannot heal;
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	and let it be so for a long time, and apply a linen cloth to it;
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then let other treatments be applied until he is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the wound comes a foreign body, it must be cut out according to this method, if they are not infected abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an infected abscess that is in the wound, one should not touch it with iron.
des emorroides	hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that bleed without cause habitually, and when hemorrhoids are old they become hard.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	and we have said before in the division the similarities of them, and the signs, and I will say here those that receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and hard lumps, when they are perfectly inside the wound, and do not appear to the touch, should not be treated with iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the murrain, which one can feel, are those whom one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	Therefore, you must put the woman in a cold room, then extend the altar with tongs, and cut it at its roots, then apply powder of blood-stopping medicines such as alum and dragon's blood and frankincense, and similar things;
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	then place her feet against the wall for an hour, then put her in cold water;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	and if bleeding occurs, then make her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peel and galls and similar things, and then take barley flour, and mix it with honey and lard, and make a poultice on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops, it is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	and if not, apply cupping to the back and breasts without pricking;
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	then take wool, and boil it in plantain juice or in elderberry juice with old wine, and apply it to the area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess has subsided, treat the area with ointment until it is healed;
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough head, so it must be cut as I have said for the tumor;
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	of the abscesses of the jaw
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscesses occur in the jaw, such as canker and stony abscess and herpes and thrush and fistulas and hemorrhoids and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	It is therefore necessary that I speak in this treatise about the hot abscess that occurs in the marrow, which is not one of the abscesses that are gathered by the boil.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	and if you wish to know the treatment for iron, then observe if the abscess is sharp at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and if it turns red if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Then do not hurry to pierce it, but let it ripen until the pain is calmed;
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	and then have the patient sit on a chair, and have two small stools where he can lean, and support his back and bring his feet together behind the leg;
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	and let his thighs be spread apart, and place his arms beneath his knees, and bind them well with a good binding;
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	then turn the body towards the right side, and apply the instrument used to work the mouth of the maris, from which comes the form;
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	and it is necessary that when you apply this instrument, you first insert the rod to know the depth of the maris, so that what enters from the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and it does not injure the patient;
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	and if the instrument is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the maris with cloths, so that the instrument does not distress it;
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	and it is necessary that he places the cone of the instrument above, and that he taints the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	and when the abscess is open, and one cuts it with a soft hand, then it must be cut at the head, with the spatula clean;
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	and when the boil is emptied, then it is necessary that you put in the wound cloths moistened in rose oil, or in dried green oil;
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	and place the cloth firmly in the wound at the center of the mortar, and put further on top of the mortar and on the pain clean wool moistened in water or mallows that have been cooked;
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat it after two days of applying ointment similar to this, until it is healed;
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	and sometimes raise the maris and the wound by aclyster of water and honey, and then with water or roots of lilies and long artemisia boiled;
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	then return to the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is deep in the marrow, then you must be careful not to use iron for treatment, but cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	It is necessary first for the midwife to know the signs of natural childbirth, and these signs are when you see the woman pressing down, and desiring to smell the air.
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	then the infant hastens to come out;
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	then you know that this childbirth is according to the natural form, and the exit is under his head, and the afterbirth with it;
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	and when you see these signs, then you must gently press his abdomen, so that the infant comes out soon;
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	for when he urinates on his head, then the afterbirth comes with it, and the mother is cleansed of her excesses through proper cleansing;
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	and he who comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	For sometimes he comes on his feet, and the body or the shoulders come out first, and the hands, or he comes on his abdomen, or buttocks, and is turned by chance on his neck, and in other bad positions;
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and skilled in these matters, and to beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the positions how one should assist them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If the child comes onto its head by natural passage, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the strength of the mother is weak, then make her sit on a saddle, where the women hold her;
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	and warm her nature with oil or fenugreek that is cooked, and then the midwife puts between her fingers the small spatula which has this form:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	and cut the amnion, and scrape at its nail until the moisture inside comes out;
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	and hold the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then it is necessary to give the woman an enema of fenugreek paste with sesame oil;
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	then have her sneeze from condisi, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour:
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	the infant will now come out.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if the two hands come out forcefully, then you must gently reset them little by little;
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	and if they cannot enter, then place the woman on a seat and lift her feet up;
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	then stand the seat on the ground, and steady the woman so she does not fall when standing;
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and if the hand cannot enter and the infant is dead, then cut the hands with the knife that was previously placed there, extract the infant, and reset equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	of the birth of the child on its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	When the infant comes on its feet, then one must push it up;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then turn it little by little, until it is even;
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then take the feet and stretch them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	When it reaches up to the thighs, then command to grasp it, and make it sneeze with condiments;
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if it is strong, may God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it does not go strong as we have said, turn it little by little until it is according to the natural form.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it moves lightly.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if it does not come strong as we have, take mastic of attar, and oil of sesame, and dissolved gum, and grind all in a mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and put upon the nature of the woman inside and remove this ointment, then have her sit in warm water up to below the ribs;
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when it is moistened underneath, make her a necklace of myrrh, and put it underneath, and leave it for an hour;
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then have her sit on the seat, then make her sneeze and hold her mouth and nose, and gently grasp her belly, for the infants are now jumping.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the birth of the child upon its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the infants come in this form, then the midwife gradually places her hands;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	then let her be supported on her neck, and let her legs be hung down, and let her lie on the bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and bend his hands little by little, and then takes hold of the hands on the belly, and removes the cushions underneath, until she is aligned downward;
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the infant does not jump, then take its feet and move them strongly, then move its belly upwards, then put your hands there;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and wash the child little by little;
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and command the woman to strain until the infant comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the birth of the child who comes with one hand extended widely
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	It is necessary to devise to return the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if it cannot be returned, then make the woman stand up and walk;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	If she cannot walk, then make her lie on the bed, and extend her legs properly;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then apply the massage that I have described;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she does not give birth, then make her sit on the stool, then attempt to guide the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and bring the child out according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and command her to pull as much as the infant comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	from the birth of the child on its neck, and have its hands spread out, and its face turned towards its mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary that the practitioner holds his hand, then turns it little by little, and brings it out gently;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is aligned, then apply the natural massage with fat and oil, as we have said, then command her to move little by little;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	and when you have done this, then make her sit on the chair, and command her to hold tight;
et la fai esternuer.	and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	of this same manner to all the tonsil
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes to this manner of swelling throughout the sinew, cut the sinew with your nail until the moisture is drained;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if the swelling can be on his face and neck, then cut it from the root so that it is not held back, and reduce the swelling;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then place the child inside, until you have put it as it should be, and command the woman to hold tight at times;
adonques si istra legierement.	then it will come out easily.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the birth of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	Know that abscesses often occur, and sometimes three or four may form;
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	and this is not a strange thing, and it often happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	Two are strange things, and do not live much, if at all;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know that they are multiplied, and are separated by the surface that divides them, which is attached to the flesh;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and sometimes they come out as naturally as any other pus, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they come out difficultly, then treat them as we have said, and let the bandage be fine, and do quickly and lightly what needs to be done;
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do so as it is worth moving to safety.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	Sometimes they are formed in the womb I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to XV, and are all shaped like a child by the measurement of the wise glorious, and it is necessary that the bail sage knows all this, for perhaps similar things happen to him;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	do as it is appropriate.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat the woman for a dead child in her womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are constrained to manual work;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	you must know if the woman is of sound health, and has no condition where she fears death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	so that the woman should lie on her back, and her hips inclined downward, and the legs raised;
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and the minister should hold the thread in two parts, tied to the bed so that it is not pulled during the descent of the child;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mouth of the mother with moist oils mixed with alum and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint her hands with these oils and these mixtures;
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	then place them lightly on the mother, then apply the places where she should put the plasters that are suitable for this, and be careful if the child is positioned that it descends headfirst;
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	so insert the awls in his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or in his palate or under the beard or in the throat or near the sides, and if the hemorrhoids are on the feet, insert them in the ankles and the middle ribs;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	and it is necessary that he holds the awl in his right hand, and places the cautery between the fingers of his left hand, and gently applies it with all his hand, and inserts the awl into any of these areas that we have mentioned, until it reaches the empty space;
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	and this is the form of the awl:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	then insert another awl opposite it, or a third one if needed, so that the extractions are equal;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then stretch it equally by moving from one side to the other, for teeth to come out, and let the bones be toothed to hold the teeth, as is here the form:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	and if a part of it remains, then anoints one of his fingers with oil, and puts it in that part, and pulls the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	and if any remains, then place this tooth in the higher part, and do this until it comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	and if one hand comes in front of the other and cannot be brought back due to constriction, then you must wrap it with a cloth until it comes out completely;
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	then place the bandage at the joint of the sole or on the foot, and thus you must do the same for the other hand, and for both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the shoulder of the child is large and it is stuck at the exit, or it has a pointed head gathered together, then you must place the sharp spatula between your fingers, cut the head and draw out the water.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you round it with the instrument which is called "almidach," from which the form comes with the instruments or chapter which is after this one;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and in the same way do it if the fetus has a large head naturally;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and then pull the bones with the tongs, and if the shoulder slips out and it sticks in the forceps, cut it open until the moisture that is in the breast comes out;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if she cannot come out, then cut her into pieces with the tool you can;
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swollen in the belly or below the ribs, then you must pierce it until the moisture flows.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the swelling is on his feet, then the attraction is light, and the adjustment at the mouth of the vein is slight.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is tight in the belly or the breast, then you must stretch it with a cloth wrapped around the hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and cut open the belly or the breast until the moisture inside flows out;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	and if the other limbs are removed and the head remains, then the physician puts his hand in the fontanel of the skull and draws it to the mouth of the skull;
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	then put one ounce or two, and draw forcefully;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	and if the opening of the ear is narrowed by a hot abscess that has come there, one should not work on it, but instead administer moist and greasy substances;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and the treatment should be plasters, and seats in water that soften and moisten.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the infant is on its side, and you can make it lie flat, then administer what we have said for the living child;
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if one cannot do so, then draw forcefully in parts, and leave nothing of the second layer.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, if the assistant remembers what we said about hot abscesses that come upon the maris;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if bleeding occurs, then put it in restricted water, and the assistant should perform other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose womb one fetus had been dead, then another was placed on top of it, and the other also died.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came on the buttock, and swelled so much that it burst, and began to rot severely.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to treat, and I thought long, and could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on a strong attracting poultice, and an bone came out, and after some days others came out.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I was very amazed, because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that they were the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I stitched the wound, and pulled out many bones, until the woman was in better condition;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and the woman lived for a long time like this, and now she releases a little pus from the site;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have recalled this chapter for the reason that when a master finds something strange, he should add help to it.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring back the dislocated to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	After this comes the form of the pressor, to which one applies the books;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	and at two turns of the two shoulders of the two limbs.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	However, the horns should be finer than the restrictive piece, and they should be made of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and the mouth of the staff should be one inch wide, and the margin of the trees should be one inch, and in length one and a half palms;
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and between the two limbs should be two adjustments of this same staff, which should be fixed on one and the other side, half a palm in length or a little more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	and these two adjustments are placed in the mouth of the device to open when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of tongs;
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and have at both ends two adjustments, as you see, one palm in length, and two fingers in width;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	and when you wish to open the uterus with the entire instrument, make the woman sit on a bed, feet hanging down and legs spread apart, then insert the two adjusted pieces together into the uterus, and hold the head of the instrument below between her thighs;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then work your hand with the entire instrument, just as you have done with the tongs equally, according to the amount that you wish to open the mouth of the uterus, until the loose part does what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	These instruments are all crowned, and their likenesses are multiplied;
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	and when the doctor has prepared them, the work is done more quickly, and it is more impressive to people because of their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not despair of the instrument that you have prepared, for their necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold back her flow, and then make her sneeze with condiment, and hold your hands at her mouth and nose;
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and if she is relieved by this, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	If not, then take a pot, and make holes in the lid, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the womb inside, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, casia lignea, and centaury;
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	all these herbs, or some of them, be cooked in a pot with water over the fire;
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	then place one end of a cane or tube from the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the patient, and have them inhale until the vapor comes inside the patient;
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	then make them sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	Then the tendon springs quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if it remains after this treatment and does not come out, then instruct the nurse to moisten her left hand in oil of sesame or in musilage of althea, and then insert it into the area, and gently massage;
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and when she has found it, then grasp it and extend it little by little straight, so that the patient does not fall during the extraction;
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	but there it is necessary to move lightly to the right and to the left, and then draw;
si venra et se desaerdra.	it will come and become dislodged.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the mouth of the ear is too narrow, we have mentioned the treatment of sneezing and fumigation with herbs;
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it does not come out with everything that we have said, then be careful that you do not follow through with drawing;
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the ear, you tie it to the thigh of the woman, then cleanse it with an ointment of four ingredients;
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	it will swell and be reset, and come out freely;
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	but nevertheless, when it ferments, a bad odor comes to the stomach and head, and harms the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	then appropriate fumigations are needed for this:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	some of the ancients have tested the fumigation of cress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman for the retention of flows and the secondina is thus:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it resembles a cane, and one places the thin end into the affected area, and the wide ends over the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let the fumigation be over the coals, and continue until it is consumed, and start another one.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the anus
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have their anus perforated, but it is plugged with a fine membrane:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	then it is necessary for the nurse to puncture that surface at its proper place, and not pierce it with an acute spatula, and be careful of the stitching so as not to touch it;
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then place moistened wool in wine and oil, then continue the treatment of anointing until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not set, then put a pin of linen in the wound, and leave it for several days, and remove it when the child wants to go to the chamber.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And sometimes this swelling comes from the sudden opening of a wound or an abscess;
si covient coper celui soudement:	then it is necessary to cut that swelling:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	so it should be treated, as we have said about the hernia of the groin.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula of the anus
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that come below the anus are nodulations, and swellings that appear near the anus or in the space between the two parts, so there is one fistula or more;
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	and when that knotting is old, it operates, and sometimes white or subtle liquid oozes out, and at times these fistulas are perforated;
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and they are known by what comes out during defecation or flatulence when the patient defecates, and sometimes one can see worms coming out.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And there are fistulas that reach as far as the bladder, and up to half of the penis;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and they extend as far as the hip joint, and up to the kneecap.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one knows the perforating fistula at the anus, and the non-perforating one:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and it is that you put your index finger in the anus, and insert a fine needle of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	and if there is twisting, then insert a thin lead probe or horsehair until you feel the probe or hair at the right place;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge of excrement or wind or worm from the perforation, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	know that it does not pierce;
si te haste dou curer.	do not hurry with the treatment.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula extends to the bladder or to the urinary duct, then the urine leaks out and cannot be sealed by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	if it is pierced up to the junction of the thigh, then the probe reaches up to that place;
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	If there is no curvature and the source of the pain around it, then it immediately causes bowel issues, and neither medication nor salves by application are effective;
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in these Persian fistulas there is no cure except work, and the vanity of foolish physicians who interfere with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	In the one that is not Persian and is not old, there is hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back;
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and lift the legs up to his thighs, and have his thighs inclined towards his belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then insert a probe of silver, or of bronze if there is curvature, until you know where the probe goes.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels it around the anus, then you must put your index finger there, and if you then sense that the tent has pierced it;
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	and it is uncovered where you feel between your finger the surface or the flesh, then you know that it is pierced;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	do not tamper with it, for it cannot be healed;
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	it is said nonetheless that some can be healed well, but this happens rarely;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	and the aid that is done consists in heating the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was previously mentioned;
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	and he inserts it entirely hot into the fistula until it reaches near the anus;
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and do this two times or three, until you know that these contaminated substances are burned, which resemble the feather of an eyelash;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then clean with wet cloths soaked in butter, until those substances come out, then clean with an ointment that cleans and heals the wound.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If he is thus healed, it is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If this is done, it cannot be healed in any other way;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if the tent enters, and does not penetrate to the bone at the base, and there is a thick layer of flesh or tissue between your finger and the tent, and you see the fistula beneath this covering from the core;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	then cut from the beginning of the fistula, and immediately push the tent forward, and then cauterize after, until you reach the head of the tent;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and the tension will be released, and it will fall;
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	then purge those tainted substances that resemble bird feathers, and leave nothing behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the sinew overpowers you and cuts between you and the work, then cauterize it with fire or medicinal acid.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cauterization brings together two good things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	that is to say, the binding of these applied substances, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	then treat the moistened tensions with butter or ground substances until the wound spits out the burned substances in the pus;
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	then treat the wound with soothing ointments that soften hard flesh, and these medicines are dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes up to the anus perfectly and is far from the body, put your finger in the anus and explore it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the tension, and between two is the thread or the sinew or flesh, where it is close to piercing, there should be no force but a way of trust and hope, by the administration of one of the three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it to the bottom, or if you can, place threads and treat it as before;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not go too deep that you do not cut the tissue holding the foundation, and excretions come out involuntarily;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then treat it as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	perchance it will be healed, or you remove that covering and clean it after it is cut near the foundation, whether by thread or by another sharpened instrument;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then cleanse that carrion which is in the wound as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	then strive to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula in the part outside the anus:
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	it is a lighter thing for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And sometimes fistulas are according to this manner:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and it is when you place the tent in the fistula, and it is on the side of the anus near the skin above, then take a tent pierced at the top according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And you twist the thread twice, and insert the tent with all the thread into the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	if it is inside the margin of the anus internally, then pull the thread from that perforation, as if you were putting your finger into the anus;
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	and draw the head of the thread, and bring the two shoulders together, and hold one to the other, and leave it for one day or two;
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and restrain it sometimes until the thread cuts these tissues that are between two and fall out;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then treat the wound until it is sealed and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not drain, then make it drain in all ways that you can, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not right to cut too deep for the suturing, and then clean it as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the spiked spatula used to make the fistula is very sharp on one side and cutting;
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other side it is not, so that one does not cut what should not be cut, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	Emorrhoids are according to two manners:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	where they are inside the anus, like grains of resin, and there can be small and large ones, and they immediately cause bleeding, and whether there is one or several, and they are found deep within the anus and at the top of the anus;
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	but those that are deep inside have little moisture, and still immediately or a little bit of yellow water or a bit of blood, and they have the color of the flesh;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment for those who have them inside the anus is that you instruct the patient to strain as if going to the chamber, until the anus protrudes, and then the threads become visible;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	then you should act quickly, and grasp it with tweezers, or hold it with your nail, then cut it at its roots;
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if the tweezers cannot hold them because of their moisture, then take them with a flag, or with cotton, or with a piece of cloth;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and pull them out with your fingers, then cut them, and sprinkle some hot powders used for cautery on top;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you cauterize them as it is said in the chapter on cautery, then treat them with other treatments until they are healed;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the fundament cannot expel, then give the patient a harsh and astringent enema to wash what is in the fundament so that it may be expelled easily;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	when the patient is purged, and if the threads are strong in the fundament, then the treatment is mild;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and it is that you take them with your nail or with tweezers, and cut them, then clean them as we have said, until they are healed, and fear the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	and you must treat the stitch according to this method:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	take the twisted thread, and put it in a needle, then draw the thread above and pierce the needle from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and thus make it wide;
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and pull the thread tightly, then tie a knot in the thread, remove the needle, and do this for all the others, leaving one to allow the excess blood to flow out;
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	Then place a moist cloth soaked in rose oil or in ointment on the fundament, and place it on the fundament, and instruct the patient to rest;
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then leave it until they defecate, and when they have done so, clean them with ointment and other treatments, until they are healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	from the dryness of the fibers in the wound
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often it happens that there is dryness of phlegm in the intestines, and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	Then you must scrape at the surface with the tip of a spatula or your nail, which should not be allowed to become moist.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	then clean it until it is properly cooked as it should be;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot heal, then restart the shaving more forcefully than before, until it heals well and is peeled;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat until it is healed.
dou fremit	of the trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A wart is a small, rough appearance around the body, and it goes very much to perfection;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and sometimes cold causes it, and it is felt like dead flesh, and it affects the whole body, and more so in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is that you take a quill from a goose feather, or a strong vulture feather, and place that quill on the wart until the circle completely surrounds the wart;
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand around the quill until you cut completely around the wart, and it is brought to perfection, and remove the wart from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you wish, do this with a needle of brass or iron according to this form, and let it be sharp below and broad above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	not to perceive, to hold the thumb still, and to press the thumb.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you wish, cauterize the tremor, as it is described in the chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the clyster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	Sometimes a clyster of silver or arkhot, or melted tin or lead is made;
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	and sometimes these substances are made small and large, according to those to whom they are administered.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those who are treated in the care of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the small and large catheter is wide at the top, or where the belly is tied according to this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	and there should be a separation where the belly is tied, as you see, and the inside of the cheeks be pierced;
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	and there should be two holes on one side, and one hole on the other;
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and let the belly where one places the medicines be of a beast’s bladder or of parchment, and let it be pierced all around with small holes, and have between each hole 1 inch of space, then put into these holes 1 strong thread of raw flax wound in X or hook around, and gather the belly as if it were a goat;
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	and when the medicine is inside, tie the instrument tightly with a strong thread, then use an enema;
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and this is the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	and let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the enema with oil or egg white, or a similar thing, then insert it gently;
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	then the minister heats it with his two hands together until it is all warm, then extract theclyster, and lift the patient's legs to the wall, and if the medicine wants to come out, hold it as much as possible;
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if he sleeps all night, it is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you clysterize in a disease of flux from the stomach, and the medicine hastens to come out, renew it until it is absorbed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	and if the hemorrhoids are in the anus, or an abscess, then theclyster should be as mild as for a child;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the form of the mildclyster with which the skin should be drawn tight:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have already said in the division about the treatment of wounds;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	or we shall tell you of the cures of hands and of medicine, according to the fulfillment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made by, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are by the throwing of stones, and the cutting of sword and knife, or spear or staff or arrow, or similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or they are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the chest, or the belly, or the liver, and similar members;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for the remedy will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, then take care if it is from the throwing of stones or similar things, and the skin is entirely ruptured and the wound is large, and you fear the rising of a hot abscess:
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	so that he may bleed from the cephalic vein especially if little blood comes from the wound, and let the bleeding be opposite to the injured part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and prevent the patient from excess of wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	And if he does not wish to bleed, then his food should be reduced, and he should drink no wine, nor eat any meat;
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and apply to the wound, if hot abscesses come, cotton moistened in rose oil only, or in astringent wine;
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no hot abscess, then put on the fresh wound, which has all its blood and is not exposed to the air, powder, which I will mention a little later;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the burn has moved, then apply some ointments until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like that of a sword cut and similar ones, and the edges cannot be brought together by bandages, then bring them together by stitching, just as I will say about abdominal wounds, of the stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	if the wound is exposed to the bone, and can, and holds only to a bit, then cut it;
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	then treat the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat hearty foods, such as heads and cooked wheat, as well as beans, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	and if you find rotten flesh on the skin, and it is not near the bone, then cut all the rot out and discard it, then treat the wound;
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if there is an artery or vein in the wound that cannot be stopped by medicine, then seek the artery, and if you find it separated, tie it with a thread;
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if this does not help at all, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	and it is that you put this powder which soothes as soon as the fire has moved it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the method of the powder is as follows:
pren encens une partie;	take frankincense one part;
sanc de dragon II parties;	dragon's blood two parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	live charcoal three parts, and powder it finely, and apply to the wound, and press it firmly until it dries well and adheres to all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	and then strain it well, and leave it unloosened if it does not swell;
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes this is done with coals alone, when one does not have the incense or the dragon's blood, but the fire has not moved the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the burn has moistened the wound, especially in this state, one does not apply this powder;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but apply some digestion ointments, or powder of barley flour made with water and honey, until it gives off pus;
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract it with fine forceps;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you hereafter the fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, then there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	if it is the nerve, there is no other method but to leave the treatment alone, and not apply anything constricting, for it harms the nerves and makes them retract;
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their connection to it is with the brain, which is the highest member;
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	but let the medicine be warm, such as hot water mixed with sweet water, and blended with rose oil, and cucumber also washed in sweet water, and other minerals according to this method, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, sew it up and bind it with bandages, then treat it until it is healed.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and it is covered and full of pus, pierce it at the lowest point;
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	and if the artery is cut and bleeding comes out, then open it, tie it up, and cauterize it if necessary;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	and if the spine of the throat is cut, or the windpipe, and the conduit is preserved so that the flesh can pass, then sew the windpipe to the neck bone, and do not touch the throat but reset it according to its natural form;
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then bind it appropriately, and leave it for some days, then treat it with drying ointments until it is healed;
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then remove it;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and if there are bone fragments, then pull out all that you can, and for those you cannot remove, leave them until the wound becomes rotten, and is separated and the discharge is lightened;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, then powder on the powder that I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, then treat it as I have said in his chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a lance or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is a stab from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, then check if wind comes out of the wound when the patient breathes:
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	then you know that the wound is mortal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, then do not put the powder at the first hour, nor bind it because the blood does not clot perfectly, and returns to the heart, and kills the patient;
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	but apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	and if you do not have an ointment, then put old cotton in the wound to draw out the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	then there will not come spasm, nor trembling from the heart, nor strangeness of alien influence;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see the good signs, then know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat it with bandages and other treatments until it is healed;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	and if it cannot heal and continues to discharge, then know that there is a fistula;
si la cure si com on doit.	treat it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	and if the wound is from the incision of a sword or knife, and it is simple, whether on the buttocks or the back, treat the part that is in front;
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	if it is large, by suturing;
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	and if it is small, by powder; and if it is compressed in the bone, and has been chopped into pieces, gather the wound, and pull out the fragments if they are separated;
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not removed, let the wound fester, it will lighten the extraction;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds on other limbs, the judgment is the same as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	Of the rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The rupture of the belly is great and moderate and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	from the large wound sometimes the intestines or the nerves of the intestines come out, causing intrusion of other substances;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	and the suturing is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one, because one delays in putting the intestines back in place, if they are not put back continuously;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	For the reason that the intestines swell immediately when they feel the cold, they retract more deeply, and for this the middle wound is beneficial, for it allows the intestines to be moved back into place more than the other two.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And know that the rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	the two common sutures happen in the belly suture, and the suture of other body wounds and the two other specific sutures are common to other wounds;
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and nevertheless they are more specific with the belly suture, and I will say one by one and explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, and some part of the intestine comes out, and it is difficult to put back, this is by one of the two manners:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	For the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen from the cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is crushed, warm it in such a manner:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	soak a sponge or a piece of cloth in warm water only, or you boil in water squill and cinnamon and spike, and moisten the intestines until the swelling is removed;
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and sometimes this is done with wines that constrict, and it is better to use only one for reducing swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the swelling begin to subside, moisten the intestines with water in which nettles and mallows have been boiled, for by this the entrance is made easier for small things;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, then cut slightly into the wound with the instrument used to cut hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	and the first treatment is to reduce the swelling, which none should cut unless there is great necessity;
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and this is the instrument for making the incision:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	then cut inside the curvature and not further, and see here the form:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines jump out, put them back in place according to their natural form in their proper place, if you can, for this is worth doing.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is wide, and it is in the part below the belly, then you must make the patient lie on his back, and raise his legs higher than his head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	and if it is in the part below the belly, then raise the head and chest higher than the parts below, and likewise if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, then place your attention so that the wounded part is higher than the other;
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus one must administer what I say in large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	In small wounds apply what is prepared for you, then have between your hands the pitious minister who thoroughly closes all the rupture with his hand, and brings together the lips;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	and this is the common method of sutures, which is that you take one needle or more, according to the width of the wound, then leave at the head of the wound some space, and insert a needle with strong thread;
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	and pierce the two sides of the skin with the two sides of the sinew, which is beneath the skin inside, until you pierce that part, and bring together the two ends of the sinew all four together;
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	then strain a double thread around the needle in two parts, then bring together the two edges of the wound properly, and then leave one finger's width, and insert another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	then twist the thread like you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing this according to how many needles you need, until the entire wound is restrained;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	and let the needles be of medium size, between fine and thick, for the fine needles cut all the flesh, and those too thick cannot enter well:
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	for that reason, they should be of medium size;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and it is not right to push the needles too deep into the flesh and skin, so that they do not cut and work the wound before the suturing;
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and then cut the heads of the needles so they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and put cloths or towels on the heads of the needles to keep them still, and leave them until the wound is healed;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	and this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, for it requires one or two needles.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second stitching is common, and it is when you bring together the two sides of the skin and the two sides of the flesh together with one needle using one strong medium thread;
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	and when you have pierced these four sides together, then return the needle to the part where you began, in the manner one sews clothes;
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and place between each stitch the thickness of a small finger;
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	this stitch served the man, and I sewed a wound that a man had in his belly, which was cut by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm wide, and the intestines came out about two palms wide, and the wound was in the middle of the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine after it had been outside for 24 hours, and the wound was sutured until 15 days, and I treated it, and he recovered.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the physicians had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not treat it with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicines;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and I placed old cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	Now I will tell you the two proper methods of stitching:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	Take the needle, and push it from the outer part to the inner part;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	when it has pierced the center straight through, then place the head of the thread where you have pushed the needle, and make it pierce from the inner part to the outer part;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and the meaning of this stitch is that you sew as skinners do with skins, and that you leave one side once, and take it from the other side, until the stitches are completely finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second method of stitching, which Galien properly described, is such that some use to join the two parts naturally together, and bring one end of the thread to the other end in such a manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	stick a needle at the head of the mirach that is close, and make pierce that place only, and leave the two cheeks of the syfac;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	then turn the needle, and make it pierce from the outer part to the inner part, at the two cheeks of the syfac;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then make pierce one and the other from the outer part to the inner part, at two other cheeks of the mirach that are on the other side;
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the most difficult manner of stitching and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Galien said this word, and some testify that one should sew the belly with two needles, each having thread;
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one must push one needle from one side, and another from the other, in the manner of those who sew leather;
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	and know that when the rupture is in the middle of the belly, the stitching is more severe than in other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, although the iron has moved it, you must reset the intestine, and the stitch;
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	then put the healing powder on it, and if the iron has moved it, then put some ointment that is available on it, until the wound draws;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and they cut the threads, and the scissors are soldered, and the mirrors;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound like the others until it is healed;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and if you do not have medicines, then put on it, as soon as it starts to expel pus, old cotton, and change it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you do not need other medicines in many cases when the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and if you fear that the wound may spread to the principal limbs, then you should moisten light wool in tempered oil heated or in rose oil, and place it around the joints, and under the armpits;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	and if he feels pain or putrefaction in the bowels, and it often happens, then cleanse them with warm black wine, and especially if the putrefaction extends to the intestines;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and pierce it from the inside, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small intestine.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestines which are called "jeun" cannot heal when they are wounded, and this is due to the abundance of veins that are there, and because of the delicacy of the entire body, and its closeness in nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	and if the bladder jumps out of the wound, then put it back as you would with an intestine, while it is fresh;
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	and if it is old and has turned green or black, then you must tie the place that is black so no bleeding occurs, for there are veins and arteries;
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	then cut what is between the ligament, and let the two shoulders hang from the part below the wound up to above to lighten the extraction when the arrow falls, and the wound draws.
de la routure dou boueil	Of the rupture of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestine is round, and the wound is small, it can be restored in some people, for I have seen that one man was wounded in the belly by a lance;
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and the wound was to the right of the stomach, and it became stitched and turned into a fistula, and through it came out excretions and wind;
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I applied treatment according to what I could, and did not cease to care for it until he was healed, and the wound was closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw it sutured, I feared that the patient might have harm in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there was no harm, but he remained in better conditions, eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and some experimenter said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in such manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	take fronds with large heads, then bring together the edges of the wound, and when the frond has opened its mouth, place it on the two edges so that it presses its mouth upon them;
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	and then cut off the head, and it will stay so that it cannot untie, then place another frond after in the same manner as before, until the wound is entirely covered;
et cout la plaie.	and cut the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	and the head burns in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient, and one can tie the intestine with a fine thread that is cut from the intestine of an animal, in such a manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	take the head of this intestinal thread that is very lean, and then tie to the head of this thread a fine linen thread tightly, then put the thread in the needle, and sew the intestine, and reset it in the rupture;
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this manner of stitching of wounds is not far from according to the way of faith and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the great intestines, then there is no skill or health without subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	about the fistula wherever it may be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it awakens, is generally called a "fistula," and especially when it is hairy and discharges pus.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And a fistula is according to the truth a false knot hard and white, where one does not feel pain, and it is also hairy like the feather of a bird;
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes clear spittle, and other times thick;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	sometimes little, and other times enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	and I have spoken of this in the section on wounds, that any wound which is not healed and has no flesh, it cannot be except by one of the nine causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	that is to say, by the insufficiency of blood or body;
ou por sa malice;	or by its maliciousness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	For there is hard flesh inside, and on the lips, where no new flesh grows;
ou il i a trop de bowe;	where there is too much bile;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	where the pus is thin, and the matter is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	where the medicine is not good in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	where the corruption is of a pestilent nature;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	where due to the property of the region, digestion is slow, and health is delayed, and swelling occurs naturally;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	where there are veins or bones;
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the medical treatments in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now I must make you know the treatment of fistula which is done by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	for there are fistulas that occur in the large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or on the skin, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in some of the ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and there is one that comes to the principal part of the member and similar areas.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are of this kind are difficult to heal, and there is only labor and ignorance;
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if there is any fistula that does not reach the place I have mentioned, and you are confident in the treatment, and you want to understand it, take a probe of bronze or iron, if the fistula is straight, then use it;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	and if the fistula is curved, then search it with a flexible probe of lead, for lead can bend around the curvature;
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	and if the fistula has multiple openings and you cannot search it well with probes, then irrigate it through one of the openings, for the moisture will flow from one opening to another, and cleanse it;
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	then carefully probe it as much as you can, so that you may know if there is bone or nerve, and this is done properly, and ask the patient about the pain they feel when pressed by your hand, and the place where they feel it;
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then cut according to what I have told you, and remove the foulness and the corrupted matter that are inside;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	and then treat it until it is healed, and if the fistula is deep in a straight place, then you must cut deeply as much as you can, then put moistened tents with medicinal herbs inside, and push them to the top of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom;
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then apply healing ointments to grow healthy flesh until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the fistula, then cut it off.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If vein or sinew does not bother the principal limbs, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackening, then scrape it until all the corruption is removed, then treat it with things that heal flesh until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	and if it is not healed, and pus returns as before, know that you have not gone to the root of the problem:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	so expose and scrape until you reach the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the area;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if he is thus healed, it is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	if not, know that the corruption is too advanced, that you cannot come near;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	there is no other method than to leave it to nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there is a small corrupted bone and you can extract it with tongs, then pull it out with the appropriate instrument for that, and if there are many bones, pull them all out, do not leave even one;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	and if the moisture hinders you, and there is no mistake nor fear, then cut away both the moisture and the flesh, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot remove them in an hour, then place on the wound something encouraging putrefaction, and leave until the flesh is rotten around the bones, and then the bones will come out more easily;
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	and if it is a large bone, such as from the leg or thigh, then raise the putrefaction only until all the blackness is removed, then heal the wound;
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	and if there is a large part of the corrupted area, it will reach the marrow of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	one must scrape and cut all the way to the putrefaction, and then treat it until it is healed;
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	and I will tell you of an ulcer that happened to a man in his leg, so that you may take example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	The young man was about thirty years old, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came within the body, so that the matter came to the leg, and it swelled with a large abscess, and he had no reason to defer opening;
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	but the physicians by their folly worked so much on it that the abscess opened, and they let out a great deal of matter, and it became a fistula, and there came many openings that all discharged pus and moisture from the body;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and many physicians applied treatments for about two years, and there was no wise person in the art of hands until I was called, and I saw his leg and the medications with which he was being treated, and what discharged through the openings had a strong odor;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and the body of the young man would become red, and had a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I put up a tent in one of these perforations, and then searched all the perforations, and found that one came opposite the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I hurried then, and cut into one of the openings until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and perforated, and the corruption reached to the inner bone;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I scraped what appeared to be the corrupted bone, and thought there was no other corruption except that which I removed;
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and began to treat the wound with poultices for a long time, and it could not heal;
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and then I began again, and uncovered the bone as before, and found the corruption continued in the bone, and scraped it, and then removed it, and attempted to heal the area;
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	but I could not cut around more than a palm's width of the bone, and I pulled it out with all its flesh, then I restored it with medicines;
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and he was healed and stitched quickly, and there was no need to begin the work again except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and for the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the evacuation he often bled, but was entirely healed, and in place of the bone a hard flesh grew, and it was well positioned and had no harmful or adverse effect whatsoever, neither going nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	and if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it must be treated in this manner:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	take the linen, and stretch it at the head of the exposed bone, and instruct someone to stretch it upwards;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and take another linen string thicker than the first one, and tie it on the flesh that is over the bone, and stretch the top end so that you pull the corrupted flesh underneath, and expose the flesh where you wish to sew, so that the suture does not bruise the flesh;
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and put the ember on a board under the bone to cut away the corrupted flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and one must scrape as much as can be seen and felt of the corruption, and scrape again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part, then uncover all the flesh;
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	then put the ember underneath, and then scrape from one part to another the corruption, and let the scraper follow the length of the corruption closely, as we have said;
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, then cut away the corrupted joint, and scrape the bone where it contains from the other side;
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is in the continuity of the two joints, there is no other remedy but to cut;
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	and if the corruption is in the wrist of the hand or the ankle of the foot, it is a very serious matter, but nevertheless you must inquire about that corruption, how it appears to you;
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and cleanse it in every way that you can, but do not let the vein or the nerve oppose you;
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and know that the incisors and the saws for cutting these bones are various, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and their fineness, and their size and their smallness, and their hardness;
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for this reason, it is necessary to prepare his instrument for each kind of work;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the methods of diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	so consider the instrument you need according to what is necessary.
dou feu	from the fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The joints become diseased either due to internal causes or due to external causes;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	and when you have treated that corruption with the care of medicines and they do not help, it is necessary to amputate that limb up to the place where the corruption comes from, so that the patient escapes death by this means or by the evil, which is greater, of the loss of the limb;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	and the sign is that the limb becomes black, so that it seems to be burned by fire, and after the blackness could come the corrosion member by member, and takes over the whole body;
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	and if you hurry to cut, and if it is due to the sting of venomous beasts, such as sea scorpion and basilisk and the like, if the corrosion is at the head of the toe, then cut it off, and do not give space for it to reach the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	and if it reaches the hand, cut it off at the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach the arm;
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	and if it comes to the arm, then cut it off at the elbow;
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and if it passes the knife, it is death, and there is no remedy other than the quantity of its virtue;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	and do the same when the corrosion comes to the stone:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	if it comes to the first joint, then cut after the other joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes to the stone, then cut away the entire stone;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it rises up the leg, then cut at the knee joint;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy but to let the patient die;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and the method of cutting or sawing the limb is that you tie above and below, and stretch one minister at one end down, and another minister the other end up, and you separate the flesh which is between the two ties to a span wide, until the bone is uncovered;
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	then you cut or saw, and place on each side a cloth of linen, so that the saw does not touch the healthy area, and does not cause another injury and heated abscess to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	and if bleeding occurs when you operate, then quickly cauterize the area, or apply some binding powders;
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then return to your treatment until it is completed, then bind the wounded limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it heals;
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened to the man in such need:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	a darkness befell him that seemed like the burning of fire, and that corruption came first to his toe of the foot, until it would spread over the entire foot;
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the man saw the corruption, he hurried to cut off the foot, and was healed;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and a long time after, the corruption returned to his toe of the hand, and he came to me, and I applied repellent things after cleansing the body, but the corruptions could not be stopped;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he wanted me to cut off his hand, and I did not want to, as I had hope of repelling the matter;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	and I also doubted that if I cut his hand, he would die, for the strength of the man was weak;
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he completely despaired, and returned to his land, and hurried to cut his hand, and was healed;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have not found content elsewhere except for what is done differently when it is necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Sometimes an abscess comes in the cartilage, and remains for so long that it forms a large collection of pus;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then it rots and bursts, and the pus comes out, and the hole remains there for a long time, like a vessel;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and the skin that is above is as delicate as fine draperies, and does not extend down to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a disease is called "healthy," and is not called "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so extended that it reaches the bone entirely, it is called "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the skin is such that you cut that skin all around, especially when it is delicate, just like fine draperies;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and it does not matter because of its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you fear that the skin will burn, and the corruption is not complete, and the skin is thick with flesh, then treat it with aclyster thus:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	Look if the breast is large, and the milk that comes out has a foul smell, then cleanse it with Egyptian medicine which is made thus:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	take arsenic, and oil, and white lead, equally, and put to cook in a vessel over fire, until the medicine turns red, and becomes as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and then take of this according to your need, and mix it with water and honey, and cleanse the breast with it, and bind the wound;
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and leave the medicine on for two hours, then remove it by squeezing;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this many times until the breast is cleansed and the stench is removed;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	and sometimes it isclysterized with ash water, when this medicine is not present, and it is that you take ashes of vine wood, and throw water over, then strain it, and use it as a clister until you know that the intestines are well cleansed;
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	and if the patient cannot tolerate it, nor the Egyptian medicine nor the ash water, thenclysterize him with water and honey in which there is a bit of ground litharge;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	or you clysterize it with honey and mixed wine, for the honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and the wine causes the body to heat;
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and when you have done this, and you are confident that the intestines are well cleansed, then clysterize him with what causes flesh to grow in them, and it is that you take a diaphoretic plaster, and make it with rose oil and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	where you cleanse with some medicines and ointments, of which I have described the properties in the treatment of ointments;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	and if the opening of the breast is small, and the nozzle of theclyster cannot enter, then widen it with an iron a bit, and put in a tent of Egyptian ointment, or basilicon ointment, until it is widened;
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the wound is too wide, sew it up leaving only enough space for theclyster to enter, and if the opening that expels pus is at the top, cut it lower where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	For when the pus is perfect, do not let any foreign matter enter;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	and if you cannot cut the breast below as you wish, then arrange in such a way that the bow goes to the lowest place there is, for when the bow is fully formed, it does not allow any flesh to enter and if you cannot cut the breast below as you wish, then prepare in such a manner:
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	that the bow moves lightly downward, and leaves nothing of the bow;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	and take consolidative medicines to put on the wound, and stretch over the linen cloth that covers the entire wound;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	then cut at the strong place the opening of the breast a bit wider than the first, then spread an ointment over another cloth according to the size of the opening, and put it on the wound's opening to alleviate the bow, and do not remove the large cloth except once after many days;
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and the one who is on the nipple of the breast, often removes it to remove the pus, and you know what comes from the pus, whether it is venom or blood or enough, or digestible, or indigestible;
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	and take notice if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in such a manner and you see that nature rises up on the nipple of the sore, then know that the breast is already curing, and health approaches;
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	and then untie it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you untie the wound, change the other bandage, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast expels undigested phlegm after many days, know that the breast will not heal.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle pus forms after a long time, do not despair of the health, for recovery approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are people who take too long to remove the flesh from their wounds, and of those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if undigested milk spits from the breast after many days, know that the breast does not heal;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	and if the breast is slow to heal and is swollen, apply drying but moist in substance and dry in virtue medicines, such as diaphoretic ointment, for it has a large part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine;
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take diaphoretic ointment, and make it with rose oil, and sprinkle it with old wine equal in substance;
puis le confit et en use;	then cook it and use it;
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	and this same is best when the diaphoretic ointment is not available, or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder it over the honey when it is on the fire;
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and then in glue the cloth, and stretch it over the breast, and sometimes one administers aristologe longe, and roots of celestial lily, which is also like flour of veal and centaure.
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	and use simples or compounds:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	grind them, and make powder, and put on the honey that I have said, and use it;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	and if the cure is prolonged, and is not cured by this treatment, then know that the corruption is perfected, and makes an impression in the bone, or in the hard members, or in the ligaments;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	treat the fistula as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Panarice is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the little finger of the hand, or of the foot, or perhaps arises in other fingers;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and when it grows old, and no attention is given to it, then comes the hot abscess, and it runs and throws pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and perhaps it corrodes it entirely;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and the corrosion reaches the bone, causing a foul-smelling pain, and the joint of the finger becomes swollen, and its color turns purple.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, then you must cut off with an iron all the excess that remains of the nail, then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cautery is greatly helpful if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and if the nail presses against the flesh inside and begins to pierce it, and injures it, then you should place a thin piece of iron under the nail that pierces the flesh, lift it up, and cut away that flesh subtly and lightly, and apply burning and corrosive medicines on the remaining flesh to remove everything;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat with ointments until he is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corruption is in the bone, cut it away and draw out, for as long as the corrupted bone remains, it cannot heal;
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if you see the toe becoming corrupted, cut it as it is said before, then treat it until it is healed;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is bitten, and swollen, and he feels great pain, then you must cleanse it first;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	then cut the nail of the infected area sharply by cutting across it, and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh underneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain;
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it happens, then put something on that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the swelling of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	The dislocation that occurs in some men's hands is entirely fleshy, and sometimes it has bones, and occasionally there is a nail, and some are born at the root of the joint, or the origin is in some parts of the fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	He who is born with any knot on the toe does not move, and he who is born at the joint of the toe, by chance moves;
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the size of he who is fleshy is light, in such a manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	He who is born in the root of the joint is difficult to treat:
si te tien dou coper.	be careful with cutting.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In him who is born with an anus or should have it at the back, you must first cut the flesh roundly to the bone, then cut the bone to a suitable seam for this, then clean it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The web that comes on the fingers together comes by birth, or by wound healing, or by fire burn, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	you must cut that suture so that the toes return to their natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then place between two tents or cloths moistened with rose oil so they do not stick;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you place between two pieces of thin linen until the wound is sealed, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If webbing comes on any of his fingers with the palm, then cut that webbing as appropriate.
des vils	of the villages
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	Veins are large and wrapped full of melancholic superfluities, which come to many parts of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and it happens more in the legs of those who walk on foot and work and carry loads than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	It is then necessary that you administer to him a purgation of bile, and then heal him with basilicum.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The iron cure is according to two methods:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	one is that they are cut, and the black blood is drawn out;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other method is that you lift the vein, and draw it entirely out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The castration is according to this method:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	first raise the leg with very hot water until the thick part is made subtle, then remove the leg of the patient from above the thigh down to the part below the knee;
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	then cut the vein in one place, or in two or three, with a wide incision, then lift and draw out the black blood forcefully from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the strength of the patient can endure;
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then tie it off, and instruct them to cleanse themselves with black bile-inducing foods;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and repeat the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, and it is harmful to the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The elevations of it are according to this manner:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	shave the patient's leg if it has a lot of hair, then put it in the bath, and wash the leg with warm water until it becomes red, and the veins swell;
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you do not have a bath, then heat it with fire, and then cut directly from the vein at the knee to the area below near the ankle;
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then work the skin with the lancet, and strip the vein on both sides until it appears when you feel it;
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and when it is seen red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems like a white thread;
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	then push the root underneath, until it is lifted from the skin, and then pierce it lightly with a lancet, then cut it in another place three times;
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it with a thread, as you have done, and pierce it with another lancet, as you did first;
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	then cut another section, or several if you need them, then lift it, and cut at the tip with your thumb, then pull and lift until the second section;
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then extract it piece by piece until all of it comes out, then cut it;
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and if you cannot pull it out, then put a needle with the thread doubly strong, and tie it and pull it, and insert it under the skin, and turn your hand from one side to the other until it comes out;
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and be careful that it does not break, for if it breaks, one cannot pull it out or lift it, and harm comes to the patient;
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	and when you have pulled it all out, then put wool soaked in wine and rose oil on the site of the wound;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the skin is tight and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight, as we have said, then you must split it crookedly, but do not cut it off;
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	and treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The shape of the iron with which one cuts the skin is curved, and it does not cut deeply, so that it does not cut the vein;
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and it is of thick curvature, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and here is the shape:
de la voinne civile	of the civil war
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is located in the legs, in warm areas where no herbs or trees grow, and in soil that has no moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	and by chance it arises in another place than the legs, and this happens due to the putrefaction that comes under the skin, just as serpents and worms come within the body between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that a great inflammation comes to the leg, then the color changes, and the vein begins to come out forcefully, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the wound is open, you must wrap around a piece of linen from one and a half fingers up to two fingers wide, and tie it, and leave the linen hanging on the leg, and every time some comes off due to decay, wrap it around the linen again, and tie it.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, wrap the remainder, and do not cut it at its root until it is entirely out;
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	for if you cut it, it will re-enter the flesh and cause an abscess and putrefaction in that place, leading to a bad illness;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	For this reason, it is necessary that it be treated little by little until the end, and nothing remains in the body;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	and sometimes this vein is treated when it is five palms long, or ten, and a man came to me once, whose was ten palms long, and when you cut it, you put one reed into the hole, and pierce until the bottom, so that everything comes out;
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	and the material inside should be emptied out, and apply to the area medicines that prevent putrefaction for some days, then treat it like an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And sometimes this vein has fewer reeds, especially when it opens at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and many holes come from it, and from which few reeds sprout;
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Then cure it as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This disease is called in our land "cattle sickness," for it often occurs in cattle, and it is a small worm that lives between the skin and flesh, and moves all over the body up and down, and one can feel it well as it travels from member to member, until it bursts the skin where it goes, and becomes fierce;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and it is caused by putrefaction of certain humors, such as worms and snakes and earthworms and ascarids in the belly;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	and there is fear of its maliciousness, for when it moves through the body and ascends to the head, and comes to the eye, by chance it may enter and destroy the eye;
et ceu avient maintes fois.	and this happens often.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you want to treat and care for it, one cannot do so except when it comes.
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	then you must bind the area above and below with a strong tight bandage, then cut above and draw it out forcefully, and if the pus is embedded in the flesh and you do not find it, then cauterize with fire above until it burns;
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm that it does is to corrupt the eye, as we have said;
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming near the eye on the head, then press below it firmly on the eyebrow, then cut above and draw it out forcefully;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and it is necessary to treat the patient with body cleansing of soluble medicines for the corrupt bad humors, and they should be fed nutritious foods to prevent corruption.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from flatulence
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes to some limbs, and then moves from limb to limb;
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and I have seen what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and she bared her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	and it then rose up as quickly as a worm to the shoulder, faster than anything, just like quicksilver when it moves from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	the pain departs from that place, and fixes in the shoulder, and then a bit after runs throughout the body, until it comes to the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then she told me that it turned around the body, as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly amazed at how it moved from limb to limb, for I had never seen this disease in such a manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	Nevertheless, I had wanted to believe that it was good to move the pain from one place to another, but I had not wanted it, as I saw in the woman;
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and the veins exposed, and because of this the constrained wind appeared;
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and it does not appear according to this reason in those who are plethoric, and who have moist bodies and veins hidden.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you wish to treat this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have said, then scrape above and below quickly, and then cut so that that wind constrained in place comes out;
et cauterize le leu;	and cauterize the place;
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	and if you do not see it with your eyes, then treat it with those that expel the winds, such as foul pills, and pills of serpent, and similar others.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their forms and according to the places of the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity among them is that there are those which have large points, and small ones, and branched ones, and soldered ones;
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and those which have two angles, and those which have tongues, and those which have pieces;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	and she who falls on any limb falls according to two manners:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	or in principal members it affects, such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When she falls then in any part of these members, and the sign of death, which I will tell you later, appears to you:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	then you must beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death follows in many cases;
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not embedded deeply, then extract it, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the sign of the brain when an arrow strikes and pierces the bone, and the suture which is on top of the brain jumps, is when there is scotoma and bleeding and inversion and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of tongue, and spasms and confusion of mind, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	and perchance it comes out without force from the nostrils, or from the ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and by chance loses the speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and from the wound jumps white moisture resembling pus, and it also jumps like broth of flesh;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if this sign appears to you, then be cautious with the treatment, and remove the arrow if it is not embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The signs of pleurisy when it falls upon the heart are that it is near the left breast, and it feels as if it were fixed in something hard, not empty;
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and sometimes the pleurisy beats like the pulse, and it causes black blood to come out, and coldness and cold sweat occur, and syncope:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	then you can be sure that death is imminent.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that remains in the body is that without pause foam jumps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs loudly and seeks the cold.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrow falls on the covering of the lung, it is near the lower ribs;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and it causes great anguish and great pain and sighing;
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and it moves all the limbs from the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow falls into the stomach, perchance some undigested flesh may jump from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow falls into the belly, and if any dung comes out through the intestines, there is no hope in the treatment, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the arrowhead falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps out and comes to flow, and the patient feels great pain:
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	Know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the arm and the spine and the wrist and the thigh and the legs, and similar members, are safe according to many dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a man that an arrow struck him in the armpit at the root of the neck:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I probed it, and pulled it out from the other side beneath the ear fat, and he was healed without harm.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And in one attempt, I pulled out an arrow that had struck him in the eye fat beneath the eyelid, and the arrow was embedded, and I could not reach beyond the tip towards the shaft, and the arrow was as large as a Turkish bow's iron part, almost light without feathers;
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	The eye was healed, and no adverse incidents occurred to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And he drew an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I shaved the beard, and worked carefully until I drew it out, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And I drew an arrow from the man, which had lodged in his abdomen, and I thought he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and after he had passed thirty days, his condition did not change;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I cut into the arrow, dislodged it, drew it out forcefully, and he had no adverse effects.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you see a man to whom an arrow has fallen into the back, and the wound was sealed over;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and the arrow remains inside him, and does not change its natural disposition, nor finds harm in any of its natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And you see another man to whom an arrow fell into his face, and the wound was sealed;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and remained thus without suffering great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	and many other similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And extract an arrow from the man of the king's court, into whose nose the arrow had fallen, and it was slightly leaning to the right side;
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and the arrow was completely embedded.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called to treat her after she had been fallen for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	And I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I wanted to examine her in a completely private tent, and did not feel any;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt a prick and pain under his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I placed on the area a plaster that is attractive and digestive, so that the area would not swell;
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and the head of the arrow appeared.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I applied the plaster for several days, and reopened the wound again, and the patient remained this way for a long time, until he felt the arrow one day inside his chest;
et il le me dist.	and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I put corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it opened, and I probed it, and felt the head of the arrow that was embedded in the place;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I applied that corrosive medicine to the opening of the wound until the head of the arrow appeared visibly;
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and it took about four months to complete the process around the wound, and then I widened the wound so that I could insert the forceps, and I moved it from one side to the other, but it could not come out;
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	then I did not stop refining and devising methods of instruments until one day I grasped it with well-made forceps, according to what its form will come at the end of this chapter, until I pulled it out and closed the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the physician judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	Then I restored it, and the wound was sutured, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	Now I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you apply your care to what I do not mention, for the books cannot take everything into account;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	but the wise masters compare very little, and upon what is present and lacking, find new work and new instruments, through the understanding of foreign things that occur in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that arrows do not remain in the members where they are embedded without two manners:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or through the place where they enter, or through another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and the one that jumps out where it enters is an arrow entering its flesh, and sometimes it jumps out now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not jump out now, leave it until the flesh around is rotten, and the discharge is diluted;
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and also if it is embedded in the bone and cannot come out, leave it that way for some days and move it each day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it jumps out, and if it does not jump out, pierce around the entire shaft finely until the surrounding area is widened, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrow is fixed in the bone of the head, and goes as far as one of the brain's chambers, and some of the accidents that I have mentioned become apparent to the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	do not remove it, but leave it until it is equal after some days, for if the arrow comes up to the surface, it is deadly.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not fixed solely in the bone and does not reach to the surface, and the patient remains for some days without ill effect, then the instrument should be used to extract it.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is deeply embedded and cannot come out easily, then apply tar around it, as I have told you;
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	then clean the area until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is embedded in a part of the body where it cannot be seen, seek it throughout the entire area;
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, then pull it with a suitable instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, then cut it so that the wound is large;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and pull the arrow if you can, and if it has ears by which it is held, then remove the flesh that is embedded from two parts as much as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow so that you can pull it out;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and be careful that you do not break the arrow, so that you can pull it out more easily.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, then leave it until the area around is swollen, then pull it out, for the extraction will be eased.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the flow of blood is contrary to you, then administer what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	and beware of the incision of the nerve and the vein, and devise how you can draw out the arrow without danger, quickly or slowly, firmly or gently;
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	and place the patient according to the position they were in when the arrow struck them, for this is the greatest help there can be, and if you cannot, then place them according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another direction, or where some part of it is visible, or the skin is swollen in such a way that it can be seen or felt clearly:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	Cut then up, until the forceps can grasp, and then extract:
si saut fuer maintenant.	if it is now possible.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, then rotate your hand roundly, until it enters into the bone, and widen the bone, then extract it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, then leave it again, and then restart the extraction until it comes out;
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if the shaft of the arrow is there, push it with the entire shaft;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if the shaft breaks off and you wish to administer further, then use the instrument with hair, so that the tip of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument;
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and then push out; and if the arrow is barbed, use the pointed instrument to enter it, to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is poisoned, then you must cut away all the flesh around where the venom is, if you can, then clean the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow falls on the hip or in the abdomen or at the bladder or at the side, and it is close, and you can cut over it;
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and beware of cutting the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew the wound if necessary;
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and treat it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the pincers used to pull out arrows is similar to the beak of a bird, and you see here the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And there are many methods:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The form of the hair tip is also like the feather of a bird, to place at the tip of the arrow, as shown here the shape:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of the tongs for piercing and pressing is here:
des voinnes dou cors communes	the veins of the body common
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	There are thirty-one veins from which one recovers, of which sixteen are in the head, namely:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	The flaps that are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech";
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and the two arteries that are in the two temples appearing;
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and two veins that are in the two tear ducts of the two eyes, which are called "aspires";
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein that is in the middle of the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is at the top of the nose;
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two glands that are in the neck;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are on the upper lips of the mouth, and these are the veins that are called "augeherich";
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and two veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The veins from which we commonly bleed are 5 in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side, and the common people call it the "vein of the head";
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	and the middle one is called "faste," and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and the common people call it the "vein of the heart";
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and the basilic is on the right side, and the common people call it the "vein of the belly," and it is on the forearm, and it is the one from which we bleed, which appears clearly on the wrist.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the saver vein is the one between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	and in the leg and foot there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	one is below the corbeure of the instep on the left side, and the second is the sophene which is at the ankle on the right side;
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the vein which is called "nesse", which is at the ankle on the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The inflammation of the veins that are behind the ears helps with old catarrhs and migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	and the qualities of the surgeon, as I tell you, and it is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth;
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	then have the patient compress his neck with a twist, until the two veins appear behind the ears in two places dependent on the head:
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	take them then in your hand, and where you feel the pulse beneath your hand, mark it there;
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	then take the lancet, and pierce below the vein until the bone, then lift your hand along the entire vein above, and cut both the skin and the vein well twice across, and let the blood flow out as much as you wish;
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then extract and bind until it is healed;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already said about the incision and the cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The inflammation of the two arteries that are in the two temples is good for old migraines, soreness, and customary ophthalmia, and for watery tears in the eyes;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the qualities of the inflamed are as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patient stretches his neck so that the two veins appear clearly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feel the pulse under your thumb, and then sign from there;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	then lift the vein with your index finger and place the lancet underneath, and lift the vein up, and cut it, just as you have done in two other veins, and let the blood according to your necessity;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then release the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	and then tie it firmly, and leave it until it is healed;
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and we have already spoken of their cutting and extraction at the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The vein of the forehead is as useful as the cephalic vein for old diseases of the face, and for migraines, and for redness;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and the quality is such that the patient strains his neck by twisting until the veins appear;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument which is called "digging tool", of which this is the form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	and place the tip on the vein, and press down with your hand, or with something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish;
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	then loosen the patient's neck, and tie the vein so that it is sealed, and sometimes the work is done with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	However, it is not right that the flames be too sharp;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	and cut sideways, because the bone is near, and by chance the flame might break when it is thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The swelling of the two veins that are in the two temples helps the eyes, and with the sty, and with redness, and with the sore in the eye, and with diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their swelling is that the patient strains his neck by twisting some ligament, as mentioned before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then it swells, and the swelling should be across, a bit long of the flame and a bit wide, for there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the flames are fine, they may break;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	then let blood as much as you need, and then bind on cotton, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The swelling of the vein of the nose is good for water, and for strong decoctions, and for illnesses of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes in the face, especially when it is old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	and the quality of the swelling is that the patient tightens his neck, then pulls his nose with your left hand, and take the fine long flame, and insert it between the two nostrils in the space that is there, for the vein does not open well on its own, and the pus will now begin to flow;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not go too deep, and let blood according to your need, then leave it for a night, for it is restored very quickly;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The salve of two binders helps with the tightness of the collar, and at the beginning of mixing, and with many diseases, and with ringworm, and with corrosives, and with herpes, and warts;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the quality of the salve is that the patient pulls his neck under one and the other, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	and let the master be standing on the head of the patient, and the patient sits on the chair, then apply the salve to the vein widely, then draw blood moderately, as much as is necessary;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	then do the same on the other vein, then loosen the ligature, and moderately constrict the veins so that the patient does not strangle;
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	and leave it until morning, when the wound should be healed.
de la sainie des leivres	of the swelling of the lips
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The swelling of the veins of the upper lips helps with phlegm in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and cracks in the lips, and from the nose and around.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of the bleeding is to sit the patient in front of you, and constrict his neck as I have said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one of which is on the right lip and the other on the left, and they are recognized by their black color, and by the small black veins around them:
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	cut both of them, and if you do not recognize them and are in doubt, then cut the largest one on each side, and do the same for the two veins that are above and below, for it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the swelling under the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The swelling of the veins under the tongue helps after the swelling of the cephalic vein, and this is at the constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and for diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the quality of the swelling is that the patient sits between your hands facing the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks underneath on each side a black vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	swell then one and the other, and do not go too deep, for underneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins of the body that are commonly swollen are treated according to two methods:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	either by pricking with an entire martian flask, or with subtle olive oil like cutting bodies, and it is called "anesil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and they are wide and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The first form of the martian flame is much renowned, and it is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	and it is necessary to open the full and closed veins filled with thick visible blood, which contain thick and murky blood;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and this is the form of the olive oil flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is more finely pointed, and it is for healing the fine veins where there is fine citrine blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the chest, and in the abdomen;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is necessary for the surgeon to bleed wisely and to be careful of the artery that is below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	and if he cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes, then he must stop it, as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and the flames should not be pricking but cutting like a file.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	and if the basilica does not open clearly, you must extract it and change to another one;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	or if you want any vein of it, or you incise in its place the vein along the arm:
elle apert manifestement;	it opens clearly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and the edge of the flame should be file-like, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	and if you wish to know the place of the incision, you must first extract the arm, touch the place until you feel the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the place of the joint, then bind the arm, and cut the vein from the flame inward;
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	and be careful not to hit the artery when you see the place swollen, for it is from the artery:
eschui la donques.	avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it spurt up like the urine of a child, and the blood is red and thin, know that it is the blood of the artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	hurry then, and press your finger on it for a long time, then remove your finger if the bleeding stops, which often happens;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	bind the arm, and leave it thus, and let the patient not move it;
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let it be under fear, and do not move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if the blood flow is not stopped, and it overwhelms you, and the medicine is not present, then cut the artery if it appears, for the head of the retractors;
et estainche li sans.	and stop the blood flow.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	and take a bark of fig, and split it, and take one of the halves and bind it on well until the next day;
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	if the blood is stopped, it is good;
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	if not, then treat it as we have said, with powders that stop blood;
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the bindings are not severe in many positions due to the small space of the wound, and the strength of the arm's joint.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The vein in the middle helps draw blood from the head above and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilic and the cephalic, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and it is necessary for the surgeon to be careful of the nerve that is below, and if he pierces too deeply, and he hits the nerve, it swells and the patient's health becomes severe, and perhaps cannot heal;
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	and this nerve appears often, and if it does not appear in some people due to its subtlety, you must probe for it with the anesil instrument;
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and cleanse the nerve to your ability.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, then cut it lengthwise.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The application of the cephalic helps, drawing blood from the head, and aids the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is necessary to apply it by pricking with olive oil flame or myrtle flame, for it is the safest of all veins, for there is neither nerve nor artery beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	Nevertheless, it is necessary to find the lightest spot, and it does not matter if one misses the first time, and one retries;
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and sometimes the area swells for some people when one misses the first time, but it does not matter.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the sanie is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing you must know about medicine, is that medicine is not practiced merely to maintain health, and to avoid future illnesses;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	and let the bleeding be done in one of the three veins that are in the arm;
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	that is to know, cephalic, saphenous, and basilic;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and one should bleed at the beginning of spring in January, and in autumn and winter after eating, when the sign of repletion appears;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	and one should bleed on the first or third day, after two or three hours of the day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The medicine that is administered to the illnesses has no determined time, but when there is need by day or night, at all hours and in every season;
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and it is not appropriate to bleed children until 14 years, nor a woman carrying a fetus from the fourth month until the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	And one should not treat those who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when someone wishes to be bled, in whatever manner, it is necessary that they purge the intestines with a mild enema if they have much retained feces, so that the veins do not draw from the intestines the harmful superfluities detrimental to the principal members;
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	nor should one bleed those who are overly satiated with food, nor those who are drunk until they recover, nor those who are dropsical;
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and if one suffers from cleansing after colic pain, and vomiting, and diarrhea, and frequent intercourse with a woman, and work, of staying awake and fasting, and that which robs all strength, whether by weapon or body;
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then refine the humors, if the blood is thick, through foods and drinks and medications, if you have the power;
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	then enter the bath, if nothing prevents it, to refine the blood, and let blood from the vein of the arm around the third, as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and guard yourself that day from work, and from piercing, and from lust, and from similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	and be bound and joyful, and let the leeches be higher than those whom one bleeds, and rub the arm two times or three, then bind the bandage above moderately, for when it is too tight or loose, blood cannot flow;
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the area with your hands until the veins swell, and they can be felt;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	then moisten the leeches with a little old oil, then place his finger of the left hand on that vein below the area where he wants to bleed, so the vein does not move when pricked.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that flee like cords from the bleeder, and some are full of windiness, so when one places the flame upon them, they retract from the flame, and one cannot open the vein, and thus one is of those;
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if he works the vein, the wound is too narrow, for this reason the surgeon must be cautious in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the vein is worked the first time, it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	if not, then begin again a little below that place or above quickly, if the area is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the area is swollen and the patient is frightened, leave it for one day or two, and do not loosen the arm:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	perchance hot abscesses may come;
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	do not enter the bath, then restart the surgery if it pleases you;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the opening is small, or the blood comes out subtly and you fear that not enough blood will come out as you wish, then cauterize that opening entirely with the flame directly;
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	and perform it somewhat hastily, so that the area becomes swollen;
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the area swollen, do not begin the bleeding again, and put on a bit of oil residue, for it lightens the body from blood, and in this place, the residue is milder than the oil;
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and thus administer the oil residue in each bleeding that you bleed the veins to stop the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	and this same thing makes a trilication and applies egg white when it is placed upon the site;
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	so refine the sinew and split it when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if there comes a large abscess, which often happens, especially when it is not sufficiently opened at the time when the vein's opening is small, then hurry and place on the site a sponge moistened in warm water and salt for a little while, and bind it for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and it is necessary that you do this after the blood has flowed from the vein, and if there remains any blackness or greenness at the site after some days, it does no harm;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you wish, put on some substance of aloe or of myrrh mixed in juice of calamus, mastic, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And often an abscess and appearance occur in the swelling of the basilic vein:
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	put your hand on it, and if you find the spot soft to the pressure of the hand, then that appearance is malignant.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	Therefore, avoid putting on any of those things we have mentioned, for fear it might cut into the artery;
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	but make for it a dry poultice to harden the spot, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw from each the blood according to the quantity of its virtue, and of the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red;
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	and if you see it thick, let it flow until it is thinned;
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is necessary for those who are full and strong, and need bloodletting, that a larger wound be made, and the flames be wide;
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and for those who are weak, do the opposite, and it is necessary to let blood less and more frequently, and it should be done by cutting across, not by piercing;
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this method of bloodletting is safe from bleeding and nerve damage, and is better than long or wide bloodletting.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	And to those whose body is lacking at the healing, it is necessary to give moist bread in pomegranate juice;
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	If it is heated, then bleed three or four times. And if it is of a cold temperament, then before the healing, eat moist bread in musk syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and strongly scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if he faints from the bleeding, after the discharge of much blood, then it is necessary that he inhales a broth of meat and a subtle aromatic syrup, and uses the other things we have mentioned in the section or chapter on syncope for the evacuation of veins.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to bleed one arm and bleed another time, then it is necessary, when he is weakened by great bleeding, that he bleeds a little at a time, according to the amount of his continuous strength.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wants to bleed one arm after the first bleeding, and he has a strong body, then he bleeds seven hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wants to be bled from the other side, should be bled on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For there is much blood within the body that is already heated, and it causes fever;
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	so it is necessary to bleed a large quantity and widen the opening until it flows into the basin;
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	then you should examine all the signs of healing, and place your hand on their pulse when they heal, so death does not come instead of health, and this happens often, when the healers are negligent;
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it is not appropriate when you want to release the arm and make blood come out a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press strongly on;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	nor if it is swollen, should he extend the arm hastily, for that would be harmful;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	but leave it until it heals a second time;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	or you poke with the tip of the flame until the blood that is clotted in the wound comes out, and place on it a piece of cloth soaked in water, and press lightly on.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, then leave it alone and do not constrict it until the abscess is calmed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if there is need to bleed for the second time, then bleed in that same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein inside the arm is bled instead of the vein of the head because it is composed that way.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the method of the salve is that the patient puts his hand in hot water, until the foscile is red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then it should be moderately bound, so that the vein appears well, then apply the salve across, not lengthwise or widthwise;
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and let the opening be wide, and apply the salve close to the joint of the hand, and if nothing can come out, then put the hand back in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough;
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is summer, do not put the hand in hot water, for it is used more in winter than in summer;
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the inflammation of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The inflammation of the vein on the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the method:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	stretch out the hand, and put it in hot water until the vein is swollen, so that one can see it;
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if the inflammation is across, and if you cut it completely through, it will cause no harm;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and do not go too deep, for the nerves are beneath entirely bare of flesh, and then put the hand back in hot water, if the blood is congealed in the wound, and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drawn as much blood as is necessary, put oil and seal on the vein to quickly close it, and do this for each cut.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The salve on the left hand is good for the disease of the spleen, and do everything as I have said for the right.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The salve of sophene is worth for all the diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the marrow, and retention of flowers, and disease of the kidneys, and of the hips and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the quality of its treatment is that the patient puts their foot in hot water, and rubs on the vein until it breaks, and binds over the joint of the foot;
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and the vein is at the ankle, and above it, many veins go up over the foot;
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	treat then at the widest vein, or at the ankle, whichever is better.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you treat it on the foot, beware of the nerves beneath, and treat it crosswise as in cutting;
et soit li flaimes anesil.	and let the flame be mild.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the blood cannot come out, then put the foot in water, and let the vein fully empty.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	and if the treatment fails the first time, start again a little higher the second time, for the place is salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	do not doubt about the nerve, as we have said, and thus do with the splint of the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The area of the sciatic vein is at the ankle, and its bleeding relieves the pain in the hip when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the quality of its healing is that the patient enters the bath and tightens above the ankle four times by twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open;
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	and if it opens, then heal it in every way that you can, and by crossing;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and it is worth moving so that you cut it, for the pain is slight, and it is very beneficial to many people.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not find it, then heal any vein that opens on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	and let so much blood flow as you wish, and then loosen the tie, and put on cotton and bind it tight;
ele est maintenant sanee.	she is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of cupping treatments
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Leeches are made of horns, or of clay, or of glass;  
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	and windiness is done according to two ways:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	or by beating and drawing blood, or without beating.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this windiness which is without beating is according to two ways:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	or it is done with full fire, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	and windiness which is done by beating and extraction of blood is done in fourteen places of the body, of which one is at the very top of the head;
et li autres est emmi le col;	and another is in the neck;
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and two others on both sides of the neck;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the suction under the chin;
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the suction on both shoulders;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the suction on the buttocks;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and the suction cups on both arms;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and the suction cups on both legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and the suction cups on both ankles;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and the ventosation does not draw any blood, for it acts on the small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and therefore does not weaken anyone, as is done with vein bleeding;
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it should not be administered, neither in full heat nor partial heat, in any disease that comes from excess, until the whole body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if by necessity of diseases it is needed to cup, or for customs, then we perform it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and at any time;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are those who, when they need to be cupped, have heavy head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and there are those who find fullness and redness in their face, and in their head, and at the neck, and darkness before their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and there are those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and spit blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and there are those who dream and see blood and wounds and dead and similar things by night.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is in the middle of the month, we order it to be bled after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The salve of hellebore helps with the dryness of the head… which affects the eyes, and it is not advisable to use this after the evacuation of all the body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	And this ventilation is in place of the salve of the cephalic, and it is not advisable for those with a cold disposition to use it, or those who have catarrh, for it does them great harm;
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	And for that reason, it is not advisable for the elderly to use it, nor those who have cold diseases in the head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often recover from it become forgetful, and for this reason, the cupping should be placed a bit lower due to the fear of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	Ventosation around the neck is in place of the salve for the head and the basilica, and for that reason, it is useful for constriction of the breast, and to split the channel of the nostril, and for all, and for fullness;
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and there must be a little pressing, for if it holds too tightly, it engenders faintness or nausea in the stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	Wind in the two ribs of the neck is good for headaches, and opthalmia and migraine, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in the place of the sanies of the basilic;
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and you must instruct the surgeon to press his hand when applying it, so that he does not cut the artery, and there are no flows of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	Wind beneath the chin is good for mouth diseases, and corruption of the gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth;
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	and it is in the place of the salves of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Windings on the shoulders are good for diseases that come from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The ventilation of the guts is worth as much as the three veins of the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins;
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instructs the surgeon not to incise too deeply, for the muscle is bare of flesh, and lies beneath nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The cupping that is on the buttocks is worth for hemorrhoids of the anus, and for diseases beneath, and it is necessary that the cupping be large, and be of glass, so it can draw well;
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	and by chance, if they were delicate, they would break;
et i fai grans plaies.	and I make great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	The leg cupping treatments are very effective, for they draw blood from the entire body, and they are useful for old pains in the reins, and of the spleen, and of the bladder, and repeatedly alleviate the flows.
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	and they are placed at the sites of the two ankles, and the two heels, and over time they weaken the body with long use, and cause fainting in many conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The method of applying the cupping is that you first place it empty, suck moderately, apply quickly, move evenly, and do not stop until you see the area turn red and swollen, and then release the blood's redness;
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	then apply force, and reset the cupping devices, and take care in the positioning of the body, for there are those who have so much flesh, and clearly poor:
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	so it is necessary to strike only once, and it is necessary to make wide wounds, and one deep incision;
et suce legierement.	and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the vein is large, then it is necessary to strike twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	the first time to refine the path of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if the blood is very thick, then it is necessary to strike a third time;
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	and when we want to draw blood little by little, then we strike only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we wish to let much blood, then we often reopen;
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	and if the blood is thick, then use a sharp instrument, and it is important that the veins be punctured suddenly, and it is necessary for those who have thick and hard skin, and who have narrow pores, that you anoint the places of the cupping with opening and dissolving oil:
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	if it is in this state, of violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or cucumber seed oil;
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	and if it is in ivory, of watercress oil, or lily, or chamomile, or other similar oils.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is thick and cold, then take oil of marjoram, or of balsamite, or oil of aniseed, and similar things.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one to be treated has tender flesh and large pores, then no oil should be applied, but it is necessary to wash after ventosation with rose water, or cold water, or water of black nightshade, or water of cucumber, or water of porcelain, or other similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And for those who have much moisture, it is lifted with oil of ash, or water of myrtle, and of sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have large excesses rise from old wine, or from juice of succory, or from decoction of anise or chamomile, or from other similar things;
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	and it is not suitable to bleed with cupping before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath one hour or two;
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and do not sleep after the cupping, and it is necessary that he sweats, when he should be cupped and when he has been cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And beware if the one who is bleeding is choleric, and if the blood is too sharp and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	it is necessary that he takes cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces with garlic, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and soft porridges, and castrated fowl meat, and moist foods.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And he who has a cold temperament, let him take honey syrup, and moderately scented wine, which is between old and new, and soft foods, and soft porridges and small birds and pigeons;
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	and on the day he will be cupped, he should drink more than he eats;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	and it is necessary to give some people at times treacle or nutmeg before cupping, or after, to strengthen the main limbs;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	and let the broth be refined, but it is not suitable for those who are hot to drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The suction cups that are placed without striking are those that are placed upon the liver, and upon the spleen, and gout, and upon the abdomen and the buttocks and the kidneys and the hip, for these limbs do not endure being struck upon them, and it is done only to draw blood from limb to limb, as we place upon the breasts when the child suckles;
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	to remove the viscosity which is in the limb, as we place suction cups upon the abdomen and upon the buttocks to reduce the limb;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and remove the pain when there is an obstruction or stone, so by its attractive power it may possibly remove the obstruction, or dislodge the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	and thus it does when placed upon the liver and upon the spleen when there is retained wind, and these cupping vessels are administered empty to suck solely;
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	and sometimes are administered together fire, and sometimes filled with hot water, as in diseases of pleurisy, and in such a manner that one fills the cupping vessel with hot water alone, or with water in which suitable herbs have been boiled for this.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the cupping administered with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And it has two fingers in width and half a palm in depth, and it has on the side around the middle one small hole, as if to insert a needle, and it should be made of brass, smooth so that it does not injure the patient when placed on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and have in the middle a crossbar of brass or iron, to hold a torch tightly, and let them be both large and small according to the illnesses and age of those who use them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	for the suction cups for children are different from those for the elderly, and for the thin different from those for the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one should place this suction cup on the limb in this way:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	take the wax torch or the linen strip, and place it inside the suction cup across the bar that is inside the suction cup, so that the flame is at the bottom of the suction cup so it does not burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then place it on the limb, and your fingers should be on the opening we mentioned, so that when you want to, the vapor escapes, and you remove the suction cup;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and imprint the liniment as before, and repeat it often, if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the cupping which is administered for a disease of pleurisy, to all water, there is no vein or pore, and it is not administered except when it is full of water, and is placed on the limb only briefly;
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Blistering is only administered in areas where cupping cannot be applied due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places;
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and on areas bare of flesh, such as toes or nails, and other similar places;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the use is such that when you find veins that are in clear sweet waters without putrefaction, then take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and place one nut in sweet water, until they become familiar, and have nothing in their bellies;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then let it be bled with a vein and a cupping glass, then rub the limb until it is red, and place on the veins;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are full and fall out, if it is a place where you can apply a cupping glass, then apply it, for it helps greatly afterward.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, then clean the area with ash, and then with water, very well, and then stamp it;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the wound is too far from the body of the veins, then moisten the linen cloth in cold water, and place it on, until the blood is stopped;
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the blood is multiplied, then place vitriol powder or gall, and similar things, until it is stopped;
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you put on the place half of peeled beans, and leave them until they burn at the site, it will stop now;
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you need more, then take other veins.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	and if the veins do not want to be taken, then rub the place with fresh blood, or you stick a needle until blood comes out, and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will burn;
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And when you see that they fall, sprinkle on a pot of aloes and crushed charcoal, or ash, so they will now fall.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear son, that the foolish physicians discard this chapter, which they have never seen in any of the ancient books, nor read a letter of it.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason, the knowledge is rare in our land, for I have never found any good one;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing of it except through the knowledge of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have treated the subject with knowledge, and by experience, and by the habit of my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	and I have described to you in this chapter what is contained, and have summarized at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are mentioned, as I have done in these two previous chapters.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It is therefore necessary that we say in the prologue of this book the summaries of the words and the chapters where the wise place their understanding, and remain on the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or torsion or contusion comes to anyone, you must hurry to treat the patient on one side and the other, if nothing else prevents it, such as weakness of body, or fainting, or old age;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	or if the weather is not very hot, or too cold;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and eat cold foods, that is to say cold broths, and meat of chicken and veal, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not overload yourself with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have no fear of a hot abscess, or the spreading of matter in the limb;
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	so the patient returns to his first government which he has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary that one nourishes the patient with foods that promote thick nourishment, where there is viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, and rice, and eggs, and meat, and cow's stomach, and poultry, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For with such nourishment the break mends and heals faster.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the bones of old and frail people cannot be easily mended or united according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor can those which are too tender, such as the bones of small children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	but have no concern, place on the broken bone the thick tendons which hold and join the limb together, until it strengthens as it was before;
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	and do not stop all of his work, and for that reason he must be nourished with hearty meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot, or of the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all manner of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that require elevation, and others in sharpening, such as the cutting of a quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a small裂痕。为了保持翻译的准确性，最后一部分“fendure”更准确地译为“fissure”或“split”，因此句子可以调整为：“And there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a small fissure.” 但是根据您的要求，我将提供一个直译版本。
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And for each method have his ingenuity and proper instrument in the restoration, according to what the memory comes into place;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and the bone fracture is recognized by the fact that the limb is twisted, and it is clearly visible due to deficiency, and it sounds under pressure from the hand;
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twisting or sound upon touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no fracture;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it may well have twisting, or splitting, or small fractures.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	So you must not move it by hand, but apply medicines that come after here, and then hold it tightly now subtly.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that for fractures that go outward, and the two parts are separated, they must now be put evenly in place, although abscesses may come;
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if hot abscesses come, leave it for some days until the abscesses are calmed;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	then set it equal to the motion that you can do lightly and wisely, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restorations of those in which there are pieces;
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then bind it, as is appropriate afterwards.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if the bone has broken pieces, then stretch it in two parts, if it is a hand or foot, or with your hand if it is a small limb, or with two ropes, or with one rope and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and set the limb according to its natural form, so that when the broken parts of the limb are separated, you reset all the fragments in their places as much as you can, and be careful that your work does not cause injury or pain to the patient;
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and properly align the two ends of the bone according to the best methods.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	and you can feel with your hand if it does not seem properly aligned:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	raise it gracefully, and do not pull too tightly, nor press as those who cause a hot abscess and contraction in the limb through their work, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is properly set, instruct the patient well that they do not move it, whether awake or asleep, or turning, or in any other way;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and ensure that the limb is so secure that it feels no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when he feels no pain, it is not complete, and it must be put into such a position that he feels no pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and take care that it is put straight, so no twisting comes when it is restored;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are diverse in smallness and in largeness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are small limbs, such as arms and legs and the like:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	one must wrap cloths of soft and fine linen;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those that are large, such as thighs and shins:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	one must wrap with a broad and hard binding, for the wide bindings embrace the entire large limb and constrain it equally on all sides, so there is no unevenness;
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then bind around with light bandages, three turns or four according to the limb, and tighten your hand a bit on all the binding, then go above the fracture and tighten less, so that the fracture may spread slightly apart;
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and soften the binding little by little, until you take a large part of the healthy area, then take another binding, and wrap around again over the fractured area;
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then go back to the part below the fracture, and tighten moderately, not too strongly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first line above;
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	then place between the bindings threads of linen or cloths, until it is all even, then bind everything on top with a bandage, and then put your well-made splints on, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or an abscess, then place something soothing on the abscess that is warm and which reduces the swelling, and leave it this way for some days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	then stretch over your stakes, and let them be half a large cane in width set firmly, or of wood from which we make cleats, or palm ribs, and let them be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it is necessary that the stake which one places on the break be a bit thicker and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and it should also be as long as is necessary for the member's smallness or largeness;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then stretch over the stakes as you have done at the first place, then bind over a suitable thread, just as in the first place on the fracture;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	narrower below, then less;
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	and it is necessary that the threads be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and they should be of soft flax;
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the works of fools who make their ligatures from twisted linen cords, and it is great error, for the ligature cannot be even if it is too fine, and it should not have less than a grain's space between each needle.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is injured by the heads of the arrows after they are embedded in their flesh, place beneath them tow of flax, or shredded wool, so that it does not harm.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the splinter, and the skin is broken, I will speak of the treatment hereafter.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not right to extract arrows from all broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limb is large, it is not necessary to place strong stitches that after five days or seven, or more according to your certainty of a hot abscess coming.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	and see here the method of ancient plasters to restore fracture, dislocation, and twist:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and it is that you take the flour that clings to the mill walls, and mix it with plenty of egg, and apply this mixture, not too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common method of the plaster restoring the fracture in various conditions, especially for women and small children, for it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another method of plaster restoring the fracture and the dislocation and the twist:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	take З pounds of balsam and labdanum and alum and asafetida and gum arabic and myrrh, in total X З.
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	mirtle and aloe, each half an ounce;
alechil VIIII З.;	alochil nine halves;
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	and make it into powder, and mix it with egg white;
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	if the person's complexion is hot, then use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and is beneficial to many people.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another kind of plaster that is good for sprains:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	take myrtle and vervain, each ten halves;
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	mirtle and aloe, each nine halves;
acaice VI З.;	accident VI Z.; 
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Bole armeniac X З., and grind well, and cook with water or egg white, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another way of plaster for joints and bones dislocated from their places, and to ease the ensuing pain, and for bone fractures and breaks:
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	take new wool, and boil it in oil, and apply it to the area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	These plasters do not heal, but they are good for soothing a hot abscess and properly removing pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another way of plaster that restores broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	take dried fig leaves and ground ivy leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another manner of plaster for the restoration of bone fractures and to reduce the remaining abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take root of malva, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of wych elm, one part of each;
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	and grind, and mix with wine, and if the limb is heated, mix it with moist coriander water, or with water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way of making a stronger plaster than the first, when a hard abscess comes to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take roots of malva, and flaxseed, balustrum, melilot, and figwort, and flowers of violets and chamomile, one part of each;
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	and grind, and mix with salt water, or fresh water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its condition.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates says in his book that one should not place on the broken limb to restore strength anything but a salve made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and he says it should be between two neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen thinks one should place on the broken limb, to restore, things somewhat dry and warm, such as myrrh and aloe and frankincense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another method for a plaster that is good for injuries and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Take mutton fat and human nails cut off, or bird feathers, and mallows, and salt equally, and grind them, and make a plaster and lay it on.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then loosen it a little after, and take care if the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place;
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	do not loosen it for several days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain comes to the place, or itching, without rest or swelling, then hurry, and loosen it, and remove the plaster now;
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	and take a light cloth, and moist sea sponge, and soak it in water, and cleanse the area until the itching stops, and the pain is soothed;
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply dry wool soaked in water or rose oil, and bind it tightly until you are sure of a warm abscess;
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	and rest the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then begin a gentle binding, and apply a poultice, and do not bind it as tightly as before;
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat gently until he is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is hot and red and painful and swelling has entirely been removed, and you need plaster and bandaging, then restart it as you did first equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	and if none of what we have said applies to the limb, do not loosen it until after three days or four or five or seven;
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	and sometimes leave it for twenty days, according to what is seen, until the fracture heals, and the flesh grows over the alignment;
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	then he restrains it more than before, and swells his flesh, as I have said before;
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	and if you see the area dry more than necessary, know that no growth can come;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	apply then warm water, every time you release it, and this should be done every third day, and slightly remove the dressing;
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	by this work then the growth returns to the limb, and quickly amends what the foolish doctors do, who restore the limb incorrectly:
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	it is harmful, and the work is fearful, and I see nothing else but to leave it alone and treat it properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of the various kinds of fractures
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many kinds of fractures are there, and diverse shapes, and the causes are distinct;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	for there are fractures that are caused by the impact of a sword, and the collarbone removes all the bone down to the surface which is beneath the bone, just as an axe does to wood;
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	and for that reason, this kind of fracture is called "hatchet wound.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	when the sword cuts the bone from above without piercing, and this kind of fracture is called "absolute";
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	and the wounds from these two fractures are large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded impact, or a split from the edge of a stone, or from falling on a stone, or from other similar causes.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a penetrating fracture, which approaches up to the tissue that is under the bone, or on top of the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	and there is a wound that penetrates the bone as fine as a hair, and the split is small, and for that reason, this fracture is called "hairline";
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	and if the wound that is made by striking a stone, or by falling, or by similar things, and makes the piece of the bone go inwards, and the joint is twisted as do the blacksmiths when they strike on the cauldrons;
si entre li piere dedens.	and the stone enters inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more to those who have moist bones in their head, such as a child's head;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and it happens in all these manners of fracture that small pieces are separated as stars;
et je em parlerai en son leu.	and I will speak of it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all kinds of fractures by the incision on them, and by probing attempts, and by the corrupted flesh that is on them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hairline fracture is known by this, that when the bone is exposed and rubbed upon, the fracture appears black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the fracture, be wary of the patient's accidents, and if you see any bad signs, such as vomiting bile, loss of consciousness, stiffness, fainting, fever ague, and eyes protruding and reddening, and other similar symptoms in various conditions, then it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any astonishing accidents, and you hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the wounded comes to you first, and it is in winter, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the fourteenth day at least that you can.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, then you must hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, lest the tissue under the bone be corrupted, and the accidents that we have mentioned come.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	and if the bone fracture extends to the membrane that covers the brain, then you must split the fractured part thus:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and it is that you take the head of the wounded patient, and uncover on the bone in all ways that you can, and on the surface of the wound more than you can, and if bleeding comes from uncovering the bone, or an abscess hot, aid with what is necessary, and it is that you fill the place with cloths soaked in rose oil;
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and let the wound rest until the hot abscess is calmed, and be sure of the bleeding;
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	then begin to remove around the bone, and it is done according to two methods of work:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	one method is that you cut with a narrow incision in front, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then he makes another cut larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second method is that you have a number of various cuts, some narrow and others wide, and they are pointed, and they are made of iron;
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and work lightly, so you do not bruise the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is hard and strong, then you must pierce around it, otherwise you administer cuts with probes, not fully piercing through the skull bone, and the tip should have a margin or a circle that prevents the point from going through the bone;
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	and you must have several, so that each comes into its place according to the thickness of the bone, so that you have probes for all skulls;
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	and these are the forms of the three types of tarers:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	and the quality to pierce around the broken bone is that you place one tarer on the bone, and turn with your hands until you know that the bone is pierced;
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	then place the tarer in another part a little afterward, and thus do all around, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone which is between the holes, and do this more subtly than you can, and gently, as we have said, until you draw out the bone by hand, or with any of the instruments that you have such as forceps, pincers;
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	and be careful not to touch the brain or the surface.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced the bone and pulled it out, then you must remove the residue that remains in the bone with another instrument similar to an incisor, but it must be more slender and finer than other incisors;
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	and if any of the small bones or scales remain, then remove them lightly with the instruments;
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	then clean the wound with lint and ointments that we have mentioned.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And another method of practice is the one that Galen said, which is more thorough;
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	and he praises it greatly, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	You must first uncover a part of the bone where the fracture appears displaced, so that once you have uncovered this part, you will place under the head of this lens-shaped incisor, of which this is the form:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut from one side, and the part is split on two sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone;
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	then strike with a small mallet so that you lightly cut around the bone entirely, and be careful of the cloth that is beneath;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	if it is adhered to the bone, remove it lightly, for it can be removed without harm and without fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is cut only on top, and there are small pieces, then you must restore that roughness, and remove the scales with a fine scraper of which you should have various sizes, to apply in each place most suitably, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	And scrape first with large scrapers, and then with finer ones, and do not stop doing this until it is smooth.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	In each of the other haircuts and subtle fractures, you must administer treatment according to its direction;
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	and this is something that is not unknown to one who has devoted their study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the surface is exposed, then you must take a piece of linen, according to the size of the wound, and moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound;
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	then take another piece of linen doubled in two or three, and moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on the first piece of linen;
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	and do this as gently as you can so that you do not burden the surface, then apply another layer on top, and do not bind it too tightly but only enough for it to cover the wound;
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	and leave it like this for one or two days until the hot abscess is calmed, then untie it, and apply medications such as lily roots, and powdered beans, and frankincense powder, and aristolochia, and similar things;
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and of these things make powder, and put on the wound, and immediately administer cleansing medicines without biting;
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	and ensure that the wound is immediately clean, do not leave any ointment, nor allow scabs to form, for when scabs form on the membrane of the brain, they can corrupt and harm it, causing great mischief to the patient;
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	for when you put something biting on the surface, it burns above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Take care then, if any bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without a doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if blackening does not come except from the medicine that you have put on, which has such power, then you should take one part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and glue one bandage, and put it on the surface;
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with appropriate treatments until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Know that sometimes both parts of the nose above are broken, or one by itself, for there are two bones;
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, so it does not cause to sink in or twist, and then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should put your little finger into the nostril hole, and place that break inside with your index finger, and push it back by force, until the nose returns to its natural form;
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is on the upper part of the nose, and your fingers cannot reach the place, then you must put it equal at the head of a rod a bit thick.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the break is in two parts, do likewise, and hasten to restore on the first day, if you can;
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	and if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the hot abscess is calmed, then place at the head of the nail strips of linen cloth, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	Place one other on the other side, if the break is there;
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	and let the strips be so thick that they fill the gaps of the nail.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And some say that one should moisten the threads with butter and change them each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	It does not seem right to me, but they should be moistened in a mixture of egg white and mill powder;
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	then leave the tent until the bone is hard, and the cartilage is hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And sometimes one puts goose feathers in place of tents, and wraps a covering around it, and the breaker holds it, and the patient blows through;
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	or do what you wish.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if hot abscesses come to the neck while you are working there, then put a poultice or cotton moistened in rose oil, or in a vial of diachylon.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if hot abscesses do not come, then apply a plaster made by mixing flaxseed flour and frankincense powder with egg white, then put light bandages on top, and do not bind the neck;
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the neck fracture is small and it is broken into small pieces, then extract it with appropriate instruments, then sew up the tear, and treat it with things that heal flesh and promote healing, such as plasters and suitable ointments;
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if there is no wound inside the nose, then treat it with tents, and put in rushes of pine until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the fracture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is fractured below, and there is no open wound, and the fracture is only superficial, and it is not broken into two, but rather indented inward, then it is recognized as slight.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is necessary, if the break is in the right part, that you put your index finger in the mouth of the patient;
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	and if the break is in the left jaw, then put your index finger of the right hand, and push the break inside gently, and tighten it with the other hand by force, and make it equal.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is separated into two, then you must administer extension from two parts until they are aligned.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if movement of the teeth occurs or a tear, then extract them with a gold, silver, or silk thread, then put on the broken jaw a cerate, and place a double cloth over it;
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	and put on the cloth a large well-made needle, or a piece of leather equal, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it up as high as you can at the cheek, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	and if you see that the face changes, then untie it on the third day, and then reset what has changed;
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	and put a poultice on, of the mill powder with egg white or sesame flour, after you have removed the plaster;
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	and put on the poultice a light wool, and if the poultices dry out and the condition of the patient does not change, leave it until he is healed;
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	many times is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if hot abscesses come, then administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is a break and wound together, bind if no piece of the bone has been removed;
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	so delicately remove the fragments with suitable instruments for this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, then widen it with fire according to your necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and none remain, sew the wound if it is wide, and apply appropriate poultices to it to promote flesh growth until it heals.
de la forcele	about the fracture
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The forearm breaks often in front, towards the shoulder, and the break is according to three manners:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	or it is broken and separated into two, and there are fragments, and it is the easiest to restore;
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	or there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the work is when the break is without a wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder where the forearm is broken;
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the other extends the neck towards the part;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	then place the fracture evenly in your hands, so that the form is as it should be, and there is no appearance or misalignment.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you need to stretch further, place under the patient's shoulder a round ball of cloth, or wool, and let it be large according to your necessity;
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	and stretch and lift the arm, and hold the ball in your hand, so that you set the fracture evenly as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder back into place due to it being stuck, then the patient must lie frequently on his side, and put a medium pillow under the shoulder, and the assistant pushes the shoulder down until the bone of the shoulder is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	and then align the fracture with your hands, and if you find it shattered, you must split it open;
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and draw out the fragments gently, and if the bone cannot join due to some obstruction, then cut it with one of the incisors that you have;
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but place under the forceps this instrument, to protect the surface:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and it resembles a spoon, and is not closed, and should be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work;
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and let it have two ends, as you see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, as is the tear of the wound that you made when you drew out the bones;
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are sure of a hot abscess, cut the wound open, and if the tear is small, or if you doubt it is a hot abscess, then apply cloths and bandages to the wound according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if hot abscesses come, moisten the cloth with rose oil and ash and wine, and apply on.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The compression of the bone, when it is without wounds and without cutting, is that you place on the bone the plaster of the powder from the mill and egg white, and put light bandages on top, and place a sphere under the splint, if you need one;
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	then take a very wide bandage of a palm in width, then put the doubled cloth on top of the bandages, and the plaster;
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	then take a narrow strip of three digits wide and long, and wrap it around the bandage, so that the ends of the bandage are hanging;
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	and place the strip on the fracture, and wrap the bandage around the neck, and under the healthy splint, and under the diseased splint;
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and the reset of each part, and when you see that the plaster holds the fracture properly, and you clearly see that the needle does not move over the broken bone, reward it each day, and when the bindings loosen, restrain it;
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	and make the patient lie on his back, and put a small pillow under the mattress when he sleeps, to raise the shoulder up;
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	thus lighten the fracture of the forearm by lowering the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless bad accidents occur, until twenty days;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	then restart the plaster, if you see that it is needed, and bind it tightly and leave it so until it is restored;
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	and it is restored in more than twenty-eight days, and in less for some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the break of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	It often happens that the shoulder is broken at its broad part or not in the middle, and one does not know it except by touching it;
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	so set it according to the shape of the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in every way that you can;
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	then apply flour from the mill with an egg white and light bandages, and place a double cloth over it;
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	then place a wide and thin splint slightly wider than the shoulder, and if beneath the splint there are gaps in any part of the shoulder, use flax bandages to fill those gaps so that the splint lies evenly;
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	and then it is bound with a large bandage firmly, so that the splinter does not move from its place, and the binding is checked each day;
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	and every time it softens, it is bound, and the splinter is placed back in its proper place if it has moved, and the patient lies on their side;
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	and the shoulder is restored in twenty days or twenty-five.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when this number is completed, then untie it, and be sure, for it is not bone that moves easily out of place.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone sticks out and points under the heart, cut above it, remove the bone, and do what we have said in the fracture of the collarbone to appease the abscess heat.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breast fracture
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The bone is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but it often breaks from weakness.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it hangs down below, and the patient feels great pain, and lacks strength, and coughs, and perhaps vomits blood, and the fracture site in the bone becomes apparent, and it can be well felt.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration is such that the patient lies on his back, and you place a cushion between his shoulders, then press the shoulders, and align the ribs from both sides with your hands, and delicacy in placing equally in all manners as you can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be;
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	then place poultices and pads over the stake made subtly of salt, or another light wood, and wrap it in a cloth, and lay it on the broken bone so that it does not move;
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	and turn the bandage around the back, and bind it moderately, and loosen the bandage every hour, and if it becomes loose, then bind it again;
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	and if it needs to be untied because of corrosion or itching that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, then hurry, and untie it, and remove the plaster, and address what has come in ways of treatments;
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	then reapply the plaster, and keep it tight until it heals.
de la brisure des costes	Of the breaking of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Know that the breaking of the ribs occurs only in their thick parts behind the back, and at the head inward, and they do not bend except because they are slippery;
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	and one can feel it well upon examination with the hands.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is that you set the break evenly, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster, and bind it with a splint, if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the breaking of the ribs is leaning inward, then the patient feels great pain and pricking, like from pleurisy, for the bone pricks the membrane;
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	and alembic with points, and soon it vomits great spitting of blood, and this is from severe illness, and the old ones have put much ingenuity into it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And there are some who say that one must administer foods that swell the belly, to push the stone downward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not wish for hot abscesses to occur if they have not already appeared.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if it has occurred, then we heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And some say that we put cupping glasses on the place to bleed thoroughly, and this seems reasonable;
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	nevertheless, there is doubt that the cupping may not draw the excess to the spot due to the condition of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some say that we should cover the area with wool soaked in hot oil, and place pads between the ribs to distribute the heat evenly, then treat it with the treatment for pleurisy, with food and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear from the bone piercing the tissue, and there is doubt for the patient, then it is necessary to cut over the spot of the broken rib, and it is necessary to place an instrument underneath to protect the surface;
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then one must cut the bone, and pull lightly, and then sew the two lips of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if hot abscesses come, then put on cloths soaked in rose oil, and apply to the area;
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat the area as appropriate for an abscess, and let the patient lie on their side where it is needed until they are healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the break of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	Sometimes the neck bones are fractured, and it happens that they bend;
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	and likewise for the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to anyone, and you wish to know if they will be healed or not, then take note if you see his hands softened and swollen and numb, and cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is mortal in many conditions, and if they move and feel well when they are squeezed and pricked, know that the bone joint is saved, and that the patient will be cured if care is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if similar things happen to the spine of the back, and you wish to know if he will be healed or not, then beware if the feet are softened, and if the signs are present which are in the hands, and on the back there is flatulence and involuntary emission;
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And when it is treated on his stomach, there is involuntary emission.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when he is lying on his back and wants to saddle up, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Know that it is mortal:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	do not labor too much in his care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not come to him, then the condition is lighter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the treatment is that you bleed it if there is a hot abscess, then put on the spine rose oil or egg yolk oil until it is calmed;
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	then place one of the comforting and drying plasters on it and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest;
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	and do not sleep on the part where he feels the pain until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if any bone becomes disjointed, it is necessary to cut on the joint;
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and remove the bone, then sew together the two edges of the wound if it is large, then treat it with an ointment to promote healing until he is healed;
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the skull," put your pouched hand (left), and make it equal to the other hand as much as possible, then apply the plaster and the splint on top if needed;
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then he binds it, and if there is loose bone, he cuts into it, removes it, and treats the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the break of the bone of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	It rarely happens that the hip bone is broken, and if it does happen, there is only a slight reduction at the top;
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	and it extends downward, inclines outward, and causes pain, swelling, and bruising at the site of the break for the patient.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And the restoration is that you place your hand on it, until you are above the fracture;
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and understand what the nature and shape of the fracture are;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And if the fracture is only at the head, then set equal this fracture, until it has a natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is downward, or it tilts inward, then make the patient lie on his stomach until the restoration of this break is aligned for you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have set it equal, then apply the plaster, then place a wooden or horn splint on top, and bind the fracture so that it does not move;
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and fill the area below the ribs until the level is equalized.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side, or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if hot abscesses come, do not touch them until the hot abscesses are calmed, and apply what we have said before;
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	and then return to the restoration, and bind it as appropriate, if there is no harmful accident;
et c’est li maniere.	and that is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder fracture
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The shoulder joint is what is between the arm and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of the two methods:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	one of which is that you take a stick of medium thickness, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	And tie the two ends with two bindings, and pull them upwards, and seat the patient on a chair;
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	then lay the broken arm on the stick until it reaches the shoulder, and have in the middle a wooden cradle, then pull upwards on some weight or let the servant stretch it down;
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	Then the physician places the splint equal to his hands together, until the splint returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that the patient is placed on his back, and his hand is tied to his neck, then command two assistants, one to hold what is above the splint with both hands, and the other to hold below all the way to the joint, and each stretches their part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction should be stronger, then hold the limb below the fracture and above the fracture, and extend each of the assistants to their side.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the splint is close to the shoulder head, then you must place one strap in the middle under the armpit, and the other towards the side, under the splint;
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	and likewise if the splint is towards the side, then you must place the strap lightly, without effort, until the splint is even on the spot and on the side;
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	then place the fracture evenly as it should be, and bind it, if no warm abscesses come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if warm abscesses come, then do not bind it for seven days, and place wool soaked in wine and rose oil on it until the warm abscesses are calmed;
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	then you compress it, and the method of compressing is that you put the plaster on the fracture, then bring the arm to the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the chest;
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	and apply the bandage, and compress it on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in its proper place, unless something prevents it, or if the bone has not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you fear that the bone may move, then use splints, and place on the fracture a splint wider and stronger than the others, and have an inch of space between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it extends three inches beyond the fracture on each side;
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	Then cut into the stones, as I have said at the beginning of the chapter on fractures, more strongly and less distantly.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the setting of the stones and the binding, as we have said, at the time when you restore the broken limb, and you fear an abscess is hot, then leave it to bind until the seventh day, as we have said;
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	then examine the bandage every three days to ensure that itching or swelling does not occur at the site, or that nourishment cannot reach the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If it adjusts, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if no such accidents occur, then do not untie it until after three days or more, and have the patient sleep on his back, with his hands on his stomach;
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	and put under the shoulder a cushion full of wool evenly, and look at each hour of the day or night, that the shape of the broken limb does not move, or the ligaments do not soften;
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	and direct it through the power of medicine, and give it the meat that we have mentioned before, in such a manner that the meat be at first subtle;
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	and when it begins to recover, let it be coarse.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be completely recovered in forty days;
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	and then one should untie it and administer baths and medicinal ointments to properly direct the area.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the constriction is tight and embedded, it remains to untie for one day or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the breaking of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the two "fo-scile", of which one is small, and it is the one that follows the pocket;
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the other is large, and it is the one that is below, towards the small finger;
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	perhaps only the large fo-scile is broken, or the small one, and perhaps both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the small fo-scile is broken, the restoration is light, and the healing;
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	and when the large one is broken, the healing is bad, and more grievous than when they are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the small fragment that is merely broken, then it must be slightly extended gently, and made even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it is the large fo-scile, then it must be bound more tightly;
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	and extend him on the cushion, and hold the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and the small fingers lower than the other fingers, and let the patient be crossed over himself, and the cushion in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any strain;
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	then extend the minister's arm below to his hand, or to the joint, and another minister above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then the physician makes it even, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the break there are pieces, then place each in its place, and if any detached piece pricks the heart, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut above it and remove it, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And if with the instrument for wounds, I have spoken of it in a specific chapter;
si pren la cure.	then take care of it.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if at the beginning of the healing process hot abscesses occur, then apply a cloth with ointment made of rose oil and white wax, which should not be too hard or too soft;
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and tie the cloth carefully above it until the heated abscess is calmed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	and then remove the plaster, and apply a poultice of mill powder with egg white, then place the splints, and let the splint at the fracture be stronger, and a little wider than the others;
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	and know that there should be six splints on the arm in various arrangements:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or in two;
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	and bind tighter over the fracture than elsewhere, and always less tightly as you move away, just as I said at the beginning of the chapter;
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	and let the bandages that are on the fracture be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough;
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	and let the thread, with which it is sewn, be of flax, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the joint after some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if any bad accidents come to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, then you must rinse the member with warm water, until the itchings are calmed;
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the member rest without being too tight.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then begin the binding again, and if the joint is softened and the bones separated, and similar things, then address it.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And take care if the nourishments cannot reach the member because it is too tight, then you must soften it a bit, and leave it this way for some days, until the nourishments flow, and then bind it tightly.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, then do not release him until twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	or wrap around, then he can place his hands on his neck, and let his necks be equal, and beware of movement and shaking, and sleep on his back;
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-five, and by chance in twenty days, according to the compositions and the complexities of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	Of the break of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that on the back of the hand and the joints of the fingers there are few fractures, and they do not come except with much bending many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the palm of the hand is broken or bent, it is necessary that the patient sit crossed, and sits straight in front of him evenly;
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	then place his hand on the stretched cloth, and the assistant extends the broken bones, and the doctor aligns them equally until they are well joined;
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	and apply the plaster and bandages, if no abscesses form, then place a splint according to the size of the area;
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and be wrapped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the break is on the outside around the belly of the foot, make a sphere of cloths, and instruct the patient to hold it tight against their broken foot;
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	and then bind it with a long cloth, and let the splint be as large as the palm of the hand, and bind it tightly as is appropriate.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is on the top, you must place a splint on top and another underneath in the sole, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it all around the hand, and stop the binding between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if the break comes to any of the joints of the fingers, if it is swollen, then set it straight as appropriate;
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	and bind it with the palm, and if you wish, put a small straight splint to elevate the break, and do not move it;
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	and if the fracture is on the other fingers, such as in the index or one of the others, make it even, and bind it with the healthy finger that follows;
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	or you bind them all together in one hold, which is better, or you put on a splint, as in a pouched;
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	and take care in the restoration and in the treatment of a hot abscess, and support those who come to it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The bone of the thigh is often broken, and it is well seen when it turns forward and backward;
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	and the restoration is such that one binds the limb above the fracture and the other below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the patient lies on his face, then each minister extends his limb equally on his side;
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and this is when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near the root of the thigh, then one of the bandages should be towards the hip, and the other bandage below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And also if it is near the knee, then the band should be near the knee, and the extension should be downward;
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	then the physician places the bone straight with his two hands, until it is according to its natural form, and then he applies the plaster, and binds it, if no abscess comes.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside, then return to your work and your treatment;
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The book is made in such a manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	You must wrap over the fracture with a thick bandage doubled in two or three layers, and leave the excess, then bend the leg so that the heel comes to the root of the knee, and put one long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee joint, and let the end of the thread come above;
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	then wrap the bandage over the leg and thigh, then place splints on the fracture, and put a splint on the bone of the leg;
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	then fill the space between the leg and thigh with soft cloths to make the pressure even, then begin to tightly bind three or four turns over the fracture;
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	and when you go higher up on the fracture, it holds less tightly;
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	then tighten the two threads that you have put between the leg and the thigh, and tie three knots that are above, then go down along the head of the thread until you come near the foot;
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	and hold it tightly so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, provided that no abscess or swelling or similar occurs.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	And if it does occur, then untie it, and address what happens, as we have said many times;
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	and if there are pieces of the bone that bother, they must be removed, if one can;
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	and if one cannot, then it is necessary to split the place, and draw force;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	and treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And sometimes the thigh is broken in such a way that one must insert splints, as in the shoulder and arm;
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	nevertheless, in such restoration, the patient does not limp.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored in 50 days, or a little less or a little more, according to the differences of temperaments.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the groove of the kneejoint
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the joint of the knee there is little breakage, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is merely a crack or a perforation, and it happens in open wounds and without visible wounds, and this is well felt.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is such that one places equal weight on what is round at its ends, until it is assembled as much as can be moved;
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	then apply the plaster, and place a round splint if you need it, and bind it as appropriate, then treat all the conditions as we have said in other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar ones;
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	so apply to each condition what is necessary until he is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the break of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is properly called "tibia", and the other is called "fibula";
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	and all types of fractures occur as they do in the arm, and therefore the restoration is the same as that of the arm, and the treatment is entirely similar. And if both bones are fractured together, then the leg turns in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the thin bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the large bone is fractured, then one feels great pain, and it is clearly visible;
et torne desoz.	and it turns inward.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Then apply extension, and make it equal, and bind the splints equally;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	but nonetheless, if the fracture is bad and there are many pieces, the extension should be lesser and lighter;
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	and lighten it according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have completed your work, take two splints that span the leg on both sides, and let them be the length of the leg from the knee down;
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	then wrap one bandage over and under them twice, and tie it in the middle as well, so that at this binding the leg cannot turn to the right or left, and thus it is proper;
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	and some administer the splint of the long leg, and if it is wood, the leg is placed there to prevent movement, and this is properly done in the fracture where there is a wound;
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	and move the leg each day to see if there is an abscess hot or other accident;
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	treat it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the leg bones
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle there is no fracture, but in the bones of the foot sometimes a fracture occurs and slightly in the toes, and there is force that breaks in many positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if the bones of the foot are fractured and you see these bones protruding over each other, then place the patient's foot on the ground as if they were about to walk, and then put your foot on top of theirs where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their places;
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	then put the plaster and bandages on, and place under the belly of the foot a small board two spans wide, then bind it to the foot appropriately, after you have wrapped cloths around, and other things you need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, then loosen the binding, for you will find the bones aligned, whether they are fractured or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if any of the toes are broken, then restore them, just as we have said for the fingers of the hand;
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	then put a splint on the broken toe according to the length of the toe, and let it be a bit wider, then place under the foot that board I have mentioned, and bind it appropriately;
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	and if there are two or three, or more, broken, then put a splint on each toe according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and bind the board under the foot;
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	and being on top of the head of the table, expose the belly of the patient, so that it is well stained.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	and you must not forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, which we have mentioned;
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	and consider each incident as it is appropriate.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone of the wrist
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the bone of the female genitalia is fractured, make her sit stretched out, then incline her towards the back part, and let her be held from behind;
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	then have the practitioner fill the female genitalia of the patient with cotton, and put as much as a thumb;
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	then stand the woman up, and lift her back little by little, and then the cotton comes out, until it reaches the entrance of the genitalia, and the bone returns with it;
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	and when she wishes to urinate, she removes the cotton, and after she has urinated, she puts it back, and thus does this for seven days or around:
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	the fracture will be restored, and if you want, take a bag of partridges, and tie a cane to the opening, and insert the entire bag into the natural orifice;
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	then blow into the cane forcefully, until the bag is inflated inside:
la nature si revenra li brisure;	nature will then return the fracture to its place;
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then it should be filled with cotton, and leave it this way for several days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the bone of the wrist of a man or a woman is broken, restore it as we have said for the bone of the hip;
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	and these fractures are not hidden to those who apply their study and practice to them, and understand my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	For the fractures indicate in various ways the right path of restoration:
enten le donques.	understand it then.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	In the case of a broken penis, take a goose's throat and insert the penis into it;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	then wrap cloths around it, and leave it for three days or so, and it will be healed quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, that he be bled now, so that the bleedings we have mentioned testify to this.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, then staunch it with vitriol, if you have nothing else, then continue to restore the broken area in that same hour, or on that day, if no warm abscesses come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if warm abscesses come, then delay the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscesses are calmed, and do not touch it on the third day or the fourth, for you would cause harmful accidents.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible on the open chest, then you must set it lightly with your hands, with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if the extension is not suitable for you to hold equally in your hands, then reset it with this instrument which is made of iron, which has seven or eight inches in length, and the width is according to the size of the wound;
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and for this reason it is necessary for the physician to apply three or four, according to what he needs in each case of fracture;
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and let it be round and a bit thick, so that it does not bend when compressed on the limb during your work, and let it be sharp at the front, and thick from the middle to the front, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And it is called "pallet," which is why the curved head should be placed on the exposed bone;
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	and push it in once, until it returns, and let them be equal to each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is fine and the instruments cannot properly grasp the bone, then you must chop off the head of the bone until the instruments have power over it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	and if you cannot bring back the bone, as we have said, then cut it with an appropriate instrument, whether an incisor or saw, to your ability;
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	then scrape away what remains in the bone of roughness and small shards.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is put back and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	so do so until it is in its place, then moisten the bandage with black styptic wine, and clean if necessary.
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not put on the wound plaster or anything else that contains oil, lest it cause putrefaction and corruption;
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	then apply bandages when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cut the covering all around according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not constricted with the fracture;
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	and many times this has been done by foolish doctors, and they have caused death to the patient or sometimes corrosion;
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	and let the bindings be softer and looser than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	and if the wound is bad or large, and you fear that adverse accidents may come, as we have said, and you find pain in the area, then it is not appropriate to apply hot stones.
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	but wrap around, instead of hot stones, hard cloths, and bind them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one day or two the wound oozing at the incision, remove what you have put on of pure wine, and apply a healing salve to wounds, such as the tetrafarmacon salve and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you must loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and in the evening, until it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And it is necessary that the limb be positioned in such a way that the oozing flows down lightly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if many days pass and it cannot heal but continues to ooze, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which you must probe the wound with a tent, and remove all these loose pieces that cause the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the place, or another kind of corruption, then you must cure it, according to what he says in his chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, such as the bone of the thigh or the shoulder, and other similar large limbs, do not treat it, for often death results, but leave it until it putrefies;
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	perchance it will fall off by itself after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound if you can;
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	and if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of burns that come upon the joint
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	We often come across the health of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a gruesome thing to see the shape of the limb;
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	and perhaps the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Be careful then if the wound is fresh:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	administer astringent medicines to it, such as aloes, frankincense, and myrrh, and sarcocolle, acacia, and similar others, so that you take any of these things, or all together, and mix them with astringent wine or with egg white or with oil;
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and places them on the head in bundles, and binds them tightly, and does not loosen them for many days;
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	and then dislocates it, and begins another one, until the knots are removed;
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	or you extract on a well-made piece of flesh;
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	for the property of the flesh is that it removes all swellings above the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if the knot has already hardened like stone and needs to be removed, then cut on it, and remove the apparent excess;
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	or you shave it with a razor until it is removed, and treat it until it heals.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the limb which is weak after the healing
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the bone fracture is restored, and the limb remains weak and delicate afterwards, it happens for many reasons:
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	for one of the reasons is that it was bound too tightly, and was not bound as it should have been;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	or because there were too many bindings, and the nourishment could not reach the limb;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	or due to an abundance of bleeding;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	or because of excessive movements, not at the right time;
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	or because he has little blood in his body, thus is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the treatment is that you make the patient eat, and make the body soft, so that the blood be multiplied in him;
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and the administrator gives a bath, and gives joy and relaxation;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	then apply pitch on the limb, so that the pitch attracts the great nourishment, and often water it with warm water, until the nourishment flows to the limb;
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and it returns to its natural form.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	of the limb twisted after the health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone is visible, and the form of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function:
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	Do not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb entirely anew, and many foolish doctors have done this in our land;
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and this work is blamed, and great evils come from it, and perhaps death;
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	nevertheless, if the nodules and tortures are fresh, they should be soaked in hot water, or herbs that soften should be boiled, such as mallow leaves, and roots, and mallows, and similar things;
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	and make a softening poultice, as dyakelon does well, and take the mallow mucilage, and mix it with chicken fat or sesamum oil, and apply a poultice on top;
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	Where you take fat figs, and grind them with chicken dung, and similar medicines that reduce the swelling.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the nodule is removed by rubbing continuously and for a long time with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And let the limb be moved every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the tortuosity is awakened and hardened, like stone, and it is necessary to remove it with iron, then it must be cut until the bone, with a subtle light incision;
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and apply care and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, he must now bring it back without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	For if one delays, the wound swells, and perhaps it is reset with pins in its place;
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	therefore, it is not right to move it at the hour when it is swollen:
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	many times brings spasm and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	however, when this happens, make the patient sweat, then leave it until all the abscesses have calmed;
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	then bathe the limb with warm water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each limb as necessary so that it returns to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters of the dislocations from the head to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	It often happens that the jawbones are dislocated there, and the dislocation of both is according to two manners:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	or they are slightly displaced from their places, and somewhat softened;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	or they are completely dislocated, and hang downward, causing saliva to flow from the mouth which he cannot hold, nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it returns by itself through various positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is whole and complete, then you must reset it quickly, and do not delay at all;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	and in such a manner that the servant holds the head of the patient, and the doctor puts his thumb into the root of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is in two parts;
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and the other fingers of the hands should be apart, to make equal;
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and instruct the patient to soften his jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the physician puts it equally, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if the resetting is difficult, especially if both jaws are together, then wash them with warm water and oil until you reset them gently;
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	do not hesitate to return it, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are drawn evenly, and the mouth of the patient closes well without softening, then put on cloths moistened in an ointment made of rose oil and wax, then lightly bind it with soft bandages;
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the patient sleep on his back, with his shoulders placed between two cushions, so that he does not move it to the right or left, nor exert himself to heal, but take light food until the pains are removed, and the jaws are healed;
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then let him eat what he wants lightly, and do not strain to open the mouth for eating and drinking until the jaw is well healed and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be perfectly reset within an hour and are not returned to their places, then fevers and customary sores ensue, and perhaps diarrhea occurs, and perhaps vomiting of bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see this, then know that it is destruction;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and many times the one to whom it happens dies within nine days.
de la forcelle	of the forceps
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot dislocate from the side within the continuity of the breast and the swelling, and it is sometimes dislocated outward, and this is well felt.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the restoration is such that the patient lies alone on his back, and extends his arms;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then press the area firmly with your palm, and it will return;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then apply the plaster and bind it, and constrain it;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	and the joint that is towards the side cannot dislocate;
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	unless it does, and if it dislocates at any time, reset it to its place, as we have said;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	then put on the poultice and bind it, and tighten it, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed;
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and in the same way is returned the shoulder of the back when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	Know that the shoulder is not dislocated except according to three ways:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	one of which is that it dislocates to the side of the armpit below;
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	and the second is to the side of the breast;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	and occasionally it dislocates to the upper part, and this happens rarely;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	and does not dislocate behind towards the shoulder, and does not dislocate inward towards the nerves;
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	and often dislocates downward towards the socket, especially in those who have little flesh, for it happens quickly and suddenly;
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	in those who have enough flesh, it hardly dislocates, and hardly returns.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And it sometimes happens to some men that there is a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	It is therefore necessary that you test it until you are certain;
et adonques encomence la cure.	and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And the dislocation is recognized when it moves downward towards the socket, and there is a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear distinction between them;
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	and you will find at the head of the shoulder a hollow, and beneath the blade when touching the head of the shoulder, just as if it were a bone;
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move it in any way;
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and similarly, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you will find it clearly upon touching;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this type of dislocation is not difficult to reset when it is new, or if the patient is young.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the method is that the assistant lifts the patient's hand up, then places his thumbs beneath the blade, and raises the joint forcefully upwards to its place;
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	and the minister lifts the hand, and extends it upwards, then places it below;
si venra hastanment.	it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	And if it does not come as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water;
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and the administrator uses a strongly soothing and tempering agent, such as a decoction of alum and fenugreek and melilot in water, and it should be administered;
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then the patient should be placed on their back, and place under the board a cushion of wool equal, not too soft nor too hard, then the physician places his heel on the cushion, and lifts the shoulder joint forcefully, and pulls the patient's arm;
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and another minister holds the head of the patient so it does not move down;
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	that shoulder returns completely now, and if you wish to reset it in this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and it is that you have a person present who is taller than the patient;
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and be straight against the side, and place his shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and lift the armpit up so that the patient hangs in the air;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	and another minister pulls the hand of the patient down towards the abdomen.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, then he may with him some heavy thing, and the dislocation returns now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And it is reset in another manner:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	and it is such that one sticks the long stick into the ground, from which the shoulder should be as strong as a pistol, and neither too thick nor too thin;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	then it should be placed under the patient, but that there be cloths above, and the patient be lying along the long of the stick;
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then his hand should be stretched out below on the other side firmly, and the joint will return to its place quickly;
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	and if it does not wish to return despite all these things that we have said, then do this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	take the stick of two arms in length and four hands in width, which has the head strong enough to move easily under the axilla, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	then tie over the head of the wooden post with soft cloth so that the wood does not injure the patient, then place it under the arm of the patient;
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	and extend his arm over the long post, and tie the shoulder to the post, and the arm to the wrist, then place the arm on a step of a wide ladder, and let the hand hang down, and let the body hang from the other side:
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	the joint is now restored.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, in whatever manner that may be, you must put under the armpit a sphere of equal wool, then apply a plaster mixed with mill powder, along with incense and egg yolk, over the entire shoulder and around it, then strain under the armpit appropriately, and turn the bandage over the plaster, and bind the hand to its neck, and let the remaining hand stay thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And it is necessary that he eat little, until the limb is strengthened, for it will heal faster;
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then eat more after five or seven days, and move it;
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	and if it is sealed and not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is displaced by moisture that has come in, or for any other reason, then you must apply cauterizations at three points, as it is set out in the chapter on cauterizations.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	and if you do all this, and it loosens after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and he cannot lift his arm up, then know that the nerves at the top of the shoulder are cut or stretched or weakened;
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation that is towards the breast or behind is done by pushing and stretching of hands, and it is administered in another place;
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing comes stiffness in the limb and slowness in movement, then the patient should take baths multiple times until that stiffness is alleviated and returns to its original nature.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the rib
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated bit by bit, and bit by bit returns;
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	and it has been dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not put back, for one sees it well and feels it well;
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	and dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick limb with the healthy one, then you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	For the joint is locked, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch his shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And you must reset it before hot abscesses come, for if hot abscesses were to come, it would be difficult to reset;
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	and perchance it cannot be entirely reset, especially when it is at the back;
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	it is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and perchance death may come from it.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And the restoration is such when it can be brought back, that you extend his hand with your two hands;
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And his arms should be spread out, and the hands of the healer according to the cut around, above and below, and push the joint at its ends together, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and trust in the root of the palm the thumb which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it does not want to return to its place, then administer strong extension;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and it is that two assistants extend the arm, and two assistants hold it so that it does not move during the extension;
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	then turn the arm on each side, after you have wrapped a long and wide doubled cloth;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the doctor joins the joint with his hand, he anoints it with some oil to soften the joint, then forcefully pushes the joint back, until it returns;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, he puts on a dry plaster with egg white, then tightly binds it, and hangs the arm around the patient’s neck, and leaves it for some days, then unties it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	and if the joint is firm in its place, then untie the binding, and leave it;
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	and if you see that the joint does not bind well, then repeat the plaster and the binding, and leave it this way for some days, until it is firmly set;
puis le deslie.	then untie it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	and if he feels stiffness after the joint is reset, and it moves, then bathe and rub it well, and press until it is relieved;
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	where you place on the joint a fat sheep’s salve, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and have him enter the bath;
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	and when he sweats, rub the joint gently, then put the salve back on, and then enter the bath;
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this two or three times until he is healed;
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	and if you wish, put on cow manure mixed with butter, warmed up and applied on;
si revenra a sa disposition.	then it will return to its proper position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The joint of the hand dislocates, and its return is light, more than the other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	Nevertheless, it must be returned to its place quickly, in the same hour that it is dislocated, lest the area become swollen or a hot abscess form.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the resetting is such that you place the diseased hand on a table, and the assistant stretches out the hand, and the doctor places his hand equally, so that he puts his palm on the surface of the joint, and pushes until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	Nevertheless, you must check if it is properly in place;
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	then place the patient's back of his hand on a table during extension and retraction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, then have the patient place the back of his hand upon the table, and the doctor places his hand upon that part of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns now, it is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, then apply warm poultices to soothe the abscesses and leave it this way without restarting.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot place it back in position after some days, then the joint remains twisted;
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and it does not harm the patient's strength as long as the hand is weakened and cannot grasp anything at all:
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	then you know that the nerves are cut, or the arteries;
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	so there is no other engine stronger than to constrict by cautery near the case, and perhaps there is nothing else that works.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, then put on the plaster that we have mentioned, then bind it and leave it for five days, then unbind it and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is any crack, then soften it with hot water, and rub it until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated on each side, sometimes on the back of the palm or on the front;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	then extend the finger, and push the dislocation into your palms until it returns, then hold the tip of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is separated;
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	and leave it for two days, and then straighten it on the third day;
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	and at night bind it as we have said, and unbind it during the day, and make it move, and bind it again at night;
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this often, until it is tight, and do the same if it dislocates at the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it is healed;
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and do the same when it dislocates from another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	Of the dislocation of the vertebrae of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the vertebrae of the back or neck are dislocated, or there are several dislocations, there is no treatment, for death quickly follows the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the signs are that the excretions jump out without will, and cannot be held back, and often some limb is weakened, or both thighs or both arms or one.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And often the shadow changes to four parts;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	that which changes at the back is called "gilbositez":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	The treatment is that you reward if the lameness has come from childhood:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	there shall be no treatment or healing at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And for that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient methods of treatment speak greatly in grand words, but they do not have much benefit at all;
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the lameness which comes to the front foot, there is no remedy nor health;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and similarly that which comes directly to both sides, and one cannot cure except properly the one that comes to the back, as I say;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the patient be stretched out on his face in an equal place, and have some padding beneath him, so he does not hurt himself;
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then stick one end in the ground firmly at the head and the other at the feet, and tie one strap underneath the armpits of the patient, and the other at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	and two assistants hold the straps, one at the head and the other at the feet, between the two stakes;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and they should be well secured, the stakes as we have said, and the doctor places his palms on the dislocation firmly, until it returns to its place.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return by this cure, take a board of three arms long, and place it under the wall, and let the patient be on their side, and put the end of the board under the wall, then place the middle of the board on the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and let the physician put his feet on the other end of the board, and press firmly until it returns to its place;
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and if you wish, do it with a wrench that turns by hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And you should drive in two pegs at the head of the patient's body one arm's length apart, and two others towards the feet, and there should be between each peg, above and below, a palm's space in length;
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	and have in each stick a hole, where the drill turns, and let the sticks be firmly in the ground so that they do not move;
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and between each two sticks have one rotating stick, on which the ropes turn, and in two rotations have two small sticks of one palm long, to rotate the drill;
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then tie the rope that is among the boards to the drill towards the head, and the other rope towards the feet to the other drill, and each of the assistants turns his drill along the whole rope, and the master places the point evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, then place a drying poultice with an abundance of egg, and then the wads, and then the stake of a tablet three inches long, which should touch the site of the swelling and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a rope as we have said, and let the patient use subtle nourishment until they are healed;
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	and if any thing comes at the end of health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the stone that we have mentioned before;
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	and sometimes a piece of linen is administered, and sometimes the appearance comes in the last vertebra of the back, and one thinks it is a dislocation;
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	and it is the bone that protrudes, for which one should not be presumptuous:
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	perchance it might bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	Know that in the joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder only dislocations occur, and they do not happen as they do in other joints;
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	and the hip joint is dislocated according to four parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	inside and outside, and in front and behind;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	and more inside than elsewhere, and slightly dislocated in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of its internal dislocation is that when one joins the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the sick knee appears more open than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend their knee to the ground;
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and the area that is nearby is swollen with an abscess and hot because the head of the thigh bone comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of those to whom it comes to decay, is that these accidents are contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	and the signs of that which happens in front is that he extends his leg well according to the alignment;
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	However, the knee does not bend without pain, and if one wants to make it go forward, it cannot move ahead, and it retains its urine, and the ankle swells, and when it goes, it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the sign of those to whom it happens behind is that they cannot straighten their knee nor bend it, and that leg is more bent than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the hip joint is in a lower position under the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The remedies for this kind of dislocation are that you reward if the dislocation is old, and it remains according to its position, there is no treatment;
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	and it does not require any presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is one of the four types of dislocation, you must hurry to return the joint, stretch it inside and outside, and move it right and left;
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	per chance it will return, and does not need another treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare the instrument strongly, and stretch the leg firmly with two hands, or with one binding above the knee;
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	and another minister extends his hand above in such a way that he places his hands beneath the bones, then tightly binds a strong bandage on the thigh;
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another holds the end of the bandage;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and they stretch up and down all at once, until the patient is lifted off the ground at once, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to the four types, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If not, then one must pay attention to its appearance.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When the dislocation is on the outer side, then you should lay the patient on his healthy side, then place the bandage at the root of the thigh, and the spot that is below the angle, then extend the bandage up towards the angle, and towards the kneecap;
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	then have another assistant take his arms, and embrace the thick part of the diseased thigh, and stretch it outwards strongly:
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	it will return to its place now;
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and this manner of dislocation is lighter than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot bind it in this manner that we have said, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong bond above the two heels, and above the two knees, and let the affected leg be stretched out twice as long as the other;
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	then let it be hung on top of a post, and let it be two arms' length off the ground;
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	then command the minister to grasp the head of the thigh, and let another minister hang with the patient, who firmly grasps the thigh, for the joint now returns quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is severe, the patient lies down, as we have said in the case of one who has rheumatism, and bind the bandage tightly on the affected leg properly, and on the weight also;
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	then put two brands, one at the head and the other at the feet, then place one brand between the thighs of the patient in the form;
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and have placed damp cloths around so that it does not hurt the patient, then extend each minister towards him, and the physician puts equal with his hand the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	If it returns, it is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	If not, put it on the table, and press it as we have said in gilbositeit, and lay the patient on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the affected leg quickly, and according to what I have said;
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	and the physician places his palm on the affected angle, then presses with the other hand, and stretches it down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And if the dislocation is behind, it is not necessary to extend the patient downward, nor lift up onto the ground, but it should be as if the hip were dislocated behind, just as we have said about lying on the two hips;
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and let it be on his face, and the bandage extended as we have said before, and one must press on the joint at the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	and it will be right when the patient stretches his legs, and they will be equal;
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	then align the thighs, apply the plaster, and strap with a bandage so that the hip does not move;
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	and let him rest for three or four days, then loosen it, and apply the plaster again;
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	and if you see that they are equal, then strap them as before, and leave it for three days;
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	then he unties it, and makes it move gently, until the limb is strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The knee is dislocated in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	that is to say, inward and outward, and backward;
et ne desalue point devant.	and it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the sign of this is that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not straighten at the thigh, know that it is dislocated;
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back against his face, and put his foot on your feet;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	then take his knee in your palms, and pull between your fingers, then bend the two sides of the knee properly;
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	and another minister extends his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he holds his leg lightly to his thigh;
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	and apply the plaster on it, and bind the leg to the thigh tightly, and keep them tied together for three or four days, then untie it;
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and the patient does not strain to walk until the limb is strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not fully healed, apply strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is mended.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heel is sometimes displaced, and sometimes fully dislocated, both internally and externally.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	and the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and you should examine where it has dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The movement is light, and it must be extended lightly by hand when it is merely awakened.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is entirely dislocated, then you must make the patient sit straight, and have the assistant hold the leg by the ankle above the foot;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with the left two times, then stretch it upwards, and gently push the foot upwards;
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	and do this two times, as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot;
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	if it returns, that is good;
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	if not, then repeat the procedure, for it will return;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return thus, make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and fix a peg firmly in the ground between his thighs, and wrap cloths around so that it does not hurt the patient;
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then have one minister hold the thigh, and another minister extend the foot with his hands or at the joint that is tied above the ankle;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then have each minister extend equally, and the peg should be between the patient's thighs to hold the patient when they are being stretched;
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	then let the physician place his hands equally on the dislocation, and another minister hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is at the right point, put the plaster and bandages on, bind tightly, and tie the foot to the leg, and watch the nerves that are above the heel behind, so that the binding is not too tight;
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	then leave it for two days or three, and if the binding softens, then bind tightly again;
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	then untie it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient to walk for four days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if he walks before that time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if hot abscesses come, you must soothe them, as we have said elsewhere, until they are healed.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When both are dislocated, they must be extended well without effort, and this is an easy thing to do.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any joint of the foot's back, then you must make the patient sit on a flat place or on a table straight, and put your foot on what appears of these joints, then press with your foot firmly until it returns;
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	and when it is leveled and nothing appears, then put under the sole of the foot a board at two shillings, then bind it properly, and leave it for three days, then untie it;
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and make it rest until it is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one wants to restore it, many times it happens that the patient dies:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	do not be presumptuous in the care, if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and cautious, not bold;
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and begin with things that soothe the hot abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope of health;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope there, reset now the limb to its place, unless the abscess begins to heat up;
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is in place, administer soothing things for a hot abscess, and treat the wound as appropriate with drying ointments;
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if with the dislocation there is a fracture and small bones are displaced, remove them, and do what we have said in simple diseases;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	and beware of entering the way of fear, according to what I have said, for it is worth moving according to your Creator, and for the wisdom of your arm and your body.
