Oh children, know that I have given you this book as a gift, the last of the art of medicine, for its completion serves your health, and through its explanations, and through its declarations, it is clear to me how I have completed that which I promised in this treatise. This work is part of my surgical practice.
For the operation on a human being is relegated to our region and in our time, almost entirely private, where its science endures great risk, and its traces are left behind; it would not have survived without some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which corrected many errors and misunderstandings about it. The interpretations of these were often closed off and the effort required to understand them was extended.
And it seems to me that I should revive the order of this treatise according to the way of exposition, declaration, and abbreviation; and for bringing it to conform with the forms of the tools of cauterization and other work instruments, as well as for adding the declaration, and preparing it, which cause is necessary.
The reason why no skilled artisan exists in their own hand in this our time is that the art of medicine is long and requires being exercised in front of knowledge in the science of anatomy, as Guali knew about the youth of body parts and their forms, as well as their connection and separation; he had knowledge of bones, nerves, and muscles, including their number and structure. He was aware of pulsatile veins and quiet ones, and the sites for their discharge.
And that's why Hippocrates said in his book, mostly in the art of the hand, that skill is everything.
May we have already mentioned this in the introduction of this book; whoever does not know what we have said about anatomy cannot avoid falling into error, which will lead to the death of people. I have seen too many cases like this, where some are formed in this science and abandon their own field of study and experiments.
And I have seen a surgeon skilled and experienced who has caused an erysipelas to occur on the neck of a woman, and by incising some neck arteries that there was a large hemorrhage resulting in her death during one of his operations.
And I have seen another surgeon who was about to remove a hernia from an old man whose condition had deteriorated, the hernia being large. It moved towards him and removed that hernia with a piece of the bladder. As a result, that man died on the third day.
And I have already attempted to remove that, and I saw that due to the size of the hernia and the position of the patient under him, he would die.
And I have seen another surgeon who was taking pay from the Duke of our land for surgery, and operated on a black captain who had been hit by his horse; he took advantage of the surgeon's ignorance to remove the fracture, covering the wound with bandages and splints made of strong material, and did not allow air into the wound.
And then he would slip according to his desires, and afterward he would dress the wound, and then allowed it to heal over several days as commanded by our prescriptions; this also happens when the skin and chest are erysipelas infected, leading to disaster.
And I have attempted this for him, and helped to slip out the obstruction, achieving tranquility and alleviation of his pains.
However, the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, so I couldn't restrain it, and it continued to spread the corruption within the body as the patient's condition deteriorated.
And I have seen another surgeon who drilled an abscess and was ulcerated several days later, during which his illness increased in the lord's presence.
This is the reason why the wet nurse must be pure of melancholy humor; otherwise, it would affect him with all its strength, but rather that there is a member that suffers from everything being affected by it.
And for that reason, children, it is necessary for you to have the operation on a person divided into two parts: one associated with health and in work where danger is present in major circumstances.
And I have already set out this in all parts of this book where there is operation involving error and fear; it is necessary for you to keep that in mind so that the pages do not accuse you and mislead you.
And so take your weapons in the service of God and protection, and your patients with happiness and firmness.
And use the best way with God's grace to obtain health and reasonable succession, and tolerate the terrible diseases that are difficult to heal, and keep your weapons away from what you fear, so that recovery is in your faith and in your name does not abandon you: for more remain at your glory, and also in this world and later on your sanctity.
Guali already said in some of his monochords: "Don't treat bad patients with bad medicine, for it is not the fault of doctors that they are named badly."
And I have completed this book according to three main points.
The division of the book begins, and first comes the first part. The first chapter ordered within the feet, in the forms of the tools and in the implements of the cautery, and what is necessary for the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, concerning drying and puncturing, as well as the use of blisters, plagues, extraction of arrows, and resemblance to those, all organized and detailed in the forms of the tools.
The third chapter, concerning restoration and dislocation, as well as the treatment of torsion and resemblance to those. The chapter is organized within foot ailments, detailing in the forms of the tools.
Let me tell you about the quality of those cauteries and their lumps, and in which phase it is prohibited to use a cautery.
So I say that the discourse on the quality of the cautery's lump and its lump is long and tedious, subtle in knowledge, and hidden in secrecy; already many wise people have spoken about it in detail, and they disagree among themselves, yet I am content with a small part of their discourses, fearing lengthiness.
And I say that the cautery confirms to any phase universally made of matter or sex matter, except for two phases; those are phases made of sex matter.
In the phase of dryness and heat, there is matter; some argue that the cautery should be applied to such conditions, while others say the opposite. They believe it's not convenient for an illness characterized by its nature and dryness, as fire has these qualities. It's inconvenient for a caudal and dry ailment when treated with something hot and dry which might heal it instead of being detrimental.
And the one who disagrees with this argues that in all dry and hot ailments that occur within human bodies, when you compare the body of a person to the phase of fire, you find that the human body is cold.
And I say according to the discourse of this, which I have experimented with for several times and discovered.
However, I do not delve into what has already been extensively discussed in the chapter on cautery and known through later exercises. I understand the variety of human phases and the distribution of illnesses among their members, as well as the causes of those illnesses and the occurrences related to them, and the timing for those events.
In other phases, do not worry about this, especially with wet and humid illnesses; already all doctors have agreed on these, there is no disagreement. And they are not concerned with the use of cautery in wet conditions.
And know, children, that in the secret of healing with fire and the goodness of this matter, concerning cautery using medicine, it is because fire is simple; its action only reaches the part that is treated by cautery and does not extend to other parts unless there's a slight injury.
The action of medicine used for burning reaches those parts of the body where it was applied, and it significantly increases the difficulty in healing an illness in that body part, making recovery quite hard.
The fire, by its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do anything except excess. We have known this through experiments and long years of service studying the art, understanding the truth about their causes; thus I justify myself for the length of my discourse. If it were not that my freedom in writing this passage did not allow me to reveal this secret related to fire, as well as the quality of its operation within bodies and its expulsion, which would serve as a philosophical demonstration revealing itself in your minds, it would be enlightening for you.
And know, children, that they disagree on the time when it is convenient to apply cautery and wait for the best springtime period.
And I say that cautery is convenient at any time because the injury caused by time's passage is submerged in the heat of what was applied with the cautery, especially if it's for pain or necessary pains, strong ones and pimples which do not suffer from delay as they are feared compared to those that might cause malice, which is more significant than a small injury coming over time.
And this does not pass in your minds, or, children, they only consider what the common people and ordinary folk doctors think, that is, it's not necessary to apply cautery at all times when healing from an illness; thus there is a consequence with that.
And the reason is not as simple as they think; cautery is merely a form of medicine that alters phase and dries out the humidity which causes pain.
And indeed, unnecessary cautery over medicine due to the value and virtue of its operation and the greatness of its master.
And it's possible that the patient's illness could return at any time depending on the phase of their illness and the location of their ailment, its virtue, what is prepared within their body from accumulating superfluities, as well as what is ingested in foods related to those causes; unless the illness being treated with cautery is a subtle illness involving few superfluities and humidity. For instance, when dental cautery is done for pain, it's possible that this type of pain doesn't return within them anymore, though this happens in smaller cases.
A common medical term is that the cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this is a professional discourse, not one I understand in it, they say that using it does not constitute treatment nor another cause leading to cautery.
The cause is against this; and I understand that the cautery is the last resort of medicine not simply when administering the methods of treatment for some illnesses, and those medicines do not work, and at the end of the cause one applies cautery, and proceeds with that. And from here comes the view that the cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to my understanding, which agrees with common knowledge and many doctors.
And the ancients would say that a cautery made of gold is better than one made of iron, and they would not say this simply because of the equality in terms of value between gold and the inferiority of its substance.
And they say that the location for applying the cautery does not cause a burn, as this is not absolutely true; I have already experimented with this and found out that it doesn't do this unless in certain parts of the body, where a gold cautery is good and better than an iron one just like they would say. Yet however, when you apply the cautery using fire onto metal, you are not told to do this, as the heat depends on the quantity you want based on the size of the gold, and how it needs to be received in preparation; and if you adjust over the flame, the gold melts with the fire; and in case of burning in the fire, a few sheets are produced for the artisan to work upon that part.
And because of this, when applying the iron cautery, you should do so more gently and more precisely according to the principles of the operation.
And I have already organized this chapter concerning the cautery according to sections, and I have organized those of the section within the feet, because I will ask you for what you want from it.
The first section.
This application of cautery brings about the effect of humidity and coldness onto a specific part of the body where two causes are involved, causing swelling, inflammation, and traumatic flow, known as "corissa," from the head to other parts of the neck and ear fluid, along with various sleep issues, tooth pain, throat problems, and universally for all illnesses caused by coldness, whether they are paralytic, swollen, or resulting in stroke, and similar conditions.
The method of this cautery is like this, initially instruct the patient to undergo a medicine-based elimination of toxins from their head for three or four nights, according to what you require and the patient's health condition and routine.
And subsequently command the patient to clean their head with a razor and then make them lie down on a sloped bench, placing their hands under their back.
And place the palm of your hand next to the nose's edge between their ears. However, when you have determined the right location as advised by you, mark that spot with your finger and then apply an olive oil cautery of this form:
And then place it over the marked spot on your heated hand in such a way that as you descend, your hand is gradually constrained, and you rotate that.
And then lift your hand gently and look at the spot, and if you see some amount of skull being exposed already, like the quantity of fat that sticks out, in this case, lift your hand, and if it doesn't heat up with iron or another type when placed on it, especially if it's cold, then you will observe the condition I have told you about.
And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on that spot, and let that sit for three days.
And then place an unripe buttercote over it and let that sit until the layer of burnt skin is destroyed. And subsequently, cure the area with tetrarhompha cream until it heals.
And they have said that whenever the wound is opened like this, it's much better and quicker to heal compared to when it isn't, because it heals faster and rejuvenates more.
And they say that when the canal is burnt into the bone, and then letting the cautery remain until it adheres to some part of the bone's surface.
And then scrape off this burnt bone piece, and then let it heal.
And they say that when the cautery reaches the deepest point, it strengthens the bone inside until the bone breaks through, and this is how you perform this treatment: They estimate that from that place, vapor from the head escapes.
And let the wound remain open for a long time, and then it will be healed once it has been consolidated.
Nowadays I do not see these two kinds of head cauteries at all, but in some individuals according to fear; let this stand: it's better for health when done immediately, as the head is healed through the continuity of its own juices as we've witnessed in other body parts, and especially so when the head is made of fatty nature.
And the type of cautery first is more saving and better you must use it; and from that one, do that work until it is healed.
Second chapter.
On the head's cautery.
When chronic and long-lasting head pain occurs throughout the whole body, and this lasts in the patient for a long time, using remedies like herbs, spices, poultices, oils, combs, scissors, gauze, and bandages, especially if an earlier cautery has been used which didn't alleviate the effects of those causes; then consider that if the head is strong by nature; and doesn't undergo severe pain or fever, then this cautery uses another kind, letting the previous one use a little. And place that cautery on the top of their head, within which the pain is divided. Incise the pain and reveal its quantity from the opening of the mouth, which we have measured, and place that on a cautery in the part behind the head at the location which is called the vessel - and this is the location where suction is made. And warm your hand in ashes, and do not reveal the mouth, for when this is done, the patient experiences various intense pain different from the pain of all other head cauterizations.
And I shall say this about the cautery in its place, that when one uses a cautery to cauterize the heads and occiputs of the head is more subtle than the one used which cauterizes the middle of the head; and this is how it should be done.
Final chapter.
On the treatment for new migraines.
When the pain is concentrated in the head or occurs inside the skull, it should be treated with medicines that soothe headaches and then administer another cure which I have described in treatments for illnesses; if none of these methods work, then the cautery treatment for this would be done in two ways: either using an acute burning medicine as a cautery, or using iron.
A cautery made with a burning medicine is that you take half a clove of garlic, crush it and cut off the ends from both heads. And then prick the pain spot on the temple with a pointed needle inside where you make the incision, inside where the pain is hidden.
And then strengthen yourself by stopping any descent of congestion, let that flow through spaces of three hours; and gently remove the garlic, leave the wound for two or three days, and rest on your elbow with it submerged in water until the place becomes warm.
And then cure that with ointment once it has healed.
And if you see fit, do this with some burning medicines that I have written about in the detailed treatise on burning medicines.
A cautery made with iron follows this way: heat it up to use as a cautery, in the following manner:
And it is called a thorn lock, where the head of the patient resembles a thorn in which there is some curvature, and at the middle of the head is a small elevation.
And place your hand over the location of pain, and hold it back - so that you do not burn the skin which is under this - and slowly rotate the small iron piece with speed.
And if the amount of it that is burned by the sensitivity of the pain is as much as half of this, lift your hand in such a way that the artery which under this is not burned either, so that no blood flow occurs.
And then soak your elbow in salt water and place it over the area, let this rest for three days; and then rest with a damp cloth on the water, and then cure with ointment once it has healed.
And if you see fit, cauterize at the end of the bistoury (surgical knife) as per cautery instructions, and watch that you do not make an incision into the artery in this new migraine.
Final chapter.
On the treatment for old migraines.
When you treat migraines using what we have said about the cure previously, and what we have said in the divisions of illnesses, if this treatment is not sufficient for you, and times when the illness does not reach what was said of the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then consider that you should ignite the surgical knife so that it turns white, which signifies over the area of pain on a line of length where most of what was said belongs, or place this; and rest your hand for one time and strengthen that while you prick the skin and delve into the skull.
However, you must guard against the continuation of the jawbone, which is crushed by chewing, and that the tongue does not stick to it, and that the nerves that affect this do not cause cramps.
And if it is about the care and caution of blood flow from the artery that is cut, there is fear in this dissection, especially for those who do not understand what they are doing and lack experience; and leave the operation as planned.
And I shall return to recall the regulation of blood flow from an artery accident according to its manner, in this section of this work.
And if you see this illness that does not satisfy this cautery and sees the body of the head tolerable, cauterize it in the middle of the head as we have measured, and cure the wound until it heals.
And if you see, apply the cautery we mentioned for the tip of the artery where there is a cautery, with two needles. This is a better and more accurate cautery.
Capitol refers to the extremity or tip.
On the treatment of earache through cautery.
When pain in the ear is caused by friction and is cured due to lack of substances, and another treatment which I have mentioned in the division, if the pain is not alleviated, then apply fire cautery, and this is the type called punctum, whose form is as follows:
And place the point near the opening, and move it around the entire area of the ear like a wheel is being turned, or in any circuit if the pain occurs at any time. Continue with the ear cautery little by little until you find where the pain is and test it.
And if cautery of these points covers the entire ear and there is no relief, then carefully treat the areas inside where they are healing.
Capitol refers to the sixth part or section.
On the treatment of curvature through cautery.
Curvature that is treated and healed through cautery can only be with substances that come through phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid cautery for the substance that is due to dryness or muscle spasms of nerves.
When you treat that type of curvature with jellies, purgatives, and antispasmodics, and if your treatment does not work, then follow this procedure when you cauterize the patient: first, cauterize the opening of the ear, second, make a small cut on its skin edge, and third, cauterize the junction of two lips.
And pause your cautery at the opposite side of the diseased part, for relief is only found in the part that appears healthy.
And the method of cautery is that you apply it at the tip of the opening of the ear much higher than a little above the corn of the head, and on its skin edge another, whose length should be according to the length of that particular spot, and then pause your hand with the cautery until that quantity of the substance of the disease in the tendon is burned.
And this is how the cautery works, it's an art of surgery, the form of which is demonstrated in front of the table. However, it's somewhat subtle that if you add a little here and there; then when the needle goes into its place of excessive roughness, do so slightly.
And then treat the area with what's in front during the process until it heals.
Capitol refers to the seventh part or section.
On the treatment of old apoplexy through cautery.
When apoplexy is old and treated with what we've mentioned and if your medicine does not work and the patient doesn't have a fever, then apply cautery to it at four points: over all parts of their head; with the point and middle of the head as we said; and with cautery on the chest. The method of applying cautery is done according to what was mentioned above.
And once it has been treated over the mouth of the stomach; and more behind; then carefully treat with what you are using.
Capitol refers to the eighth part or section.
On the treatment of forgetfulness caused by phlegm.
And if you give them to the patient during meals, large jellies and pills that will help their digestion.
And then remove the cap over the entire head and pause on their chest with an ointment as described in the treatment of ointments.
And pause that for a few applications; this is the method of applying cautery. And do it according to that order of procedures which I have already mentioned.
And if for those things he is well; otherwise, then apply to him three cauteries in the rear part of his head, which should descend from the higher part of the head into the lower part near the neck. And pause between each application for the entirety of that, and then treat the cautery with what has been done.
And if you increase and the patient tolerates it, then apply cautery to the middle part; and if you find greater tolerance, then apply cautery over both parts of the head.
And treat that area until it heals; and apply the olive oil according to the method shown in front.
Capitol refers to the ninth part or section.
On the treatment of paralysis and the softening of the entire body through cautery.
And if you are in the process of softening the head with jellies and what we have mentioned; then remove the cap from the patient's head, and apply cautery to it at the middle of the head, and on all parts of the head, and on the rear part of their body, and do three cauterizations over their cervical vertebrae.
And if it is necessary in the disease of softening of the body for many patients and their tolerance is great and the disease is severe, then apply cautery to them at four cauterizations over both cervical vertebrae, subsequently applying the hand with cautery until that muscle mass has been burned from them, and raise your hand. And then treat what needs to be healed, and this one should have an olive cautery.
Capital X.
Regarding the treatment of epilepsy through cautery.
It is not the patient with epilepsy who is treated by cautery, but rather those cases of epilepsy that are due to phlegm.
And thus, when you start modifying the patient's brain at the beginning of their years and later in another treatment which we have described in the division when the patient is old and can tolerate the side effects of the medicines.
And if it is a child who cannot endure the medicines, then provide nourishment that strengthens and chews, modify the diet for these days, improving the digestion of food.
And then shave the patient's head, and then apply a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and apply another cautery on the back of the head, and over each bone on the head, he applies a cautery. And if the patient is strong and can tolerate it, then apply cauteries using those I have mentioned, having a paralytic and soothing effect on the spine in the neck region and the spine of the back.
And apply an olive cautery according to what has been described previously.
If the patient is a child, then use a subtle cautery according to this method.
Capital XI.
Regarding the treatment of melancholy through cautery.
When the causes of melancholy are dampness corrupted and phlegm thickened, then apply cautery with the cauteries that we have mentioned previously for paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excess leading to melancholy and the patient's body is wet, then have them drink that which clears the brain according to what has been described in the division previously.
And then shave the patient's head, and then make a reasonable concoction of wormwood over it on the circle, and place that in the middle of the head.
And let the patient rest for sixty days, and keep them under observation from every side.
And then apply an ointment; it is worthy of being rubbed with the grease from sheep's wool. And heat that over the fire for a warm preparation according to measure, which they should endure as it increases in them. And then place that on the middle of the patient's head within the circle, and let them rest until it cools.
And do this to the patient every day of the week once, under their other regime while they are being cured; or if you wish, apply cautery making petting points according to what is best for them, so that your hand remains with a prepared cautery: this is a type of cautery which moistens the brain equally.
And then let that cooked piece rest in oil or in lard.
Capital XII.
Regarding the treatment of descending water through cautery in the stomach.
When it is declared that the beginning of water has occurred in the stomach according to the symptoms I have described in the division, then begin and give the patient that which clears their head, and keep them away from all dampness.
And make that sugar dissolve in water over several days.
And then instruct the patient to shave their head, and apply cautery with a cautery on the middle of the head; and if it is the beginning of water in two stomachs, or from one side if it's the beginning of water in one stomach, then apply two cauterizations on each temple.
Let the cautery touch all veins and arteries that are left from the treatment; and let the cauterizations be in that length, around the temples.
And keep yourself from any bleeding when it is being treated; and if you see blood from them, stop for a moment with some medicine which is available to you.
And I will come with knowledge about that which is in the extraction of arteries and about avoiding those, and caution against bleeding.
And sometimes it must be treated on the neck between the two bones with two cauterizations placed one after the other.
Capital XIII.
Regarding the treatment of old tears.
When tears from the stomachs are ancient and due to veins and arteries located on the forehead area, and it is confirmed that this is an excess causing phlegm-like conditions, then apply cautery with a previously described cautery for the beginning of water affecting the stomachs, and apply a cautery in the middle of the head, two cauterizations on each temple, and two cauterizations on the neck between the two bones. And if you suffer from excess, then apply cautery across the entire length of the stomach on the outer edge of the eyebrow with small cauteries.
Capital XIV.
Regarding the treatment of nasal odor.
When you are treating that with what we have described in the division and it doesn't improve your treatment, then prepare and give three nights of garlic to the patient; and then shave the head of the patient, and apply a medium olive cautery. And then apply a rosemary cautery with two small cauterizations on each eyebrow, leaving just a little hair.
And be careful not to burn that area.
And make the point of the cautery, this is its method.
Chapter XV.
Regarding the cautery for the blanching and smoothing of the eyelids of rabbits.
When the eyelid of the rabbit is inflamed or due to disease or moisture, then apply a cautery over that eyelid with this lunar cautery; and this is how you do it:
And if you are doing it, apply the cautery over both eyebrows for a little bit with two cauteries across its entirety, and let them extend to the temples. And the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press your hand too much against the cautery, but according to how much of the eyelid's curved part becomes heated.
Chapter XVI.
Regarding the cautery for the eyelid of the rabbit when the skin has turned into parts inside and extends to the belly of the rabbit.
When the skin of the rabbit turns into parts inside such that it touches the belly, apply a cautery to those in two ways: either use an ordinary cautery or one with medicinal properties.
If you use a rabbit cautery with fire, command the patient to show their skin like those that are shaved, within which they should be extended and equalized; and if you hold onto that, then grasp the rabbit's skin with one hand so that it does not get burned until the hair grows out from under the skin.
Then when they are extended and equalized, then place the head of the patient in your own hand, and place over the eyelids of the rabbit with a sign indicating it like the figure of a fern leaf, and make the start of the sign close to the skin.
Then place a small amount of rabbit's albumen or pus from a boil on the belly.
And apply the heat of the cautery, which is how you do it for this.
And gradually apply the heat of the cautery over the sign which you've made, little by little in patches until it burns the surface of the skin like a fern leaf, entirely resembling that.
And as a sign of healing for the patient's work, you should see that the eyelid of the rabbit is now pulled back and its hair is raised above the needle's puncture.
And raise your hand and leave that for three days, then place over it a small amount of butter until the scab is fully formed. And treat that with ointment until it heals.
And if there is any cause that returns to their location and the eyelid becomes inflamed again, then do another round of cautery over that area just as you did initially.
And if the skin is still present on the eyelid, then apply a cautery until it returns to its natural place and becomes equalized so that the hair does not touch the belly.
And the cautery with medicinal properties is this: command the patient to show their skin until it is extended and equalized, then have it done in the shape of a fern leaf from a piece of cloth.
And take some well-known soap and a living onion root. .1., Mix that and let it cook until it doesn't cool down; then spread that over the cloth which was made in this shape like a fern leaf, place that on one or both rabbits; and place the rabbit's head in your own hand.
And place the described above over the medicine and press it a little bit but don't burn the patient with it, which burning sensation should be like that of fire in them.
And when you notice the burning sensation, then remove the medicine and place it in your designated hand; once that burning sensation stops, then rinse the medicine off on their belly with water; then consider if the eyelid has lifted as if it is washed of by fire or incision, which happens immediately afterwards; and if it doesn't return to that area of the medicine over the spot where the medicine was not applied and does not touch until your operation is fully equalized and the rabbit's hair is pulled back.
And place over it a small amount of butter or another substance until it heals, ensuring that the scab associated with itching is eradicated and then treat it with an ointment or something else until it has healed.
And for this to be necessary, you must keep vigilant care with your operation so that the medicine doesn't fall off in the rabbit's belly; if the eyelid becomes soft after some days and any cause of hair touching it, then apply your medicine over that area which is made soft by the eyelid, precisely as you did at first, and place the patient until they are healed.
This is how a fern leaf looks.
Know that humans' rabbits vary according to size and thickness, so your operation depends on this.
And let there be no concealment of the path to rectitude towards that which is studied in this art.
Chapter XVII.
Regarding the surgical treatment of a fistula that occurs in the tear duct of the eye.
When you treat a fistula, remember what we've discussed in the division of illnesses and do not proceed with your treatment. Instead, follow this method for cautery: instruct the patient to hold their head on your side, and place another servant's hand between your hands as if to support them without disturbing or agitating them under their head.
And then hold the point close in the white part of the eye or on the mucous membrane above the patient's tear duct.
And now heat up the cautery tool like this:
Which should be rounded, such as in the shape of a cane or a bird's quill feather, with one end where the cautery is made.
And if you can see, it should penetrate to the other end. And if desired, it should be removed in such a way as to avoid damage.
However, whoever is rounder tends better towards your task.
And if the fistula has opened, press it gently and help the patient obtain relief and dry out that area. And if it hasn't opened, then open it and remove the pus from the patient.
And then place on the patient's eye the heated cautery, and hold your hand near but not quite at the tear duct to the nasal passage, so that your hand doesn't disturb the patient or make them anxious. Then pause the cautery in the gray area of the eye and proceed with this task.
And if at the beginning of your cautery it enters the nostril, it's good; otherwise, then you should apply the cautery once or twice as needed and leave it like that for three days. Then place this point with a border on the eye area and insert some dried grease inside until it is healed.
And if it has passed ten days and is not healed, then place on the corrosive quick medicine inside that the nostril be exposed and shave according to what suits in its forehead.
And this is another method for cautery of a fistula which some earlier practitioners said: find the location of the fistula and perform it there, then pause above that fissure with a fine sliver, resembling its form. Place in that area an amount the size of one nail of melted lead; hold your hand over it with good pressure, making sure not to disturb the patient so that the melted lead does not enter their tear ducts; and when you pause on the patient's eye with heat like a point in a white part or water, let the lead melt at the site of the fistula and heal it through wonderful treatment.
And if the fistula is healed as we've discussed with cautery and treatment, it's good; otherwise, then it's necessary to administer nostril extraction and reduce the fistula to within the nasal passage according to where it naturally occurs.
Capitol XVIII.
Regarding the cautery of a cut under the foot.
Wounds often result in cuts on the lips, and more so on the lips of children.
And just as you treat those cuts following what we have discussed in the divisions and do not proceed with your treatment, then heat up the small knife's cautery according to this method that suits:
And let its cavity be according to the subtlety of the knife.
Then pause that initial point within those cuts where the cautery reaches up to the edge of the cuts.
And then treat it with a poultice so that it heals.
Capitol XIX.
Regarding the cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the tonsil area or on the palate or in the area of the teeth where pus occurs, you make a cut and then it breaks open, heals over time, and forms a fistula. When this happens, treat that instead of continuing treatment, so follow that method for using the cautery according to the amount received in the fistula, place that ignited point into the outlet of the fistula, hold your hand inside until the heat of the fire reaches its edge, do this once or twice afterward; then treat it as we have discussed regarding treatment until it heals.
And if the healing has been removed and it heals, it's good; otherwise, then it is necessary to uncover the place and preserve the bone according to what suits its capital.
Capitol XX.
Regarding tooth cautery and soothing of the gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and teeth are tender, if you treat those with medicines instead of proceeding, then place the patient's head on your side, heat up the cautery in such a way that it is inserted soon, pause the small part over each tooth, insert the heated cautery quickly, hold your hand near so that the heat from the fire reaches the edge of the tooth.
And then raise your hand, and proceed to apply the cautery several times according to your wish.
And then have the patient rinse their mouth with salty water and keep it there for an hour, after which they should spit it out, so that the tender tooth is hardened, the soft gums are strengthened, and the moisture in the mouth is dried.
Chapter XXI.
On the treatment of dental pain through cautery.
When dental pain is due to coldness or worms, or if the treatment does not respond to medicine, then apply cautery in two ways: either on the gum border, or directly with fire.
Cautery on the gum involves taking cow's gums and boiling them in iron pots. Next, take a small piece and cover it at the tip of the tool, then immerse that into hot water, holding it over the painful tooth until it gets cooled down.
And repeatedly apply this several times so that the heat of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you see this, soak wool or cloth in the gum above mentioned, hold that over the painful tooth, and place a burning iron on it until the heat reaches to the tip of the tooth cavity.
However, when applying cautery with fire, you must wait for the steam of herbs or iron to occur and there should be some heat in the patient's body that does not reach into the mouth.
And then apply the cautery in the form it will take, hold it over the tooth and place your hand until the cautery cools down; do this several times so that the pain decreases or on that day or the other.
And let the patient be filled with that cautery that fills their mouth with good gum and hold it for an hour, then they should gargle; this is the way of applying cautery.
And apply cautery wherever you see the extremity according to what is possible for you.
This is how the applicator works:
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of protruding hernias through cautery.
When hernias are due to phlegm and body fluids that do not respond to digestion through medicine, and you see slight improvement in their digestion, then apply the cautery following this method: having two normal extremities each for which the smoke of applying the cautery should be done on the other extremity. Hold the ignited tool over the pus cavity once, and another if needed until it reaches into the tip of the cavity.
And if the pus cavity is small, then hold the cautery according to the amount of pus. Then rest it over the area for three days and place a cloth soaked in grease on the iron while it's still hot until what the fire has burnt heals.
And then cure that with ointments, swabs, and cloths until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On the treatment of throat inflammation and constriction through cautery.
When humidity enters the pulmonary channel, especially when it is due to cold constitution, then ensure that the patient starts with medicine for evacuation, and apply cautery to that part of the throat where there is a compression.
And make sure not to let the cautery reach the larynx, nor burn too much of its neck but only a little.
Apply cautery on another part, targeting the junction between the neck and the lower back area of the patient. And apply the cautery to his collar bone in the same manner as previously described.
And continue treating it with what was previously done until it heals.
Chapter XXIV.
On the treatment of lung disease and cough through cautery.
When lung cough and lung disease are due to humidity, and the patient does not have fever or typhus but is old lung disease, then apply cautery on two parts over the trachea at the compressed places of the throat and chest; and for another application in the middle part of the chest between two nipples; and for the collar bone cautery as was described previously.
And if you want, make your cautery puncture on the points of the cauteries that are called puncture, as described in the description of ear pain treatment.
And make points inside the cuts; and continue treating it with what was previously applied until it heals.
And after each cautery session, you have three more sessions for that treatment. For one session, you can perform three cauteries according to this method:
Chapter XXV.
On the treatment of tickling that is at the head of the spine.
When the head of the spine is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and does not return in its usual time, you should first reduce the dislocation while letting the patient return, then make them move slightly so that it gets back again as we have demonstrated. Then ensure that the patient turns their head onto their two hands or onto their sides; and raise the neck which is at the part inside of tickling to the parts above your left hand fingers, if the joint is dislocated inside.
And then apply the cautery with two heads; this is how you do it:
And then apply a cautery between that which goes into the other side; and the image of the cautery treatment will come this way from four points of the cautery.
And certain treatments are adjusted according to this count, and these are the cautery methods. VIII.
And place on the cautery with salt points, and then fasten the patient in bed, and let the limb not be burned for some time until it is comfortable.
And if the dislocation is above and the cause is from the heat, do this, then apply a cautery on the muscle over the cauterizing point or with moisture points. Where the joint is confirmed and the dampness is eliminated and the patient is cured.
Chapter XXVI.
On cautery for the stomach.
When cold and moisture enter the stomach causing an excess of its composition, and you multiply these wetnesses for him, and if you continue the methods of treatment without confirming, then let it be that the patient is over his two knees bent, and extends his hands and things. And apply a cautery on that with three cauterizations: in one, let him place his feet by the size of a hand's worth of the cautery, and at two cauterizations leave on both sides of the area for the triangular image of a triangular cautery to come about; and extend between those who are not adjusted so they perform reduction.
And if the depth of the cautery is the quantity of the two thirds of the thickness of the intestines.
And if you want, apply a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; this is a cautery according to the circular shape as shown:
And have the stomach cautery made where that which is scared by this cautery is: and you place points on the stomach according to your desire with heat, and then apply the cautery on those points; and treat that with a cure that comes before until it heals.
Chapter XXVII.
On cautery for the rectum fissure.
When there is pain in the rectum due to coldness or moisture or excess wind causing it to exceed its normal composition, and if the patient is treated with what we have said without confirming, then let it be that the patient is bent over their hips, and you apply three cauterizations according to this form; and this half of the quantity on either side of the rectum between the inguinal creases, until lying on one's back.
And let the space between each cautery be according to the size of a finger; and have the cauterizations according to the length of the body straight.
And do not confuse your understanding with the movement of the cautery.
And if the quantity of water that is applied equals half of the thickness of the intestines, and it should not be adjusted too much; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them lie down, which already extends their things, and raise their arms.
And if it is possible for you to apply these cauterizations with a surgical knife, when you have subtlety and caution in the art.
And remember not to overdo the cautery process, ensure that the heat is applied to all of the intestines so it reaches throughout the body and penetrates into the organs where the intestines are delicate; know this.
Chapter XXVIII.
On puncturing an abscess in the rectum with a cautery.
When there is irritation or an abscess in the rectum and you want to know if that abscess is within the flesh of the rectum or on its covering, then if it's within the flesh of the rectum, the patient becomes weakened and pain intensifies.
And if it's on the covering of the rectum, with the pain is greatly intensified and often exhausts doctors in treating him.
So let the patient lie on their back; and then find the location of the abscess with your hand; and then heat up the cautery which is similar to a reed, as its shape was shown in the previous page. And apply the cautery there and within until all of the intestines are heated up, until it reaches the anus, until one feels warmth.
And then treat that with cure for the other abscesses until he is healed.
And do not use this way of cautery but only that which is prolonged in the study of medical art and has known many maladies with it; rather, try some treatments on this operation, however follow my advice here and it will be better.
Chapter XXIX.
On cautery for boils.
The old cautery methods for boils involved scratching according to this manner of doing it, and what you should take from the wisdom of Aristotle's zoology is a long sharp tooth that is found there, with length equal to a finger.
And then immerse that in oil and heat it over a fire, and apply a cautery at the site which is between the continuation of the scapula towards the spine; and with two cauterizations place them diagonally, one slightly sloping downwards to where the beard leaves off, and another two cauterizations on this line sloping down from the fifth rib to the ilium, sloping one slightly backwards; and make another cautery in the middle of the leg; then apply a cautery over the stomach, and three cauterizations at the sites sloping backwards; and place another cautery in that site which is between the two shoulders, and two cauterizations on both sides of the leg, let the cautery be placed between the two shoulders.
And don't remove your hand from under the cautery, rather show it in action on the patient's body.
And it has been said by some ancient ones that these are the actions of men who use a type of iron cauterization resembling hot fire and ashes, which they place in that area between the ribs where we reach towards that lump inside, as we have described for the lump in the throat.
When performing this puncture with a cautery, there is no need for fear; as you have already experienced it recently when dealing with the fistula where healing does not occur.
Chapter XXX.
On the treatment of removing pus through cautery.
When you treat the pus disease as we have instructed for treatment in division and do not apply your own cure, then when applying cautery to it, there are three ways, all of which are directional. Of these, one is that you make three or four lines of cauterization according to the length of the pus like the figure of the cauterizations in the throat, the figure of which has preceded.
And between each cauterization there should be the width of a finger or a little less, and the method of applying the cautery is the same way we described for the cautery in the throat.
And do not pull your hand away from under the cautery; and have the patient lie on their back.
And there is another way to apply the cautery, that is, you should ignite the cautery with two streams of liquid, which we have described in the chapter about muscle dislocation, and raise the body part where the pus is located so that it can drain out from the left side of the patient.
And make your elevation according to which you raise the body part according to the length of the body, so that the cauterizations are made according to the width of the body.
And then insert both streams, ignite them, in that space where they reach the spine from the other side.
And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauterizations are done.
And if you see fit, apply three streams with a single cautery.
And then treat the pus that has remained to drain for too many days, as it may require more careful attention than other previous causes in treatment.
Chapter XXI.
On the treatment of dropsy.
Cauterization should not be performed throughout the body in dropsy, but only in its proper place.
When you treat dropsy using the methods of treatment we have described in division and do not apply your own cure, then you should perform four cauterizations around the umbilicus and one on the stomach, and another on the throat, and another on pus. And place two cauterizations between the vertebrae of each side, and one on the right side of the leg, and make another cauterization on the stomach. And the depth of the cauterization should be proportionate to the thickness of the spine.
And then let the cauterizations open sufficiently so that pus can drain for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient for treatment immediately next to the cauterization, as it allows two interpretations and should be accompanied by therapeutic assistance.
The shape of the cauterization on which it is applied to the abdomen should be in the form of a bow according to its previous shape, and that which is cauterized around the waist should be olive-shaped according to its previous form.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of applying cautery to feet and thighs.
When the feet are swollen due to dropsy and full of watery pus, you should apply cautery to the feet on each side between the thumb and ring finger, lift your hand under the cautery and do not twist it; then lift your hand slightly, and do not turn it completely as the watery pus will drain.
The cautery should be made in this way: Then apply two cauterizations on each thigh, and for any part, make a cauterization at the tip of the knife-like part. And make the cauterizations according to the length of the thigh: you kneel and place your other knee in the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauterizations.
And let the opened wound drain for a long time to allow some water to drain from it.
And then treat those causes which we have described.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the treatment of applying cautery to abdominal regions.
When the abdominal pain is due to wind and moisture causing discomfort in the intestines, it is the digestive and retaining properties that cause this. These are located in the stomach and in the intestines, and this condition can be treated using treatment methods without causing any harm. Often, the patient suffers from a cautery of the virtue, so perform a large cauterization on their stomach according to what preceded during the stomach cautery, then do the same with the circle cauterization and four cauterizations in the circuit of subtle abdominals, with subtle clavilh cauterization; and do a cauterization over the anus on that area or perform two cauterizations.
And if you notice excessive moisture and the patient tolerates this, then perform a cautery on their umbilicus and on the intestines, strengthen your adjustments with two cauterizations on the stomach and near the inguinal regions, which is a perfect cure for youthful ailments from which you will not err.
Chapter xxxiv.
On the cautery of old hemorrhoids.
When dealing with old hemorrhoids in nature or those filled with thick fluids or corrupted moisture, and they are treated as we have said in the division without harming your treatment, then perform a cautery on three areas on the pus left behind by both small and triangular points, and do two more cauterizations above the umbilicus.
And if you notice that the stomach of the patient is cooled and their food is not being digested properly, along with their face appearing swollen, then perform a large cauterization on the stomach according to what precedes; and do one more on the buttocks, and another on the chest. Do a cautery on the clavilh area, and allow the cauterization to cool for some time before opening up again to treat until the patient is healed.
Chapter xxxv.
On the cautery of the thorax near their operation site.
When you remove the thymus gland, then you apply the cautery that has been prepared as a rod of fire. Place the ignited object in the thymus gland incision and continue your hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which it carries the poison.
And do this once or twice; if thistles are too many, then cauterize each one as we have recounted, and continue to treat them with the remedies that you apply while they heal.
And if you perform a large cautery on a thistle, it will be more effective in youth.
Chapter xxxvi.
On the cautery of abscesses that occur naturally within their parts.
When nature does not comply with the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, they will be cured with cautery.
So when you find an abscess in nature later on and it is old, with disease and corrupted moisture, then the pus that deserves to drain escapes through this subtle opening. And you should know the depth of the wound according to the previously mentioned probe.
And ignite the cautery that resembles a rod. And place that ignited cautery into this abscess, and according to the depth in which it reaches the probe.
And iterate applying the cautery until those corrupted bodies are burned out, either once, twice, or three times, according to your need.
And be careful not to burn the nerves or veins; or if the abscess goes towards the bladder's body or towards the intestines, then avoid all those areas. Do this only when the abscess is in a fleshly location and you think it is not penetrating deeply.
And continue to treat the area until it heals.
And if the area is sealed, and once removed are all its contents, and it remains for a long time like this, then know that it has been fully healed.
And if the contents are not exclusively yours, then know that it is penetrating or at its base there's corruption of your body, or it stems from those causes which will bring memory to their location.
Chapter xxxvii.
On the cautery of boils.
When in boils you experience pain due to friction or due to thick wind, and the groin of the patient is swollen, then know that you should cauterize each boil with a cautery on each boil and apply a subtle cautery corresponding to their cause.
And strongly cauterize a small area immediately after that, for three linear cauteries will come from it, and they will be more effective in youth.
Chapter xxxviii.
On the cautery of the bladder.
When it happens in the bladder due to friction and moisture such that the patient doesn't retain urine, then perform a cautery on the area filled with pus below the bladder, like where the skin starts from the umbilicus, and do so with one cauterization on the right side, and another on the left side.
And the length of each cautery according to the quantity of the pus; perform a cauterization with a cautery in the lower part of both sides; or do two cauterizations if it is necessary.
And perform the subtle cautery as described.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
Regarding the cautery treatment for the eye.
When the vein and moisture enter the eye, and in such cases it is forbidden to undertake pregnancy, and if her menstrual periods are affected by this, they become delayed and provoke pain during urination. In that case, one should apply a cautery three times along the umbilical circuit, as we have described for the bladder in previous sections; or with a single cautery over the area where there is pus, or perhaps two cauteries, ensuring the first cautery has not left any scars behind.
Section XL.
Regarding the cautery treatment for the dislocation of the ankle.
When moisture invades the joints and causes issues in the ankle's structure, indicating this by extending one foot compared to the other when placed side by side. And the location of the dislocation is found within the inner bend of the leg.
Then apply the cautery on the thigh above the ankle joint with circular movements, as you will be able to feel it around the area when the ankle twists and in such a way that the ankle falls into the middle of the circle.
And as for the cautery described earlier, its shape is similar to the cautery treatment for the stomach.
And if this type of cautery isn't available to you, then apply three large olive oil-soaked cauteries.
And make the cautery according to the severity of all symptoms in the entire body; and treat that area until it is healed.
Section XLI.
Regarding the cautery treatment for the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs at the ankle joint, which is caused by friction and moisture, you should heal it using what we have described earlier without altering its effectiveness. If this method does not work, then proceed to loosen the body of the ankle with large pills or artificial ones, or something similar; then cauterize that area accordingly.
And the method for applying the cautery in this case follows two methods: one using burning medicines, or a cautery using fire.
There are two known methods for this, of which one involves applying the cautery over the width of the thigh three times in triangular patterns as shown here; and make sure to achieve good depth with it. And the spacing between each cautery should be equal to the thickness of your finger, whether it's an olive-sized or large cautery.
There are four areas where you should apply the cautery to the middle part of the calf for four points.
And if you wish, apply the cautery around the circle described earlier in the treatment of ankle dislocation, that is, a circle that burns all symptoms throughout the body.
And this is how you perform a hot cautery when pain is localized around the ankle and doesn't extend into the foot.
And if it does extend into the foot, then apply two cauteries on the foot over the area that contains the ankle pain; and with one cautery on the heel for four fingers' width towards the calf.
And if it's a knife-like cautery, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the severity of symptoms in the body.
And if the ankle is so positioned that the pain extends along the bones of the foot, then apply the cautery here where you place it, doing so with three points or four or more if necessary.
And if the ankle is so positioned that pain extends up to the heel of the foot, then apply a knife-like cautery here.
And remember to avoid applying the cautery until it burns nerves or large vessels during every treatment, as this could lead to harm or constriction on your leg.
And I have seen several others who apply cautery on the heel and finish their treatment there, and heat the bedfire inflated in such a way that the swelling achieves the foot, and the fire pierces and corrupts all of the foot. And it leads to severe stomach fluids, resulting in death.
And if the pain occurs in two parts at once, apply this method for each one accordingly.
And the wise ones would say about ankle cautery, this is how it should be done: make a circle resembling iron, where the circumference equals one palm; and according to its aperture as if of a finger bone or perhaps slightly less.
And inside that circle place another point; and the spacing between them equals the thickness of your foot; and make those circles twice in width; and let the length of those marks be one or two fingers, and make those marks iron decently dressed within the circles; and this is how it should look:
And ignite it in the fire until it reddens and produces sparks, then apply it to the ankle joint, pressing the leg against the side. And then, apply three round cauteries in one go to that area.
And then, smooth that area for three days; and cover that with bandages until the wound heals; and treat it with ointments until it is healed.
DiYS Albucasis: or children, for this kind of cautery we have used them due to the fear of examining the patient, and because we found that they look over the patient.
May this type of cautery bring relief to those who suffer from it, and find its place on the patient.
May the medicine that sticks to the cautery make you draw two hollow circles, in which you put out the fire of the door; let their length be as large as two nuts or small stones in size.
And if the space between them is according to the quantity of the thickness of the thing mentioned; place these under and above, so that they contain themselves among each other according to this form:
And place your hand on the part of the water where the patient is submerged up to the waist, and place your hand over the part of the water; then take hot water and put it between the two circles, making its quality small like a small fire gradually, and keep that for one hour's worth, and let the patient chew and adjust - as if it were being burned by fire - until the chewing stops.
And lift your hand to the instrument and remove the hot water from all the water with lukewarm water.
And let that be for three days and place your hand on that lump until the color of adjustment is fully changed to black, then let that be for several days, and it will run from their pus; this lasts throughout adolescence.
And then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
And if the pain extends into the thigh or chest, have them lie in a position where they contain water as is done with water equally.
And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about that in the treatise on the correction of medicines. Recipe for alkali and ash not extinguished from both parts, one third each, put them in a new vessel where the part under is pierced through with a small stick, according to the quantity that fits into their rays.
And let your hand rest under the bottom of the vessel another wave will rise, and pour live alkali and ash water over it which takes them up with one's finger, and when you compress them with your own hand for good compression, leave the vessel that gives off a clear water from the part under to the rising wave.
And adjust all that water, pour it over live ash and another alkali renewed, then it will give off strong acidity, which is administered in doses for medical operations and in the cautery of other limbs, this operation is done with fire.
And some medicines among which the cautery is performed widely, such as tea and honey and ash in salt form should be mixed.
And Gaulia recounts an operation and its cure among the ancients for which water pain and sciatic vein pain are cured, and it is beautiful to be of that kind, and I say there is no need for any other treatment, as it becomes healed in one go just as we recommend, and it makes a strong entry into banishment and sickness already from that.
And if it is close to heartburn vertigo, and if vertigo is not found, take a recent fig; and mix it with a little gray and place it in water where there is pain, or on the thigh, or on the chest, and tie it.
And leave it for the amount of three hours or according to how much the patient's adjustment chewing lasts.
And then place that in the sun when the body of the patient is reddened, as soon as the pain stops and they are healed.
And know that no one should use cautery with these medicines except for their expulsion from the body.
Mays has Escorides explained that when there is an artery in the goat's vein, it is cauterized; and you should give this to the patient: take wool and soak it in ancient oil, then place it between the ribs and under the belly.
And take an old goat's belly and smother it in fire until charcoal is formed; then place the patient on the wool, leave them there until they stretch. And repeat this, do not stop doing this until the sensation of chewing reaches into the water and rests the pain.
This method of cautery is called cow's cautery.
Capitol .xlii.
Regarding the cautery of pain in two.
Some pains are in the two places due to several causes, such as through impact or through striking, or through excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to those, through infusion of wet and rough material.
And cautery should not be applied anywhere else but in this single type that is performed through the effusion of abrasive material.
When using pills for the treatment of illness in the stomach, make a similar evacuation and use those that are made to cover the area where pain is felt, specifically three lines according to the width of the affected area. Place your marks with cauterization on each line up to the point of tolerance by the patient and based on its effectiveness.
And a cautery treatment is done with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, perform the cautery using three or four points of a central knee-pointed cautery as follows:
Capital XXXIII.
From the process of cautery to the commencement of glibosity.
The causes observed for this stomach ailment in small children; and the sign of its commencement in them is when you notice an increase in their appetite along with an increase in elevation and movement.
And you find at the lower end of the spine of the back and in the buttocks that have already begun to rise above other spines.
And when you perform this and wish to prohibit it, then apply the cautery as follows: Let the cautery cover the entire part of the spine equally.
And if you wish, apply with a pointed cautery along the spinal circuit, two or three lines long. Let the points be evenly spaced between them.
And apply treatment to the area until it is healed with what we have described.
Make sure that cautery is not administered in glibosity caused by muscle spasms of nerves.
Capital XLIV.
On the treatment for gout and joint pain with cautery.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that penetrate every part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And how gout caused by friction is treated using the method of cure and not aggravating the pain, it involves applying cautery.
And that is why you apply cautery to that area in relation to the evacuation circuit of the joint in the hand with moist cauterization.
And use olive oil, which has this form as its method:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains ascend into the thighs or to other joints, and these marks are observed, then apply the cautery on each thigh with three or four points of this olive oil cautery across its entire surface.
And if moist cauterization is necessary for these types of cauterizations, then apply the cautery without pressing too hard with your hand before, only to about the circumference of the cord.
And if the pains ascend into the thigh and calf, then administer the cautery as described in our capital.
And if the pains are only in the hips and it's called glibosity, then prick along the circuit of the veins as they flow, prick on those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then prick on the circuit of the veins over every wrist and on the knuckle of the hand.
And if the pains ascend for several days to the elbows or muscles, then apply the cauterization over all parts of the assistants.
And do not evacuate the stomach with good regulation and medicine reception, if only good regulation and steam are applied using this cautery, it will lead to healing, may God help.
Capital XLV.
On the treatment of ruptures with cautery.
When observing rupture in the intestines and discussing hernias opposite the surgical site from the back, and this is how they begin to be addressed, then you should instruct that the patient's food intake be suspended for a day, and use gentle causes so that the abdominal wound heals.
And guide the stomach between your hands on their back, and command that they keep their breath in until a hole is healed or the hernia appears.
And guide that back to your hands and test for rupture over the bones of the femur with the sign being as much like half a circle in the lower parts of the body.
And guide the application of the cautery which has this form:
Let it ignite and produce sparks. And guide the return of the hernia or the abdominal wall to its original position, and guide their hand over the area in such a way that the hernia does not protrude.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed them with a cushion under their knees, another servant on their legs, and another one on their chest to hold their hands.
And guide the cautery onto that mark with your hand on the pointed cautery, and place that near where you perceive the femur bone in the middle of your universe; repeat this on another area if you have not succeeded in the first attempt towards the bones.
And observe wisely the consistency of the hernia during your cautery treatment, do not burn that hernia too much so that it does not cause death or any other serious harm to the stomach.
And know that when you use the cautery, do not touch the eyes, do not impair your operation.
And understand that the size and measure of a child's cautery should be subtle according to their grandeur.
Then care for the area of the cautery for three days with a bandage so that the heat scale from the fire can be removed.
Then treat that area with other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient should lie on their back for 10 days until the area and the wound are sealed.
And understand that you should feed the patient according to the duration of their healing period. This affects how much food they can take and ensures the intestine does not re-emerge due to the effort of recovery.
And after about 10 days when it is desired to remove the aid, then administer medicine properly, and keep that person for another 10 days.
And let them work less and regain their strength with food and drink, and use strong drinks. When they follow this full recovery regimen, they will become healthy.
And I will explain the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen. At meals, you should not allow them to eat too much at once, so you cauterize that rupture with a round-pointed cautery according to his quantity, and let him drink as if he were sick; then treat that area following what we said and do not adjust it afterwards.
And already inform them that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this shape, since it is marked by temptation:
and draw a line that you make over the width at the waist just above the rupture, and another line up top; then place your hand with a triangular cautery, yet the first cautery should be finer and better.
Chapter XLVI.
About the cauterization of torsion.
When pain persists in some limbs due to impact or percussion and the pain continues for a long time without improving with medicines, then understand that you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And the size and quantity of each limb for the cautery, according to its strength and development, as well as the location of the twist and pain.
If the patient recovers after the first cautery, then it's good; otherwise, proceed to apply another cautery; for usually, such pains are punctured on the same body part where they originate, so understand that you should use these cauterizations until the patient is healed.
Chapter LVII.
About the cauterization of leprosy.
Some leprosy lesions require treatment with a cautery due to intense youth, and more so if it's caused by the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
And when you want to cauterize that area, consider if the leprosy is contagious and treat it with what we said in the division of treatment and do not exceed or fall short, fearing for the patient's health that corruption would spread throughout their body and all its components. So cauterize that area on the head using these cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and another a bit below you, place your forehead at the end of the hair; and two more over both temples; and another behind, on the back of the neck or collarbone.
Finish your hand with these cauteries for a short time until you notice a small pressure in the mouth, and if they're disturbed by old things, so that the expiration of large vapors is relieved for them; then cauterize over the pus according to what's needed.
And if the leprosy has already spread on the patient and is manifestly visible, understand that you should cauterize that area with those cauteries which we have said about in the head; then cauterize over the tip of the nose, and two cauteries over each major ear, and two over each cervical vertebra, and five over each rib, and one large one near the belly button, and one on the shoulder blade, and two over each arm, and one on each elbow, and two over each foot, and one over each heel, and two over the buttocks, and two over each muscle, and two on each of their toes; then cauterize that area over all the joints mentioned, and over every heel of their feet, and over the dimples of their buttocks.
And guard yourself from the nerves that are on the foot so as not to burn those.
Some lesions are cauterized with a cautery on the palate bone and another in the stomach opening, and another on the esophagus.
And understand that the more precisely you adjust the cauteries, the more beneficial and less painful they are; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery as they do with their senses, because their body is already numb.
And understand that the cauteries should be large or small according to the limbs and joints as determined by the tools' specificities.
Then care for the cautery with oatmeal flour mixed with honey and another treatment until it is healed.
Chapter LVIII.
About the cauterization of coma or stupor.
When a limb is paralyzed or has fallen asleep and cannot be treated with medicines and bandages, then you should cauterize that paralyzed limb using cauteries according to the size or development of the limb.
And let your cautery enter into the inflamed area of the leg a little. And apply that oil inside, until it is healed.
And some blisters are treated with cautery on certain swellings that cause pain in the limbs and feet, as well as along the spine of both sides. This affects the nerves that control that body part, and the swelling is relieved by this process.
Do not diagnose about that otherwise, but only those who are knowledgeable in the anatomy of limbs and the distribution of nerves throughout the body's movements.
Chapter 49.
Regarding the treatment with cautery for those who have ulcers.
When ulcers are old and do not respond to any of the medicines' oils, then you treat them with cautery by applying it for a little longer than usual according to the size of the area where the ulcer is located. This process heals the whiteness and color of the ulcer, and changes the color of the surrounding skin.
And apply that with a mixture of egg whites and split peas, mixed with oil rubbed on them and leaves of hyssop, or a decoction of dove's dung or of anise, from each take one part, mix all together, then place a cloth there for the area to be treated until it heals.
Chapter 50.
Regarding treatment with cautery for children.
When cankers start and you want them to stop, then treat that area with a circular application of cautery as it rotates around the body.
And the wise advise to apply the inner part of the cautery at its center; however, I do not see this happening, as I fear it might be an ulcer. I have already seen some blisters in this regard.
And the pus is treated by applying cautery around the area in a circular motion as we have said, or with localized applications of cautery.
Chapter 51.
Regarding treatment with cautery for abscesses.
When some abscess takes longer to mature, which might be due to excess or the patient's old age and weakness, or because of time, and you wish to hasten its maturation; then apply localized cautery in the area around the pus point; and let it rest after this treatment so that maturation can proceed.
If you wish to perform the perforation with cautery, then use this form of cautery: and apply it at its center in the abscess area until the pus penetrates.
And if the cautery is applied in that place where there is pus, because it relieves the body of the arm; then treat it until it heals.
Chapter 52.
Regarding treatment with cautery for corroding (possibly referring to skin conditions or wounds that are deteriorating).
Corroding is the spreading decay in the limb, which corrodes the area like fire burns through dry wood.
Therefore, if you see the corroding (which might refer to a decaying or spreading condition) in places that are treated with heat, then apply hot cautery needles, small and large as appropriate for those areas where there is corrosion.
And treat the entire area with cautery until you eliminate all of the corrosion without causing any harm to it.
And let that area rest for three days, and place on the treated spots oil mixed beforehand until all the scabs are eliminated and all corrosion is gone.
And treat that with meat-generating oils.
If within three days the healthy meat grows in the area where there is not corruption, then it's good. But if not, then apply more cautery to the corrupted areas as needed.
Corroding is treated with certain times of acute medicine, which are halfway in places that require cautery. However, applying cautery with heat is for the gentle pus that is newly formed.
And I have already mentioned the treatment with acute medicine in the division, so use that when you have opportunity for it on him.
Chapter 53.
Regarding treatment with cautery of lumps and other similar conditions.
Blisters on the patient's limbs that are called lumps, it is a large lump, deeply implanted, which affects the chest; and applying cautery in those places can be done in two ways: with hot cautery and with heated water.
Apply hot cautery by heating the point slightly like that of a needle, made of iron according to its size so it can encompass the lump in its entirety and have fine margins.
And let that heat rest on the lump, and then move your hand around with the cautery in the circuit of the lump until the cautery reaches the depth of the lump. Let it rest for three days until you start to notice a change or improvement. And then cover that with bladders filled with salt water and let the plaster rest on it for a night, until that lump has been eliminated from its root.
And then treat the area with meat-generating ointment until it heals.
And if they do not convert and blisters occur on the surface of the body, mainly in the limbs and feet, then you should apply cautery with heated water to those areas. Use a small piece of iron or a needle to place over the lump; fill a small container with heated water and let it rest on top of the lump; then add water into the container until there's enough liquid that when squeezed by your hand, the water pressure reaches the root of the lump and draws out the water. Wait for half an hour as the body sweats due to the hot water, then remove it; once the lump has been removed from its root.
And thus perform those tasks while closely observing each one of them, ensuring they are all present within your body.
And then treat those abscesses that arise from the roots of the claws, healing them with substances that cause the flesh to regenerate.
Capital: 53.
Regarding the treatment of tremors through cautery.
When the cause of a tremor is due to friction on nerves or fever resulting from rubbing, or for any similar cause, then you should apply four cauteries or five in total over each rib bone; and with one cautery on each foot, and another one on the abdomen. Use an olive oil-based treatment after applying the cauteries.
And the tremor in them subsides, promoting the healing of their illness.
Capital: 55.
Regarding the treatment of burns caused by accidents to the body.
When burns appear in the body and form pus-filled wounds from decomposing materials; then at the moment they appear, it is necessary to treat them by applying a cautery over all parts of the ulcer. Use a fine-pointed needle dipped in mastic oil, with its tip extended into the flame; or use long reeds of rhubarb; or apply a small circular cautery.
And some blisters should be cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion according to this manner; they do not grow, and the excess is eliminated by this method. This results in healing for those affected.
However, it must be that this evacuation is done through phlebotomy nearby.
Capital: 56.
Regarding the treatment of bleeding from injuries caused by an arrow's incision.
Blisters that occur from bleeding due to an arrow's cut should be placed over the wound which needs to be drained, or over the incision of abscesses or cautery on a member. Then proceed similarly, making it difficult to stop that bleed.
And when this happens with anything else, then you should cover the wounds from the arrow with your hand and place your thumb on those blister-like areas inside where you can stop the bleeding of the blood, ensuring it doesn't escape.
And then place small and large olive oil-based cauteries over the fire for several times, blowing over those areas that have a flame.
And then take a small or large one depending on the location and wound where the artery has ruptured, apply it over that vein immediately after you have stopped your bleeding, and apply the cautery until the blood flow is reduced and restricted.
And when the blood is expelled from the artery's wound while you are stopping your bleeding and removing the cautery, then take another carefully prepared needle-based cautery out of the heated cauteries, therefore do not stop until you apply this one after another until the bleeding is restricted.
And remember not to burn the nerves here, so that it doesn't bring about other harm to the patient's health.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the bleeding there, especially if the artery is large, unless you have one of four ways: or apply the cautery as we have said, or extraction if it cannot be removed, where once removed its ends are burned and the bleeding is restricted; or that it is tied with a string or tightened through strong constriction; or that they are laid upon medicinal substances whose virtue restricts the bleeding; and are strengthened by powder in a decent restraint.
Have that person who administers the decent restraint upon them with a ligature and by constriction through cloths or due to causes of burning substances and similar ones, do not apply anything but tar.
And when this happens with something else and the doctor or medicine is not present, then apply the mentioned restraint over the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand to greatly tighten it within which the bleeding should be stopped from the main part of the wound, and on the arrowhead do not let it bleed; and from the arrowhead spread cold rubbing water upon it until the bleeding is congealed and thickened; then consider what needs cautery or what medicine is necessary.
Regarding cuts, punctures, and wounds, as well as phlebotomy and their various aspects.
We have already discussed in the first chapter about every illness for which a fire-based cautery is convenient and with burning medicine, as well as the occasions and causes thereof, and the necessary instruments among those required forms of cauterization; and I have organized the chapters on increasing the state of health into the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter according to that manner, so as to alleviate the desire of whoever asks for it, hence on what they have requested.
And before I begin this, understand that in this chapter it pertains to the cautery which is discussed in the first chapter on cauterization.
And for that, I urge you to be in great caution, because in the operation which is part of this chapter, various blisters require evacuation involving blood where there is life due to the application onto the vein or cut on the abscess or incision of discharge or purification of the wound or removal of arrow or incision of pus and their similar actions. And all of those are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in their heart, death.
I warn you that do not let this happen to you in which you are situated, for sometimes you must handle diseases as one handles the movements of illnesses. And among them is one that will die from their illness and is easily death for them, and also because of the intensity of what they find in their illness, and due to the longevity of their illness, and when it comes to sickness it means death.
And among those is the one that gives you their account and says it, you hope for that health, and their illness is harmful.
And so do not agree with the one who shows you about this manner; and your caution should be greater than greediness and your appetite; and do not presume any cause about this but rather a certain knowledge that verifies what you need to know, and for which there is a plausible succession.
And use in the treatment of all your ailments with prediction and indication for which health is converted, in that it gives you help about acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
Oh, children, God in you implores his understanding and does not withhold direction and protection for this is within his power.
And I have organized this chapter distinguishing by chapters according to what preceded in the chapter of cauterizations, for treatment of head within the feet, so that you may be relieved of what you are asking for and what you need.
First chapter.
Regarding the treatment of water which is contained in the head of children.
Know that this illness which is common in children needs delivery and when the baby's head gets stronger, its lividity manifests.
And some swellings due to hidden causes which are not known.
I have not seen this illness except in children; and for all those whom I saw, they die of it, and thus it is an apparent death among them.
And I have seen that a child with the head full of water, his head was always so magnificated that it couldn't bear to be placed on itself due to the size of its head, and more than that, moisture increased within that which caused death.
And this moisture either gets added between the canal and the bone, or it accumulates away from the bones on the scalp.
When the operation is in that place if the moisture is between the canal and the bone and the pus is little, then you should make an incision in the middle of the head at a fissure in the width, and let the length of the fissure be as wide as two fingers so that the moisture flows, this is the form of pus:
And thus if the moisture is greatly increased and the pus is large, then here are two incisions according to this manner:
And if the moisture is away from the bones, a sign of it is that you open the corners of the head from every direction and when you squeeze that in your own hand to the inner parts, water squirts out instead of hiding this. And when you make an incision in the middle of the head at three fissures according to this manner:
And during the incision, extract all the moisture; and strengthen the incisions with bandages and cushions; and on the fifth day, apply oil over it and paste it with wine and oil within the head so that its member is comforted and healed. And feed the sick with dry meat of little moisture until the body is strengthened and made well.
And there is another manner of incision that you should consider based on the size and collection of water, for some swellings are more in the occipital area, or at the front, or on the right, or on the left; so pay attention to where the swelling and accumulation of water appear, and do this according to what is best possible for you.
And observe that do not cut the artery and let the veins of blood flow freely, so heal the sick through this flow of blood in evacuation of moisture.
Chapter III.
When an old catarrh or pain occurs in the throat or chest, and it's too late to apply the treatment of medicines, then the best course of action is to make this incision into those two arteries.
And when you want to make an incision for the sick's head that causes their sickness, prepare the place with rough cloth so that you can see the arteries, and strengthen the neck of the sick with some cloth; and consider where is the pulse; and the places above the places which are near the ears press down, and such things do not occur in some people.
And cut on the artery with a thread, and make an incision in each one through the width of each sharp part leading to the bone, and do this considering the width of the head.
And if you want, insert the needle near your fingers and thread it through to the arteries, so that they penetrate the parts below.
And make the length of the incision two digits adjusted, so that when any vein is incised, there is a sensation at its exit during pulsation, which jumps from beat to beat.
If the artery does not appear at the incision, then gauge the circumference of your hand for the amount of space of three digits, and prepare to try by touching it, and insert into the bone.
And that which gets heated with heat is a quantity of blood unharmed, and let it not heat your hand or wrist much, and all of this is according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the thigh and the filling of the artery of yours.
And then consider the wound, and therefore if there remains over the bone any cause of a boil, then cut that so as not to create a carbuncle.
And then strengthen the wound with plasters and with linen bandages, and cure that with ointment until it is healed.
Capitol III.
On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When some accident causes old migraine or severe headaches, due to humidity in agriculture and the quality of those headaches on the temples, or old headaches are intense and resemble those, and are treated according to the methods of healing in medicine and this does not apply, then we have focused on these illnesses: extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
And the method of the operation and extraction of those is that the thigh raises the skin which is in the temples; and understand the artery apparent in the temple where it is shown to you by its pulse, and is hidden even in few people due to the intensity of the heat.
And if it is hidden to you, then let the thigh be strengthened with some cloth; and then rub that place with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until you can see the artery clearly. And then take the needle of which this is the form: And then you prick the cord with it in such a way that you reach the artery; and then let your finger rest on it to allow blood flow until you extract that at the ends of the arteries; and then remove that from the cord and uncover those tunics which are underneath, from all parts.
If the artery is delicate, then wrap it around the tip of your thumb, and then cut off a part from it according to its length for which the tips are stretched and shortened, and do not allow blood flow; if they are not cut, it will not pump blood at all.
And then remove the blood of the unharmed blood. Into three parts.
And if the artery is large, then consider that you secure it in two places with twice as strong ties or with cords long, and do not leave it to decay before the healing of the wound and do not allow blood flow.
And then cut out the excess that is between two ligatures; and do this either in that moment or soon afterwards.
And if you want, cauterize that with a cautery inside the bone and with a surgical knife until its extremities are cut, and stay in place like this work of healing.
And it is better work if the thigh has fever or is of cold complex; for cautery is due to those causes that help in finishing moisture, therefore it is better in youth.
And consider the extraction of arteries that you make in the old way, and have rest on your powder adequately done, and then let it be treated with dried medicines that cause the flesh to heal and with hot water until it is healed.
And if while you are working another opening, it starts to flow blood from the artery, then you take care to reduce that blood, or with a cautery, or with the old way, and strengthen your hand until you can stop the blood. And if none of those causes are present to you, then pause your finger on the area until the blood coagulates, and coat the area with cold water until the heat subsides, and strengthen according to how it feels.
And what is pus in the extraction of artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives, because you have placed both areas on the surface, and move a hot flame until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that it stretches whatever is between its extremities, which are not fully consolidated by this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And let the heat of both knives be at the same time. However, if they are of varying heat compared to two knives, then it is better, as with two sharp knives close to each other, and you do not cut the flesh at speed.
Therefore, if there is any thickness, heat the fire in those and the flesh is cut lightly.
And this work is better in all works and for anything lighter.
And let the distance between the two knives be the size of your finger.
The head quarter.
From the treatment of injuries caused by sharp and acidic tears in animals.
When they are acidic tears, and it's the injury caused by those veins which are on the animal's forehead, and there is no cause to apply medicine for its cure, and sometimes the face of the patient becomes red and feels like a crawling sensation on their forehead, as if it were ants walking, and the animals' tears are exhausted, becoming moist in this way that their skin has been used up, and their eyelids are scratched by the sharpness of the tears. The old ones would treat these injuries in this manner during such an operation, and many consider this treatment to be unbearable.
And you instruct the patient to scrape their skin which is on their forehead, and then you proceed to make three equal distances incisions across the forehead according to its length. And if the length of the incision is two hands: one incision should be exactly half the length of the nose at the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a bit less than a hand movement of the tears that are in the lacrimal region, and the third from another side.
And watch out for the beginning of the veins which are on both sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space from each incision is the size of three fingers adjusted.
And if you have one piece of sponge or dry cloth, apply it moistened with the liquid to cool down the injury.
And then insert the blade of two sharp ends, here is the form of the incision for this: which begins from the division point within to the second incision. Excise all the chain among the two incisions near the bridge which is above the bone, and make this of the incision migrating into the second incision. And then cut this blade and insert another tool in the first incision, which is called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And place the sharp part of this sharp tool on the attached muscle, incise that chain, and the other side into the bone, and insert that into the area where it reaches the migrating incision, and cut all the veins that descend from the head to the animals.
May this continuous incision reach that appearance of the chain, and proceed with this in the migrating incision between the other incisions.
And when the amount of fluid is enough to drain, press out the places from the compressed liquid sponge.
And then pause at each incision for a short while, and place those powders on those ashes in wine and oil, and water them so that they do not develop into pus.
And on the third day, loosen the ligaments and apply a large amount of hot water or vinegar, and then treat this with balm ointment in oil among others until the wounds are healed.
End of Part V.
From the treatment of tears caused by inflammation and from animals whose parts are inside the head.
When there is a catarrh in one of the veins and it continues, and sometimes from the tears of the patient they are exhausted, and their observation has been distorted, and their eyelids are ulcerated along with their eyes' skin, and at the base of the head is acute toothache followed by subsequent exhaustion, then you should know that these accidents mean that the substances and catarrh do not come from veins of parts inside proceeding.
And the best treatment for these is this: you instruct the patient to scratch their forehead, and then proceed to make an incision in that area at the middle of the forehead, a little bit across (and begin from the incision on the left temple into the right; and let the cut be inside the bone; and extend your hand from the temperature areas which are swollen due to chewing), inside where the bone is revealed.
Dry all the liquid with a sponge or dry cloth, and then fill between the two lips of the incision with a short time or with cloths. And then strengthen it from above with powders mixed in wine and oil to prevent pus formation.
And when you loosen that and each time the pus has diminished, then prepare to scrape the bone from where it starts in their navel flesh, and then treat this with drying regiments which make the flesh of the navel, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of honeycomb and mix them together, and make a poultice from them and apply it to these wounds of the native flesh.
End of Part VI.
From the treatment of what inflames in the earlobes.
All causes that inflame the earlobes are of four kinds: some are caused by metallic substances like lead or mercury, similar in effect to them such as iron and silver; others might be due to plant causes like dandelion or fava beans; thirdly, they could be caused by fluids, such as water and vinegar, that have a similar effect; and finally, there may be some animal origin.
And when lead inflames the earlobe or some other similar cause of those causes that do not adhere to nor grow in the earlobe, place the earlobe in sunlight. If you notice lead, then distil on this with some oil that has been beaten or from sulfur, and proceed to take out its extraction, and make sneezing occur among conditions, and hold their noses whenever there's an incident of sneezing. And place in the earlobe circuit some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the earlobe to the parts above, those spots swollen are due to these causes.
And if it is not swollen, then administer the extraction with the tool called episiotomy scissors by this one, which is the form:
And if it's swollen due to a tear, that's good; otherwise, then administer the extraction with a fine pair of scissors, where there is duplication of small veins.
And if it's not swollen for that reason, then make an incision and insert the tip of the cannula into the hole of the earlobe and seal around the cannula with wax and with a soothing oil so that it does not open except for the cannula. And remove from the wound in force, those that are swollen with what we have described.
If it is not swollen in this manner, then take some alum or vinegar and apply that where the gallbladder is located, press those areas a little bit, place that under the tip of the nail, and then cover that with cloth appropriately placed. And insert that into the earlobe for ease, then scrape the earlobe of moisture.
And if it is not swollen by all the causes we have recounted, then you should cut where the abscess or cramp might develop.
And the manner of cutting that one is that you begin by touching the patient's vein of the phlegm and remove the touch according to the nature of it, then make that incision between your hands and convert the earlobe to the parts above, and create a small fissure in the edge of the earlobe put your thumb in the spot where you pressed them. And if the fissure is like the shape of the moon that reaches to the flesh, and when the flesh has healed over it, hold onto that if you can with appropriate tools; and cover that part while moving quickly on it, and heal that inside so it becomes healthy.
And if the cause affecting the earlobe is one of those fats you suspect that inflates it, then administer treatment and extraction for it; but if you do not have control over your movements, then take a fine spatula according to this form: And administer with that the excision of that fat which is inside the earlobe.
And do not stop doing that when you think it's already moistened by the steam of the earlobe, place it on fat spots, and proceed to remove from those near the veins or at a gentle angle, or with incision as described here, making the extraction easier.
And in the water that enters into the earlobe cove, let the patient use sneezing while holding their breath at the beginning, and fill the patient's earlobe with some old cloth, and place it over that earlobe where there is water. If it ends up being swollen due to this, that's good; otherwise, then take small leather strips and pins according to the length of this one, heat these in the fire for a bit, and have the patient insert one of these into their earlobe hole and place another piece of cloth on top of the part of their body facing downwind, and hit it with another leather strip over the skin inside the earlobe. Then do not stop with the leather until all the water is swollen.
Then do not stop with the leather until all the water is swollen. And when the water has become swollen, take paper or a reed instead,. And place one end of it into the earlobe and extend the other end into the fire so that the tip is burned.
And place another reed and do this as many times until all the water is swollen, then insert that into a cannula like previously mentioned for removing the pus.
If it's small creatures entering that earlobe, if they're in small quantities and resemble them, then treat them as we've said in the division; but if there are large ones causing an abscess inside the body cavity, then administer their extraction with tools and at a gentle angle, and the cause is pus being less severe than all other causes I've mentioned in the earlobe.
And when it comes to extracting worms that develop in the earlobe, if you treat them with what we've said in the division and in the distillation treatment, do not abandon your treatment, instead observe the earlobe under sunlight.
And if you find any worm-related cause here, then extract it with tools or with fine scissors. But if there's no cause to be found, then take a cannula and make it slightly wide, like this: And insert the fine tip into the earlobe according to how much your patience can endure as long as it's causing discomfort; then suck forcefully through that tube, and do this until all the worms have become swollen.
And if you can't control your movements, then apply and seal around the cannula opening with wax as we've said; then administer distillations which have already been heated up in treating worms, follow this in the distillation treatment.
And if you have an exudation which you pour with the oils and medicines into the earlobe using this tool, like so: Make it from silver or wood, lay them out straight, in which there should be a small trough, and have a flat surface above.
And therefore let it come to what is in the cavity of the container here where it is necessary. And if you wish, take the rod and wrap it around the patient's descent point with a cloth, then apply oil to the cavity of the organ, or the juice from any herb, or whatever you want from these medicines in the container - that is for the ear - , then insert the rod above the cloth and press your hand into it until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the organ and the patient feels the oil inside.
And whatever is placed in the ear should already be heated by fire for a little while. And remember that the cause which you distill into the ear should not be too hot, because the ear medicines do not tolerate this.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of ear wax blockage.
Some children suffer from unperforated abdominal swellings in their mothers' wombs, and this happens occasionally in some adults as well; ear wax blockage occurs inside the ear meat due to infection or from nothing in that area. This ear wax blockage sometimes happens at the entrance of the ear's passage where it cannot reach the throat, and sometimes it is outside the parts involved.
And that which happens at its entrance, where it cannot reach the throat, is in more difficult conditions for treatment for the majorities.
And in that one where you can reach the throat, take the ear of the patient to the sun and observe it there. And if you see obvious obstruction, open that with a thin spatula whose shape is like this:
If the end of it in which there is a small width has one part sharp and the other not; and the spatula is two lengths on each side so that it does not harm the ear.
And if the blockage is due to soft flesh in the ear or its meat, then use that with fine, sharp instruments and apply it forcefully inside until all the flesh is removed.
And if the blockage is at the entrance of the ear, then take a thin rod made of iron and heat it slightly with fire for a little bit, then place it in the meat of the ear.
And if you have felt obstruction with what the patient feels with ease, due to hearing loss, force the pressure off it with ease; and remember not to harm the nerves of the ear.
And then cover the ear with cloth according to the width of the trough which you have wrapped in Egyptian oil; do this for several days until you are sure of the healing process. Or take some and insert it into water, grind it over its surface until it is thoroughly ground, use it; and if you find that the ear has already been swollen, then remove it while replacing it with another substance which you cover in cotton that is soaked in oil, so that the pus can drain out; and then treat it until it heals.
If there is bleeding or pus, then soak the sponge or cloth in warm water and place it over the ear, and use another treatment that stops the blood flow from infection, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
On the treatment of adhesions that occur to the eyelids.
Eyelid adhesions which can happen on the eyes of some individuals are sometimes wetted, at other times they are dry.
Then use them with tweezers or forceps, and separate those with thin instruments from their roots, and then cover the areas with ground substances.
If there is pain or bleeding comes out, then you apply a cautery to those with a fine lancing instrument.
And the best cautery is near incisions and past healings tend to return whenever any cause of their roots remains; when they are burned with fire, those roots burn and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for inflammation that occurs on the eyelids of individuals.
Inflammations on the eyelids of individuals can occur due to a certain cause that accumulates into inflammation with its strength and hardness; because of this, it is called inflammation.
And there is an addition of large moisture on the eyelid, beneath and above.
So the operation here is that if you consider that inflammation proceeds from under the eyelid and swells all parts; and the cause of it is minor.
Then cut across it according to its width, and then force that out from all sides with ease until you drain it, and suspend that with forceps and remove it.
And if the appearance is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and treat that until it heals.
And if it is small, there will be no harm from that which with the healing of it restores and heals that.
And if the large inflammation declines to the inner parts inside the eyelid, then remove that inside, and take out the large inflammation with forceps, another you can choose for incisions, press all parts of it, and if the eyelid is stretched through an incision, this will not be noted to have any cause.
And at the beginning, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with water that boils inside until it heals.
Capital x.
From the treatment remove the swelling above the eye of the wound.
Axcirnath is gray stuff that's produced in the coverings of the eye above, and particularly affects children, it worsens the wounds of those and causes their eyes to get cloudy; and they can't look at the brightness of the sun because thus their tears gather on them.
And you must talk about those often on their faces all the time, and on their faces they sleep; and on the eyelids of theirs they leave wet eyebrows, which have already covered swelling, and the imminent formation of conjunctivitis is evident in the eye; and that when you press on the area with your own words, you feel a lump inside those.
And some surgical method is in this where the patient stops their head on your side, and then stops drapings of them and you create a small cut, and make a circle according to the quantity which contains pus from every part, and then stop that over that and press with your own words all around so that conjunctivitis be added inside the circle, and in the middle of that wetness you make a slit perpendicular through the tear duct, and the slit should not be larger than the one made in ophthalmotomy.
In the anterior cover that you cut entirely until you reach the conjunctiva, where after various positions process pus through a slit according to the shape of white fat.
Then remove those with cloths that you have enveloped between your own words from the parts forward and mix them with both hands until they are dispersed.
And watch that you don't place on the slit for when you have this, do not let pus reach the eye and remove that.
If you do not find pus at the start of the slit, then adjust in the slit a small tool so that pus can process; and remove this also as we have said; and then submerge cloths from them in water and vinegar, place these over the area and strengthen those with powders.
And thus they pass salt over it in the cavity of the slit, so that what remains from that wetness is.
And then treat it until it heals.
If an abscess occurs in the area, then treat that with plaster bandages until it heals.
Capital xi.
On methods for examining the eye.
When on the eyelids of patients their own hair replaces their natural skin and is thick, then these cause disorders in the eye like constant tears and puffiness of the eyelids and inner eyelid tissue which can lead to destruction of the eye that we call inflammation of the eye, and treatment is done in four ways: or with a cauterizing tool using fire; or with acute medicine as it's said in the section on cauterization; or it's treated by excision and suturing; or with canals according to what I say.
And so cut where you place the eye's head on your own side; then convert the eyelid of the eye to your left hand, and if it is converted, that's good; and otherwise, insert a needle in that part which contains pus from the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through skin above, and that - close to the edge of the eyelid where hair grows - near the hair, and pull out the thread on top of the parts above the eyelid, and convert it into the ray.
And then make in the part inside the eyelid your hair adjusted to the wetness of the major tear duct towards the minor tear duct; and then remove this thread and place on your own eyelid small powders of pine or cloth, and then press on your eyelid with a test, and it should be like a twig of myrtle.
But when you cut to see the figure according to the amount of retraction of the eyelid, which is already differentiated in humans, those are those that have been cut deeply from the large eyelid quantity according to the quantity for which the eyelid becomes swollen.
And then make with this cut on both lines which you have marked, and start from the major tear duct towards the minor tear duct. And if your slit is close to natural hair like it's thick as a king's beard.
And then insert the needle into one of the two corners of the string, and then scrape off everything, and then adjust to the stitching the two lips at mouth or a thread of fine wool on each eyelid, clean up pus, and adhere that which is superfluous from threads over two eyebrows for some contagious causes, if you wish to do this, otherwise don't treat it.
And then let the stitching of the threads rest for three or four days, and then treat that.
And if you want, let the wound and its stitching rest, then treat that with something that dries and constricts, where the eyelid is lifted you must seal the wound and support it; but stitching is better. Therefore do this as they did in ancient times.
But when there's concern about the eye, it is a good operation, and not out of fear.
And another method for examination is this, and that there should be a figure on the eyelid like a leaf of myrtle, then lift the eyelid by three threads separately according to this form:
If it's not possible this way, hold the threads, and if this isn't equal, then take a needle with thread and insert that in the middle of the figure, and place the other thread near the major lacrimal sac, and the second thread next to the minor lacrimal sac, adjusting between your fingers the threads at equality, then raise your hand up to the same height as elevation, lift the whole chain on which it is applied thus as we have described.
And adjust both lips of the wound for suture, and heal that inside which has healed.
If it happens that you have an abscess, start with your incision or your wound, but treat that abscess with a plaster and make it resemble the patient's skin, and apply ointment.
And some inflammations under the eyelid which cause its hair to fall out, then choose what you use in that of what we have said about incisions; but suture where it is more artificial.
Tie up the canals as follows: And this is to convert the eyelid and divide the figure inside as I have recounted; then with skill make two canals or two subtle threads of which length is according to the length of the eyelid, and their width is more like the width of the nose. And you have already incised at the extremities of each part where you have the threads.
And add each with subtlety under what excess there is of the eyelid of the eye, and strengthen the threads of each part firmly, and let that rest for a few days; so that through the constriction, the chain will die out and be rejected and fall in on itself by its own weight.
If it's delayed, then cut the chain at the corners, and treat the wound inside which has healed.
And when it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and there are no hairs poking out.
And this is how you should make two threads according to this form: And the length and width of the quantity shall neither be too much nor too little.
Chapter XII.
Regarding raising irritating hairs in the eye with a needle when the hair is hard.
When the hairs are unnatural, hard and prickly in the eyes, then the operation for them is that you take a fine needle and hold it by the slender thread of each end and leather, and adjust their extremities finely. And let the length of the threads be about the size of a palm.
And further, you can make another fine thread like this one quickly, and if you want, adjust the ends of that as well.
And place the patient's head where you are, and position it close to the sun so that your work may be seen clearly, for this is a subtle and small operation.
And then insert the needle into the root of the adjusted hair that requires skill, and make it penetrate into the eyelid quickly while extracting it above the natural hair.
And then pull the hair inwards and insert that needle into them, and make sure the hairs are one or two or three but no more.
And then pull your hand towards that place where the hair is pulled out in the middle of the eyelid through the needle with the natural hair.
If it's pulled out in the middle and not the hair, pull out in the middle from each part with that needle where you have made that thread, beyond which pulling would be too much.
And remove that from the patient's vision, so then you will pull out in the middle and the needle, and pinch each and clean the eye, and let the discharge rest for two or three days, so that the hair sticks to its place and grows back with good tissue.
And if the hair is shorter than usual, then adjust a long hair from the natural ones, and raise it to that point or let it rest until it grows out a bit more, and then raise that part.
Chapter XIII.
Regarding the treatment for eyebrow plucking which occurs above the eyelid.
When it appears in the eye as eyebrow plucking, and when contraction of the eyelid occurs upon contraction within its boundaries, or to the right or left side, due to improper healing or scarring or cautery, this is referred to as leporine. This eyebrow plucking can be natural or accidental, occurring due to healing of a wound, or scarring, or cautery, or resembling those ill effects.
The method for the operation in this case is to cut that contraction and separate those eyelid edges, place a piece of linen thread between them on the inside, and tie them together until they heal.
And do not cover that you should apply the healing for the causes which dry out and tighten; so if you do this it will worsen the eyebrow plucking further than any amount of time could remedy.
Use for the causes that soften such as fennel, soak them in water as if you were bathing them and keep them moist with oil, or use oil of saffron which has been dissolved with some oils, immerse the linen cloth in this, and apply it.
And the treasure of your cure is that you puncture through all parts that are not consolidated according to the shape I indicated at the beginning.
And this operation which we have described is merely a correction of the hernia that does not return the shape of the area according to what I indicated in front.
Capitol. XIV.
Of the cure of hernias which is performed on the eyelid, you do it.
This hernia which is performed on the eyelid, you do it, and it's called vertebrospinous hernia; and it can be either of a natural cause or accidental.
An accidental one is caused by an injury, a cut, a cautery, or other similar actions.
And the way of the operation for this is that you take a needle with a double thread, insert it into the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal into the right one, so that the thread reaches both ends of the tissue.
And then extend the flesh to the parts above on the needle and where the needle is, cut open with a wide incision. And so, if the shape of the eyelid returns according to its form, it is good; and otherwise, take hold of the thread and place that at the cut edge, then adjust the eyelid on that spot, and make the two incisions in the corner of the eyelid.
And let the ends of the two incision points meet at an angle where you made the incisions between them, and make that angle so that when they gather together, it forms a figure.
And this figure is the Greek letter: the lambda.
And then remove the flesh that much which corresponds to the edge of this, so as to straighten out the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and sew them with the thread of wool; and properly treat those with the medicines we have mentioned, and with ointments to make them heal.
And if the hernia must be treated by incision or suture or cautery, then you should make an incision in a flat manner on the skin of the eyelid as previously indicated. And then separate with the ointment between the two lips as we have said.
In the total discourse of hernia cure, when it is above or below, let this operation run in your procedure according to how it is prepared as a form of hernia, and that form is in the shape of various spots.
And the skilled artisans always prepare parts in every manner that is possible for him to return the shape to its natural form or close to it, and this patient according to how they suit him with the operation and tools in their most suitable arrangements.
Capitol XV.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation happens in old men, make sure that the eyelid is firmly set above the white of the eye, and prohibit its ease of movement and natural actions. Therefore, it should be that you intervene at the end of this thread on the eyelid, then lift it up or extend it to a corner.
And then you make the adhesion cut into a subtle incision, one that is not at the point of the incisions, having it blunt enough so that the patient does not disturb the operation, and leave the incision intact to prevent the eye's sharpness from being impaired.
And let your incision be such that it removes this adhesion in ease, so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
And then place in the eye salted water that you wash with; or distil it from junia dissolved in water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with an ointment on it; place wool infused in egg white over the eye, and use for healing processes until it is healed.
Capitol XVI.
Of incision of the eyelashes and prominence of flesh in the tear ducts.
Know that the eyelash can be done in two ways, one is nervous and resembles a thin hard lump; or it's non-nervous, resembling white clotted moisture. When you touch it, if it pulls to take an inch, it is removed and the inch does not remain with it.
And both of these species do not start from the major tear duct, which gradually covers the vision and prohibits light and eye movements.
And the way to act in an incision is that the patient places his head where it should be, and then opens their eyes, lifts the eyelid with your hand, and carefully removes the eyelash on an inch of duplication, extending it to the corners. And then take a needle and intervene with one horsehair or cowhide or calf skin or similar, or double the end of the needle little by little and fix it in the middle of the eyelash, piercing that on the needle, and hold onto it with a nail; then extend it to the corners, excising from the hair where the eye ends. And similarly follow that into the hair inside the angle of the patient.
And then you make the remaining cut in the edge of the tear duct with a subtle incision or small V-shaped cuts, and removes the flesh of the tear duct naturally so that through this incision there is no continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the gall is in the sun's position or by the side of the stomach, as we have said, and it should be squeezed out through the liver, which has this form:
And remember not to touch the peritoneum on the liver, and that it should not rupture in this, and that the pupil (eye) be pierced.
Near the end of the injury, add a little salt or make a wound that bleeds, and let it heal inside by itself; and take care to ensure that what covers it heals.
And if the gall is not nerve-filled and you can't put in the needle, or it's located under that sun position, then this type of gall heals with medicine, and is treated as I and recommend in this section.
And if you want to remove that (gall), then open the space between the thighs and take out the liver carefully with this pointed tool according to this shape: with subtlety. And if you notice that it has become thin and is mixed in with the stomach fluid, then distill from your mouth into the stomach wound that bleeds or with stomach acid or with finely chopped salt, and pour the stomach fluid inside by the next day.
And continue with the operation inside until all that is from you has been removed, otherwise if it spreads to the stomach, then leave this, and begin treating the infected area again when it heals.
And continue your operation on that according to reason until it is healed.
The dissection of the eye's flesh, if you notice significant damage in the stomach, should be left for the sun; and dissect a part of that one by one, and do not finish the operation so as not to pierce the fluid from tears.
And continue with distilling stomach acid into the tear and treating it until it heals.
Chapter XVII.
On dissecting the appendix and what is born from adjusted flesh in the stomach.
Some wounds in the stomachs of certain beings produce raw flesh, and it is overprotected until it covers the eye, or approaches and strengthens near the eyelids, and they force their lids onto the parts far away, assembling them to touch like the bottom of a box.
The operation is that the stomach places its head at this location and opens the stomachs of that one, collecting all that flesh with suitable tools towards the stomach, and uses these tools with a forceps or chopsticks; then cut the flesh from the beginning until it's completely finished using scissors, and watch over not to let that substance escape while you perform your operation.
And when you are cutting those or with the needle that we have recommended in the operation of this gall, or with small saws on which you collect beeswax according to what comes close to this chapter.
And once your operation is completed and everything flesh has been removed, then fill the stomach with finely chopped salt, or distill it with stomach acid that resembles the corrosive medicines, and place on the outside of the stomach a piece of fat from an animal so that there's no spread of infected pus.
And if there is any reason for appendicitis and the pus has spread to infected pus, and you fear the spread of infected pus, then leave this stomach and treat that infected area with water that softens this infected area, and continue with your operation until it heals, and do similarly on the flesh that accidentally occurs in this type's stomach.
However, make sure you allow for complete healing of the stomach from stomach acid through natural or accidental means, operate with iron, and do not put your hand into any of these operations until that part is suffering under this operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On collecting bile in the stomach.
Bile is a type of hard veins that lie on the stomach and prohibit its operation, and slowly digest the stomach over days.
So it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the stomach where bile exists is strong and in it there is nothing else but bile, then you collect that bile.
And when you command the stomach that it places its head at this location, then suspend those veins under the sun or two depending on your judgement; and if that one is an object of double thinness according to this shape:
or is both bones gradually in a body according to this shape:
And then collect those veins with fine tools, with subtlety, and remove the pus as soon as possible when you see those veins become full of bile and are turned.
And remember not to take the stomach to the ends of the liver; and if your operation is in the middle morning facing the sun, and if your operation is firm that you cut only those veins.
And when you have completed it, then distill into the stomach with green or red stomach acid for its acidity to corrode what has been filled with bile.
If it is not possible for you to collect all at that time, then cover everything with what softens your pain, and leave this for several days until your pain is relieved and there's no spread of infected pus.
And continue working on it according to the motherly method until you heal.
And this is how the knives are:
Chapter 19.
About reducing nasal obstruction.
When you treat nasal congestion with a cautery or with hot medicinal ointment as per the description of the patient and if it does not heal, then there is no disease in the patient but instead cuts must be made over the abscess. You should wait for its maturation, and extract all moisture which is within him and place oil inside when its opening has been revealed and the nose can be seen.
And therefore, when the nose is revealed and you find corruption or darkness in your body, then you should have an instrument like this which has the form:
And this is called a sharp head, and it is made of iron, and its head should be rounded in the same way as an apple. It should pierce through like a needle or a fine file (as shown in the following figure).
And place that over the corrupted area of the nose, and then gently rotate it with your fingers, pressing your hand little by little until you know that the corruption has been removed.
And this is done with some incisions, and then restore the area due to drying causes and restrictive factors.
And if the area is consolidated and it has a good texture of flesh, and it is separated from the root of the disease and rests for 40 days without being renewed or developing pus, then you will know that it has healed.
But if not, then it is within the body rather than reducing the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: you should uncover from behind with fire or with acute medicine, and as soon as the nose has been uncovered, you take action according to this form:
The tip of the iron is triangular-shaped, and the main part of the iron should be smoothly inserted into the extremity as shown here.
And place that over the nose, and it should be close to the lacrimal; extend your hand a little beyond your elbow, and then rotate your hand around the tool until it fully penetrates the nose, and feel for the patient's face when you find an escape route through their hand.
And thus restore the area with medicines that restrict and dry out, as you would with any treatment.
And when the flesh and the area endure, then the matter that exudes to the parts diffuses returns to the nose, so this is minor pus on the face.
Chapter 20.
About reducing swelling of the cheek.
When the cheek swells completely and does not result in severe discomfort or reduction, then you should uncover the face, and guide it, and place several large incisions on the neck's scarification area, ensuring proper suction; and then place a liniment on the cheek which is made of aloes and arnica, and strengthen plaster on the cheek with powdered paste.
The method for powders is that you take cloths of linseed powder, each cloth being divided into four parts; and make from those powders.
And then place those one upon the other according to the quantity which the cheek requires. And then strengthen them with firm linen strips; and apply the suction cups to these several times on each incision; and then leave the suction cups in place, allowing the cheek to be stretched during the day and night.
Meanwhile, while the ligament is being softened, then you should have it well stretched.
And keep the ligament stretched throughout the day and night as we have said.
And if the cheek has already been reduced, then good is that, but if not, then continue to apply the plaster with powders and the linen strips until healing occurs.
Chapter 21.
About performing the operation for swelling of the uveal layer.
When there is disruption in the uveal layer, and it swells beyond the eyelids like a degree of swelling, and takes on the shape of a person due to this, and you want to incise it, then the operation on you should be as we have recommended, that you insert the needle into the furrow of the uvea in the part left behind from the part above, and then place another needle with double thread from the lacrimal side, and make that penetrate and guide the first needle according to its position; and then incise the area of the double thread and lift off the part of the uvea along the path of the needle, and strengthen that with paste.
And then remove the needle, place wool infused in egg white on the cheek and guide it until the thread falls into the eye.
And then take care of the cheek with what makes that feel comfortable until the wound is healed.
And some cuts gather from all parts within the circle of linen around the cheek adjusting swelling greatly, and then make a small puncture through the fine pin to come up at the corner of the cheek, and drain the yellowish fluid, and descend the cheek and enter soon.
And then strengthen until it has healed.
Chapter 22.
About the treatment of conjunctivitis.
This disease called conjunctivitis is simply an eye infection that resembles descending water, it is not the other one.
The way to perform the operation on her is that you make the patient lie on the prepared bed and keep them straight, then take hold of their head with your hands from both sides and guide it into the area where you saw the illness spreading to the parts left, then ensure it dries without descending and keeps its position, and finally, the patient would observe these causes as they appear.
And if it does not descend into joy, know that it is water.
You may if it is not prepared for the descent of the illness into water, then make the patient lie between your hands and take a fine needle to puncture there under the eyelid, cutting slightly on the sclera passing through the cornea's edge (into the place you see), where the illness should come out.
And once it's out, then you should distill with the odor of water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey.
And treat the other causes around as it becomes healthy.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of water descending due to smell.
We have mentioned the ingredients of water in the division and which one suits to puncture based on our declaration, then that one according to their health.
Then cover so that you make the patient lie between your hands on a mat and hold their smell there firmly.
And place your left hand near the corner of their smell's eyelid, if the smell is where there's water, it's the left smell; or with your right hand, if the smell is on the right side.
And place your right hand for taking the salve, if the smell is on the left side; or with your left hand, if the smell is on the right.
And place the tip of the salve near the corner for pregnancy in the fluid layer of the smell from the tear duct on one side of the nose, and carefully apply the salve towards that area while turning your hand.
And then penetrate into the fluid layer of the smell and feel that the salve has spread due to heat.
And cover so that the length of the salve's path to the root is the same as the distance between the pupil and the edge of the blackness, which is the corner of the smell; you will see the smell's view through the clarity of the cornea tissue.
And apply the salve inside where the water is, then gently pull it down once or twice, and as soon as the water descends, you will see the patient lying on their side, and the salve in their smell.
And rest for a little bit; if the water has descended, then you should discontinue that action before the salve is removed.
And when it's dried and doesn't descend, then you extract the salve gently, turn your hand little by little towards that area, and apply in water a small amount of clear salt from gemma; and with that wash the smell inside. And place the end or stop the wick or infused wool in rose oil and albumin on the smell there.
You should take those from our time who pause about that cotton thread in the album of the oil.
And if you don't follow your salve into the smell due to its hardness - which is characteristic of some people whose smell is hard to move - then cover so that you take the thread called alberid, which has this form:
And puncture through that conjunctive tissue, and do not let your hand end at the edge, but instead ensure you have a path to follow the salve in its location.
And place the salve according to what we've said.
And conclude your work by ensuring the patient's good rest, where they sleep on their back in a dark room, and forbid all movements.
And allow nature to take its course so that their essence becomes clear, and do not let their head tilt to the right or left in entirety.
And place the pillow according to their natural position by the third day.
And then remove that in that dark room and expose the swollen eye, let them see some causes, and return the pillow on the seventh day.
And cover so you do this during the healing hours or soon after the infusion. Have covered, that you remove this so that water can pass slightly by great and intense examination.
If it happens that there's a boil, then cover so that you remove the smell before the seventh day, and correct that with water that softens the boil.
Then you finish your examination and cover over the patient's face for their breath regulation, allowing them to stay in the dark room for several days.
And gradually adapt to that darkness and converse about their causes.
Know that in a dark room, the student cannot regain vision for several days, so you should be eager about the operation.
And we have already reached what some of those used in Artaq, and someone said that they make fire in Airak, where they drill through with the salve where water is drained.
However, I have not seen anything like this perfectly in our land, nor is it written in any of the ancient books; it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the types of madness for when one should be over those who are unaware of those:
And they can be caused by wood or metal specifically, and their ends are to this subtlety triangular, the sharp end like that is the form.
Chapter XXIV
Regarding the treatment of flesh wounds in the nose.
When in the nose there are various types of flesh wounds, some of which cause congestion that gathers like mucus in the throat, or a polyp on the inner lining; this disease is called a polyp resembling that inner lining. And if it's flesh cancerous, discolored, of a dark color; and from it comes that the flesh is lion-like not of a dark color.
So in that which is in these lion-like flesh and not fraudulent or cancerous, it seems that you should have the patient lie down among their servants and expose them to the sun. Also, inhale their nostrils and pierce them with your finger in those flesh wounds. And then extract that from the divided parts further away, and later when you have understood what has been mixed with a sharp thin smear under one part until you know that all flesh has been contaminated; if there is any justification for removing it from this patient's cause, then you should use this among the subtle tools to facilitate its extraction so that some justification remains. If you suspect gangrene or an infected abscess, then hold this over the part that is affected; or if it's from malignant abscesses, then cauterize that within where the infection can be removed and all cavities are cleansed.
And when getting in the nose near the incision add water or wine. If you have opened the nose and there is moisture inside the palate from it, then know that it has been healed.
If the moisture doesn't penetrate as you see, then know that inside it is flesh with pus over bones in the nostrils where the removal has not been done.
So when you see that there's some lump in him, use his moisture on the patient's mucus, and pause between each spoonful of the specified amount or measure, and guide him to eat until an end is found or another cause which might be possible for him.
And after this action, let him inhale his own smell so that it reaches the canals of the nostrils, and sit above his bowl, which many children do in school when they perform this activity, and it is a slight reason for whoever wants to do it.
And then pause the two ends of the string, one end that goes over the nose and the other that remains in the nostril, and later apply flesh suturing to the mucus in the string, and do this until you know that the flesh is around the mucus in the string.
And then extract the string, pause in the nose near the removal of the pus lump, and do this for three days or more until all that is contaminated from the flesh corrodes.
And at the end of the treatment, pause in the nose with a lead catheter for several days until it is healed.
If you are following the cure that dries out, use this method.
And this is the form of the tool for head purger which boils oils and medicines in the nostrils:
And make it out of silver or wood, which resembles a small opened lantern, like a small cauldron, and the shape is similar.
And if you wish, make a closed catheter like a cane, and the tube of this tool for head purger is flat, open; which has a handle at the back of it, on which you place that when you immerse oil or whatever you want from liquids and volatile substances in it.
Chapter XXV
Regarding nasal discharges from the ends of the nose.
Gone are the times when discharges resemble mucus in the ends of the nose, and it is magnified or observed for several days to see if there's improvement.
And when you notice this in the beginning of its appearance, and eradicate all that. And then place over the site or cautery or burning medicine where it is supposed to be located.
If its appearance is delayed until it becomes magnified, then consider if it's hardened, hard, of dark color and with little feeling, then don't touch this with iron which is pus; that gone symptoms indicate that you should remove this pus for the great malice towards that against which this had been.
And if the pus is lion-like in texture and not of dark color, and it's possible to cut throughout this area, then evacuate the patient and incise this suspicious sign, and cure the site with what dries out and restrain until it is healed.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
On the suturing of the nose and lips and earlobe when continuity is dissolved by infection or scarring.
Know that when you produce a break in continuity in one of these cartilages, it is not appropriate for that operation unless in some people.
So take care, when you face some cause of those [conditions], consider if it is fresh infection at its source and then adjust the two lips of the wound for suture, and properly treat that inside which becomes healed.
And if the lips of continuity break have already separated and some is made healthy, then take care that you abrade every part of its external continuum in which there is no infection. And adjust the two lips with sutures and strengthen them, and apply dragon's blood powder to those areas and mix it well, then place a small amount of adhesive plaster on top of the powder for two days or three, and afterwards remove that and replace the plaster, treating inside where the filaments might detach by themselves, and treat internally wherever it becomes healed.
The method of suturing is that you add the continuity or with needles as we have instructed in the suturing of the abdomen, or add the continuity with thread like this and show it to you.
Chapter XXVII.
On the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips at their internal parts.
Infections observed in internal parts of patients' lips like hard blisters resembling goose fat, some are smaller and others are larger.
So take care that you turn the lips and slits of each of those hard lumps from all parts, and then fill the extraction with a mixture inside where the infection is strengthened, and afterwards wash it with vinegar and treat the area with what makes it internally, wherever it becomes healed.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the incision of the gum adjusted in the gums.
Large cuts are often made on the gum that the ancients called albus. So take care that you hang that from an onion or whatever you have on hand under the cheekbones and make incisions in it. Then cut off its root, and let the healthy blood flow or remove the infection.
And place something soothing over the area or other powders for or stimulatory purposes.
And if that flesh returns, then make a secondary incision and burn it, where the cautery will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
On tooth extraction with iron.
When on the surface of the teeth at their internal parts and those in front, and between gums, sharp edges are set, some are blackened and made citrine or yellow within which they corrupt the gum, causing the teeth to become yellow.
So take care that you place the patient between your hands and hold their head in its proper position, remove teeth showing those edges and causes like sand from where no serious cause breaks them, and do this for blackness and citrinitas and others wherever they are changed.
Then if that is only in those at the start of tooth extraction, it's good; otherwise, then you repeat extraction on those to the next day and the second and the third until you reach your desired conclusion.
Know that teeth require various shapes of drilling tools and different figures depending on how your operation is prepared. And for this reason, the drillers that allow the tooth to be extracted from its internal parts are different from those that cut between the teeth according to other forms. These forms of drills must be prepared by you which I will show you shortly:
Chapter XXX.
On tooth extraction.
Take care that you treat the tooth for its pain across all stages and complete the extraction of it, noting no reason to justify the swelling after its removal, which is a substance inside where relief occurs during its extraction.
When the patient feels that tooth needing extraction, you must firmly certify which is the painful tooth, noting large swellings and pain descending on a healthy tooth, so you extract that one and immediately the pain stops when the unhealthy tooth with pain is extracted, as we have seen in operations for barbies.
Therefore when you must be certified which is the painful tooth and know this well, then take care that you scrape in the circuit of the tooth on its surface where there might be some pus, ensuring it dissolves within the tooth's gum from all parts, and then cut it near your fingers or on fine cheekbones gradually until that breaks down.
And then cut in the strength with large saw blades for good speech or burst force, hold the patient's head between your palms as long as necessary that it doesn't worsen, and carve the tooth according to rightness in a manner that doesn't break it, nor cause more pain on the unhealthy part.
And if it's not easily extracted, then take one of those tools, and get that under all parts with ease and apply force on removing it just as it begins.
If the tooth is broken or decayed, then when you cover that part with a cloth, press it at the end of a subtle ray to prevent it from breaking during your compression on that part; hold them there.
And when you make the incisions delicately in the scarification throughout the entire part of the gum tissue, maintain your strength so as not to tear that and damage that portion of him, return over the patient due to the mischief being more severe than his initial pain.
And remember not to do as those ignorant barbers do in their rashness and zeal when they are removing lumps; for they don't administer what we have advised. Large illnesses often come from these swollen lumps which are harder to fix than breaking them, and all the veins near them become inflamed, or some of them, or you remove that along with some bones in the jaw as we've testified.
And after removing it, wash your mouth with vinegar or add salt to it.
And if there is pus coming out like swelling, similarly when pus does this, take a quantity of garlic and apply it to the wound. If this does not work with that garlic, use a cautery.
The shape of the forceps and delicate tongs used to extract teeth at the beginning is long at the extreme end, short in the handle and thick, so that they don't bend when you use those tools.
And they should be as in the case of thick handles where when you use them, they don't bend, and have long ends.
And they should be made of Indian iron, with curved ends. The ends of those have teeth on them where the one inside fits into the other and is held by a strong downward pressure. Some of these ends are shaped like the bill of an ibis which has a name called ciconia, this is its strength and it has a strong construction.
Chapter XXXI.
On tooth extraction and the removal of fractured bones in the jaw.
When you need to extract a tooth that is broken inside, then cover the area with your hand for about an hour or two until the place softens; and insert or apply some of those ends which are assembled like the bill of an ibis called ciconia or guanta, the shape of the forceps:
The ends of them should be made in such a way as to resemble a file or an almond.
And if you do not follow my advice with these forceps or tongs, then cover the vein and expose all the flesh, and insert the tool which has the name of an awl, it is a small lever whose form is as follows:
And it should have a short handle that is thick at the end, and not be sharp so it doesn't break.
So if the vein is successfully punctured with this way, it's good; and otherwise, help yourself to these other tools whose forms are like:
The form of the second tool is that it should be triangular and have a particularly delicate end.
And already you will have helped with this tool, which has two slopes as follows: and with other tools which precede in tooth extraction; for when it is done with this tool which resembles an eagle, here's the form:
Of the triangular twisted or short end, which should have some thickness, and not be sharp so it doesn't break.
And know that tools for tooth extraction are similar to other tools in this respect.
Let the skilled and subtle artisans find for themselves according to what their operation means and various illnesses; among these illnesses, there are those that the ancients would neither describe nor use proper instruments for, due to their different forms.
If the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth is broken, then place your weight on that in its location according to what is convenient for you with those tools and forceps as we have described in the extraction of tooth roots, and help yourself with this gesture whose form is:
And have it be slightly thick, and hold or keep it in your mouth so that it doesn't dislodge or escape as long as the bone is being punctured; and then restore the place with suitable medicines afterwards.
If there is a small pus in the bone, then remove that of that pus and its darkness, and treat it inside until it heals.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of prominent teeth compared to others.
When teeth are prominent not according to their natural position, in which case the shape is like a ridge, especially so when it occurs in women and particularly in elderly respected ones; therefore consider: if one tooth is nearly aligned with another tooth, and it's not possible to extract or apply a remedy to that one, then leave it alone; but if it doesn't attach to any other tooth, then you should insert this tool into that space which has the following form; and it resembles a pig's snout, made of Indian iron with a very sharp end.
And have your insertion at the point where you would insert that after many days due to the hardness of the tooth, and don't make it thicker than the other teeth.
And if it is in the most extreme case to grind down, then sharpen that on an Indian steel file of which this is the form:
And it is all of Indian iron and the blade is sharp; and use here points like a file with which pins are made, on which the tooth is ground little by little in moist days for convenience, so that there will be no other tooth similarly sharpened and broken. Then draw that along at the end, and cut that with some of a razor's edge.
And if it is a tooth where part has been removed and you cut the tongue, then hollow out that within which the sharpness of that fraction should be accommodated and equalized, and fill it so that the tongue does not erode nor the word get corrupted.
Chapter XXXIII.
Regarding the restoration of broken teeth with gold or silver.
When it happens to the teeth in front of concussion and removal through impact or from being struck, and the patient cannot hold up what is chewed, and you have treated that with stiptic medicines, but your treatment did not work, then so that they do not get affected by those that turn hard in gold and not in silver, where silver goes green and for a few days you can leave it there, yet gold never changes.
And let the tooth be in such subtlety and coarseness according to the quantity that can fit between the teeth; and the form of the insertion is that you take the tooth and place twice as much as it on two healthy teeth, and gradually increase the curvature of the tooth between two broken ones, whether one or many, so that the thread reaches the healthy tooth from the other side. And then repeat the insertion into the part from which you started, hold your hand with ease and knowledge so that it does not get broken.
And when you tighten the thread with which you are holding the tooth, do not allow the threads of the teeth to intertwine.
And then use the forceps or remove them all, and add those wherever you can see them in gestures, and convert those and the hidden ones between the healthy tooth and the broken tooth, so that it does not cause damage to the tongue. And then straighten that one like how Romans would do it.
If it is displaced or broken, hold that one or those with another tooth in such a manner throughout the entire process.
And this is how teeth are and the figure of the correction of two healthy teeth and two broken ones, like these that are placed:
And when it is done to return one or two teeth close to each other in those places, and they have grown like we have recounted, and that they break.
And do not let anyone but skilled artisans and wise people do this.
And sometimes it is suitable to use some reason of cow bones, and they are made like the shape of a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth fails, and it is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
Regarding the insipidity of the tongue that appears in the tongue and inhibits speech.
This ligament that appears on your tongue in some cases or is natural as one is born with it, or accidentally happens due to injury which has already become consolidated.
And the operation on it is that you open the patient's mouth, locate its apex existing in your tongue; lift their tongue up, and then cut this nerve ligament as far as possible within the width where the tongue has returned from its recent condition.
If in that there is any hardness or knotting, and this has been made permanent due to the healing of an injury, then you remove it with force and cut through it across the width where you have cut the ligament, so as to dissolve the lump.
And make sure that there is not a cut made in the root of the flesh and that you sever here smoothly, allowing for pus to drain out.
And then wash the remnants of the cut with warm water or with vinegar or with a scrubbing liquid; and let the patient rest their tongue for several nights, so that it does not consolidate another lump.
If pus drains out, place a cover over the inflamed area; but if the pus does not drain, then cauterize the site with a long-lasting cautery that fits around this. And let that healing proceed while taking care of the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
Regarding the removal of a runny lump on your tongue.
Sometimes, small swellings appear on the tongue that resemble pustules, preventing the tongue from performing its natural function and causing inflammation in the mouth.
And the procedure for this is to open the patient's mouth facing the sun and identify the pus bubble.
And if you see it has a dark color or is black and hard, which the patient does not feel, then do not touch that which is tender.
And if it has turned to whiteness with moisture, then put the forceps in, cut through a fine membrane, and cut around completely; and if pus comes out during your operation, then place a cover over this area, made of glass or something similar, so that the pus is contained.
And then return to your work where you have prepared for him with respect, in a place that is washed with water and salt; and care for him with the other treatment until he is healed.
Chapter 36.
On the extraction of pus from both ears and that which is nothing in the galea, and other blisters.
When it appears in the galea, they are glands that are gathered like cotton wool, which occur outside and are called the two ears. They are named such when you treat them as we have said in the division, if they are not healed then you consider if there is pus present. If it is hard, of a dark color, with little sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
And if it is of reddish color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron for fear of the flow of pus; first flatten that inside until it matures, then either you puncture that, or it will burst on its own.
And if it is of white color, soft, and the root of him is delicate, then that must have been infected.
And when you are about to perform surgery on him, consider beforehand if the pus has rested and is ready after your operation or if it has decreased by any diminution; then let the patient lie down facing the sun, his head towards you, open his mouth, and have the servant hold his tongue between their hands with an instrument of noble motion, as such:
And make it of silver or of gold, and let it be finely made like a needle.
So when you press the tongue and it shows you the pus, and you place your tool over it, then take the forceps and place them in the mouth, and pull that out as far as possible from the parts. And another thing when you remove some cause of the tunics, and then pierce that with this tool which has this shape:
And another thing when you remove some cause of the tunics, and then pierce that with this tool which has this shape: It is similar to forceps, but the extremities of it are curved, so that the opening of each one of them faces towards the other, very sharp, which is made of iron and heated.
May if this tool is not available to you, then pierce it with the needle which has this shape: And it should be sharp from one side, not sharp on the other.
And after you have pierced one hole, pierce the other according to this method of piercing, and rinse the patient with water afterwards.
May if there is pus drainage, rinse with decoction of the boiled water of feverfew or rue leaves and use them in the same way as for the stictic causes until the flow of pus is restricted, then treat him so that he becomes healed.
And some blisters occur in the galea besides other blisters from those two ears, and pierce those as I have said and indicated for piercing two holes equally.
And I have already treated a woman for pus in the galea of her, that pus was of a dark color, with little sensation, which had already constricted the galea of her, and the woman was breathing with difficulty, she had also been forbidden to eat or drink water, she was already near death if she did not receive treatment for one day or two more.
And the pus had spread so much that it was between two fingers when you could pass them through with two thumbs.
And I cut the pus out carefully and held one of their forceps, then pulled that out, and removed a large portion from him. Then I pierced where I understood to be the other hole, and forced his mouth open, then squeezed his tongue, and placed the forceps in that lump of pus.
And I removed a large part from him, so there was only a little bit of pus left coming out of him. Then the galea of that woman was completely restored, she started drinking water soon after, and then began to eat food. So I did not stop piercing pus from that lump for a long time, and instead, pus formed in place of it, which continued to pierce as that one lasted.
Then I treated this way and burned the galea of her, hence after adding to the operation; then I walked around and did not know what God had done for me afterwards.
Chapter 37.
On the method of piercing when it is infected with pus.
When phlegm occurs in the uvula, and it is infected with pus and is long, then it is named as a straight lump. And if there is a large and round part at its end, then it is called a bubbling lump.
And when it is healed as we have said in the division, and your treatment does not take effect, and repeatedly there are times that pus has disappeared from him and becomes subtle, then you should consider piercing the one that has added a round lump; and if it extends to that length, and it bleeds, of dark or black color, without any sensation for him, then you must try the method of piercing him, because fear occurs in this patient.
And when you perform that according to the manner I have said about its whiteness and length, make him lie down and press his tongue with an instrument whose shape processes this action, then place the forceps in the new hole, pull that downwards and pierce it with one of the two tools which I mentioned for piercing two holes.
And choose not to introduce anything other than what is fitted to the natural conclusion of the addition, for if you introduce more from him, you would hurt his speech.
And when the incision is made, use what we have recommended in the incision of two layers, and cure it within so that it heals.
If the patient was frightened by the incision, know that when using the tool in the cautery process you should calm him down. The method of cautery on him is nothing but hot water, and you place the head of the patient in your hand, then press his tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, take some water as we said in the first stage of cautery, heat that to a live state, make sure it's not too thick or too thin, fill the hollow of the tool with which this is done:
Let the cavity of his protrusion be filled with medicine in the same way as the cavity of a rabbit's belly, place the tool on the wound and press it, the patient lies on his back so that he can swallow or spit out saliva from his mouth due to the intrinsic medicine, so that it doesn't cause any damage to him and allows him to expel it.
And press your hand on the medicine, and squeeze it over the uvula for half an hour during which you see that medicine is degraded and soothed by the chewing of the medicine.
And if you wish, pinch and wrap it around the end of the tooth, submerge the pin in the medicine, insert the tooth into the pin in a tube so that the pin adheres to that tube. Do this as many times as necessary until you achieve what you want from the cautery of the uvula, then let that rest until it dries and falls off about three or four days later.
And if you feel the need to repeat the medicine, do so, and then after the cautery remove it from the uvula's circuit around the pin, and modify what is in that circuit of his medicine. Wash it with water and clean it before applying ointment, and take care internally with remedies until he heals.
And this kind of treatment is preserved that the incision and far from fear.
Some ulcers are cured of the uvula with this that is treated finely and with cautery and incision, which is cured by submersion in this manner: take calamus, yarrow, garlic, rue, powdered gum arabic, chamomile, vinegar, and similar herbs, adjust all these ingredients or some of them into one mixture, let them be submerged in warm water and boil; then let the mixture be strained with fine cloth over the mixture, place an iron tool heated by fire on this mixture according to this manner; it should be made of silver or gold.
And immerse the tip in the mouth of the patient until the steam rises to the uvula over the pygostyle, until the uvula becomes very red.
And apply it to those red spots until they dry up, and remember that you should not perform this treatment at the onset of boils, as it would exacerbate in the boil. Do not do this, but rather declare the boil's declaration by cauterization for him.
If you do not have this tool at your disposal, then take a cane and make a small opening in his extremity with it, so that the patient's mouth is closed, as the tip of the onion prevents steam from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On Extracting Thorns and What Sthes in the Wound, and Other Causes.
Red spots stick in the wound or thorn of a beast or any other cause.
So when you remove what is obvious from those, on which your eyes look, and you press the tongue against the tool in front of yourself, so that it is declared to you what is in the throat.
And what is not visible and is hidden in the throat, know that you should make the patient vomit before the food has digested in the stomach; or if a strong cause is attached to the throat, it will be removed by vomiting. Or let him swallow a piece of bread or grated lettuce or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of dried marine sponge, wring it well with water, and give that to him to swallow; then when it reaches the place where thorns are located, it will come out on its own. And take a wriggler and drink it with thickened water, let it be inside you and gently remove it; or take a pin and insert it slightly and then pull it out gradually.
If they do not come out from those causes as we have mentioned, then use an iron tool according to this form:
And it should be slightly thicker than a small one, and at its end there is an indentation which you insert into his throat with ease.
And have his head raised upwards, and beware of touching his bone in the throat, for it will cause him pain or make that bone or thorn come out, or you should guide that bone by your hand if it is a doctor.
However, that patient must enter into it with honey, through his knowledge of the place of the attached cause and presses it in the belly, and takes his hand to the instrument among them, all according to the amount which is prepared inside him while he is being drilled.
Chapter xxx-nine.
On the extraction of a tumor attached to the gallbladder.
When the gallbladder is treated with what we have discussed in the section on treatment and medicines that do not respond, consider this regarding the gallbladder of the patient under the sun, because you have understood the tongue of him by the tool which we recommended to you.
So if you turn the tumor, extract it from the bile or with subtle means underneath appropriately.
And if it's not possible for you to extract from there, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the gallbladder of the patient, and place near the concavity of the cannula an ignited iron rod, and do this several times (until the tumor is dead and comes out of the gallbladder) and keep the patient entirely off water for the whole day.
And take a pitcher full of water, make an incision in that place for him, and wash his mouth with that; and do not let any cause pass through that one until you change the water once every hour from his hand, until he feels the water as soon as it comes.
If it has not been drilled in the way we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with garlic or with castor oil by the tool that we recommended for fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, and let it work its effects.
And another method of operation in fumigation is to take a vessel with charcoal ashes and the vessel should be covered with a cloth in the middle of which there's an opening, and place the tip of the tool inside this opening; and conduct the fumigation above; and have the patient put his mouth at the end of the tube, and close his mouth so that the fumigation does not escape until you know that the fumigation has reached the tumor, as soon as he feels it.
And if he doesn't feel it, then you should repeat the fumigation several times, and keep the patient from drinking, and eat salty foods and soups, and avoid water, and it is necessary that this regimen be properly carried out.
And this is the form of the tool on which gallbladder tumors are treated when they are seen; it is somewhat similar to forceps like these, except when it's in his body at some curvature: It is flat on the gallbladder, and the end of it resembles the beak of a stork that is handled, in which it is filed by grinding stone, so that when you grasp any cause, that does not slip.
Chapter xl.
It is the summary of the discourse concerning swellings and in the section about them.
Swellings are special cases, of bodily manners, according to what is recalled about them, from each in this treatise.
And they are diverse in piercing and section of them by two manners, from which the one is through the essence of swellings themselves; and because we take from moisture.
And the second method is near the places where accidents occur in the body, whether an swelling occurs in the head it's another case of a swelling that happens in the anus; and a swelling at a meaty location is another from one occurring at a joint; and each has its own procedure for operation.
And some swellings cover those which are not pierced but rather wait until the healing has matured in them or their completion.
And other swellings cover those that are pricked when they cross, and do not mature according to their completion, such as swellings near joints, where an swelling when it approaches a joint, the being of him is prolonged until you place what is in his circuit, and hardens his organs or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that limb; or it's a swelling near the main body part, and if you delay the piercing of it until its maturation is not complete for the main body part; or it's close to the anus, therefore pierce the un-matured one; and does not cover when you prick across due to incomplete digestion, but that which is close to the anus, so that it doesn't affect his organs and is elongated inside parts of the anus, creating a fistula, or that which is made at the end of him that is not healed. And you cover when you know the time for piercing the swelling, and this is when it has matured.
And know that it has matured when there's a reduction of pain and the cessation of fever, and near the decrease in sweating and pulse rate, and the sharpness of the head of the swelling, and other signs.
And when you know that you should pierce it at the site of pus left by the swelling and pus coming from the treatment of the prominence.
And piercing should be at the length of flesh or body, if swellings are in parts of the limbs or feet, and in areas of scars, on nerve cords, blood vessels; and, after all, everywhere evenly where there is no reflection; for those that reflect, use piercing according to that limb.
When the abscess is in a fleshly location, then it is that you should confirm the digestion of him within the puncture until his poor's body and the hard mixture are prolonged throughout and strengthen his weakened lips and depth.
As for such abscesses, you should puncture them according to the size of the flesh or the body's need, or according to which part the member requires.
And know how to administer a small puncture, and for large abscesses, a larger and wider one according to the variety of sizes of the abscesses.
And for other abscesses where the canal is contained and sealed, when it's done like that with bread, the treatment should continue as before, just as what happens in too many dublet and bobe.
And for those that are incised at a junction with three angles; and for those where the incision is made like a figure of thistle leaf, as in the abscesses of the gout.
And for them, it is administered round sections and lunar sections, resembling those.
As for that which lacks a depth like superficial abscesses, you should puncture it at the superficial point or only flatly.
And when the abscess is thick and has already collected healthy pus, you should puncture it but don't worry about removing all the dirt at once; take out some part of it, then let the abscess settle overnight, then remove a larger part, and proceed to make incisions gradually as needed until there is an open passage.
Especially if the patient is of old age or vigor, or a woman in pregnancy, or a child small, or an elderly person in decay; when the animal spirit's bile has dissolved with the release of pus, and fortifies the patient, then you should operate them.
Be vigilant in this chapter with great caution, and when you puncture the places of these abscesses, be sure to clean them and assess whether the pus from the abscess is little, or a flat section, then administer those remedies internally or locally; and if the abscess is large, and the incision's wounds are hard, then it's that you should use force when each pull enters until they reach their time.
And if in the abscess an incision is made or it becomes concave within the channel, then you should complete it with local wax or silk thread, as when you tear bread or cloths, considering moisture; strengthen that from the third day onward; and proceed to process it and heal the area under the moisture until it is cured.
If during your operation you experience the discharge of pus, then you should administer water baths and vinegar together in those with which you soak a cloth made from linen, and place that over the area where the blood flows.
If the discharge of blood continues, then it's that you should provide treatment and care, as well as powders which I have recommended in local areas of this our book and division.
And if it's during winter, and the location of the abscess is in a place with nerves, then you should soak powders in vinegar and oil, and place those over the areas.
And if it's in summer, and the areas are fleshly, then you should place ground powders in water or oil, or vinegar and oil, all of which should be rubbed until the third day, as we have said, and from there you should release the abscess and clean that area and administer treatments suitable for him until he is cured.
And this is what's necessary in knowing the treatment of abscesses universally, but according to the method of distinction I have already explained for all abscesses on how the treatment proceeds through individual chapters.
Chapter 41.
Regarding the sections of abscesses that occur in the canal of the head.
In the canal of the head are small abscesses, which have special nodes that contain membranes peculiar to them; and the characteristics of their lumps.
And they have pangs, and those that contain moisture resembling lime. And there are those that contain moisture resembling dust, and they resemble them; and there are those that are scaly, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, just as you should approach the extraction of those without causing resistance.
And the operation in the section of those is that you squeeze them with an instrument which resembles this one somewhat, which is called a probe, so that you know it contains.
If what it contains is moisture, then divide that in sections along its length according to the superficial section like this:
Start from the section of line .B. between the lines of .G. As moisture is evacuated, then you remove that skin which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause of all, should the returns be too frequent if there's any cause left over.
And then immerse the area in Egyptian ointment if it's available, or otherwise in water and salt; fill that with pus and leave it for another day, where you scrape away everything that gets dissolved from that skin.
And then apply Egyptian oil on that part twice and thoroughly if it irritates you, understanding that there should be no cause for that layer; then treat the wound with oil until it is healed.
And if there's an abscess with fatty nodes, then you should incise that part in this way: Make a cross-shaped section, cut into the area between the two lips of the section and proceed to drain it from all directions, and exert your strength in removing the tissue which contains that.
If you are facing a contradiction when sewing up, then do as I told you first.
And similarly do when dealing with an abscess on the section and during the process of healing as we have told you; and if the abscess area is a little swollen, it's due to minor inflammation and a lack of moisture.
And some of these abscesses are of this kind found in the head in certain men who lack moisture; the cause is that I incised on an abscess in the head of an old woman and squeezed it like a hard, rough, white pimple, which couldn't be drained, and if someone had hit that area, they would have gotten infected.
And in other abscesses, accidents at the head are not this one, like those on the heads of children and the redness around the ears, but the area of these all is a superficial section.
And pause the perforation for those below their part, by this you will alleviate the body of the sick in these lower parts.
And treat those with what is suitable for the process of healing.
Head Chapter 42.
On section of scrophulas which occur in the collar area.
These abscesses are observed to occur in the collar and underarm area, as well as in the axillae; sometimes they also occur in other body parts.
And those that occur in the collar are, these are masses that are generated among them, and all scrophula of those is within their own tissue, just as in the nodes and abscesses on the head, as we have recounted.
And the types of these scrophula are lumps, some of which contain moisture, and others which are malicious not yielding to healing.
Then in that one where you use good judgment in the Touchment, whose color is indicative of the color of the cord and is visible throughout, it does not adhere to the nerve in the collar or to the veins or to the suture line. It is not a lump, as when you incise it from the dry superficial area of the part above until the part below on the line of .G. within the line of .B., and burn it completely; spread the lips of the cord with oil, or with powdered oil if needed, just like we did in the abscesses of the head, and extract that little by little.
And it is more careful not to incise the vein or nerve.
And if the cutting tool is not sharp enough and you cannot control it during incision or if it causes discomfort to the patient, then do not incise what is unnecessary; if you were to incise a vein or suture line, preventing yourself from continuing with your operation would be required, so in that case stop the bleeding and apply soothing powders which leave traces of inflammation, strengthen the wound, leave it where the irritation of the abscess subsides and the wound becomes softened, and then begin to heal. When the blood has been drained.
And return to your operation once you have fulfilled that.
And then inquire if there is any cause for the other small scrophula, so you should incise and clean those.
And if it is in the area of a large vein, then do not incise that scrophula from its area. Before you proceed, hold that with a firm grip and let it fall naturally by itself.
And then fill the wound with an old cloth which you have already soaked in Egyptian oil, and treat that.
And if you incise the whole of that scrophula, then proceed by adjusting the two lips of the wound and cut until there is nothing left of any superfluity.
And if you find that there is excess pus due to the size of the scrophula, proceed by understanding where to incise it, extract that and administer suturing as was said.
And for those scrophulas that contain moisture, puncture it with a superficial incision at the point where you see its maturation place, and stop puncturing until you reach the bottom pus of the body as we have said.
And then perform puncturing, use oil and do it like the others, so that it corrodes what is rotten from the inflammation. And when you find that the wound has already been cleaned, then treat it with healing flesh oil until it heals.
Head Chapter 43.
On section of the head of an abscess that occurs in the groin area.
The ancient people treated this section under the skin, and nobody in our land has seen that being done.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those.
In men there is a bend, where the removal of the epididymis should be avoided, because otherwise it might happen in youth when all the veins and the larger ones of the patient are here.
In those who have pus pockets in the mouth or ear canal or both the ears, when the illness is not in the hair, it should be avoided to reach the section of the epididymis to prevent the loss which happens through perforation.
So when we want this, that we incise the epididymis leaving three circles of the epididymis' circles, or four at small size by width in the one that is between two circles according to quantity, so the section should be in the middle not on the cartilage, and this location is suitable for the section which is devoid of flesh and the blood vessels of his are lymphatic.
And if the doctor is hesitant, proceed thus that he extends the ear canal to the notch, and then opens the duct into which it penetrates, but beware of the blood vessels if you see any cause.
And then cut the skin as we have counted; and it is significant on the section of the canal by the flame which comes from that eruption at this which is of his eruption and through the removal of the pus.
And leave the wound opened for some time.
So when the time is ripe for the feared perforation, add two flaps of the canal's wound, and that alone is the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow until it becomes healthy.
And Diwaccas says that the summ of the speech which we have recounted, explanation is not but you see that some of those pus pockets have already expanded through the ear canal of the patient, and the patient has come into death, and his hand was cut off, and others would incise the epiglottis so that the patient breathes on the area of the wound for a breath or two, and is saved from death.
And for this reason command to keep the wound opened until it consumes the mischief of the illness; and this mischief lasts three days; and then from that point command thus on the wound, and treat it until it becomes healthy.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is that one of the servants put a coteau in her ear canal and incised a part of the lung's membrane, and I was called to treat him, and behaved as if it were the cry of the dead, and uncovered the wound and smelled the pus which was inside the wound small.
So I confessed that it had not incised a vein or artery, and the wind came out of the wound, and treated it until it was healed.
And don't punish the servant unless in the pus, and after some days return to treating his arrangements.
And I say that there is no fear at the section of the epididymis.
Chapter XLIV.
On the section about abscesses that occur outside the ear canal, which is called the ear canal hernia.
This abscess named ear canal hernia is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and moves in women.
And it occurs in two ways, whether it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural one there is no need to cure.
And the accidental occurs in two ways of which one is like fatty lumps, and the other way is like abscesses that are made by blockage of an artery, and there is fear in that. And don't assume that it makes any difference like iron rather than just when it's small. And you prepare that and investigate it as described, and if you find it resembling fatty lumps, and is not suspended by any of the veins, then you incise it like lumps, and extract it with what is inside of its skin and emulsify; and otherwise, then it should be thoroughly examined in every way, and treated accordingly until it becomes healthy.
Chapter XLV.
On the section of types of lumps.
Of the lumps there are various species, and I have already mentioned all their types in the division.
And you should consider this difference between a lump and an ulcer to avoid confusion.
So I say that for an ulcer it is hotness and fever and violent pains during which the boiling of excess is quenched; and the completion of putrefaction is when the latter ceases to have fever, pain, and heat.
In a lump there is not hotness or fever or pain, and contains this lymph which is of the body's own.
And according to the color of the body, its beginning is like a boil and is made like an abscess, whether major or minor, and they are according to two species, either fatty and contain moisture, and the colors of the moisture are spots, as I have said in the division.
And when you reach the treatment of a lump, that you expel it and investigate it at its beginning towards the instrument which is called an introdus, according to what comes in its form in the chapter which is similar to this.
And this is the method of questioning for pus and all kinds of nodes, you take this instrument and insert it into the wet spot which you find in the sore, then you will turn your fingers gradually inside until you know that the instrument has penetrated the chain.
And finally guide your hand according to the size of the sore, then extract the pus and observe what is left in the trace where it was.
And if it is a flowing wetness, of any color, then you incise into the superficial section as I have said in other sores.
And if there is no wetness at the trace of the pus, then you will know that it is greasy.
And dry over it according to this shape on the surface: Do this as we have taught you, and suspend that with forceps, then scrape the chain from all sides with ease, and if possible, keep the skin or bag over that area and remove that pus from the node.
If it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and in this case, you will have to remove it with its parts without causing any damage.
And if something causes it to open again, a little or too much, the node will return according to the custom.
And if you notice that something large or small opens from it, then complete the wound with some sharp corrosive powders and strengthen the wound. Place over that which is a pus sore cautery, and treat the rest of the treatment until it heals.
And if it is a large node, then you cut both of its lips and treat that which is enclosed.
And if there is a pulsating vein opposite it, or not pulsating, then you should apply and heat the area of that which is split by the glass and straighten that stretch for two days or three until the wound heals and stops the bubbling of the blood; then return to cut what is torn from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.
Of the forms of the instrument necessary for sectioning and puncturing.
Of those are the forms of the surgical instruments, and they consist of three kinds. Among those there is a large one, another that is of medium size, and another that is small.
The form of the large surgical tool is like this:
The form of the small surgical tool is like this:
Let them be made of iron, silver, or lead, with appropriate ends that allow me to insert the tool into the abscesses.
And these are the forms of experiments, they are named by numbers, and one of those is called bloodletting.
And there are three kinds, among which one is large, another is medium-sized, and the last is small.
The form of the large experiment, its shape:
The form of the medium-sized experiment, its shape:
The form of the small experiment, its shape:
Let them be for those abscesses, discharges, fistulas, and tumors so that they get inside those ones from bones and other causes.
They are round tools, thick, large, like big needles with which the cords are sewn on, and they are made of iron, copper, or silver. The best ones are those made of citrus wood.
They are also the experiments of black feathers, which should be used to make those fistulas open in their cavities where reflections occur, that they are reflected by their lightness onto those reflections.
They come in three types; some of them are long, others medium-sized, and the rest short, depending on the size of the diameter of the fistula and its constriction.
The form of the large lead experiment:
The form of the medium-sized lead experiment:
The form of the small lead experiment:
The forms of the forceps are of special kinds. Among those there are some simple ones that have only one curvature and come in three types: large, small, and medium-sized.
And they have tongs from them, which also come in three kinds.
And there are forceps with two curves among them, and these too come in three varieties.
And they have forceps with three curves among them, and these also come in three different types.
And all of these are necessary for their place.
Shape of a small simple stone, its shape:
Shape of a large stone with two curves: Shape of an intermediate-sized stone with two curves: Shape of a small stone with two curves:
Shape of a large stone with three curves:
Shape of an intermediate-sized stone with three curves:
And these are the forms of the scalpels according to which they cut and remove swellings and abscesses, and they are of three types; among them, one is large, intermediate-sized, and small.
Shape of a large scalpel:
Shape of the intermediate scalpel:
Shape of the small scalpel:
The ends of those are sharp for making incisions, while the other ends are blunt and not pressed in such a manner but rather are used gently when scraping swellings during an operation to avoid damaging a vein or nerve. For these actions provide relief and tranquility for the patient, achieving a smooth process that avoids harming the area around the abscess.
And these are the forms of needles, they come in three types: large, intermediate-sized, and small, just like thorns.
They are made from reed and resemble arrows on which alcohol is applied.
And in the tip there's a punctured area hidden by wax and under that is a groove leading inward and outward. You can use it as you see fit, just like when observing.
The forms of spatulas, which hide between your fingers you perform the incision on the abscesses without feeling the pain, and they come in three types: large, intermediate-sized, and small. And these are the forms of those tools:
The forms of suction cups that remove the discharge from disease are of three types: large, intermediate-sized, and small. These are their forms:
They are made from reed like a citrus fruit, round with some length, and they are delicate.
And you should have these types of suction cups in large, intermediate-sized and small sizes, so that with those you can quickly remove disease discharge when necessary, and later when you first started medicine.
However, do not use them to remove disease throughout the body, but only in fatty areas. Like those fatty lumps on the buttocks and thighs, and on the elbows, breasts, nipples, belly and testicles, they resemble those fatty lumps in humans.
And some operations are done with those instruments or small points resembling thorns according to this shape; when done through phlebotomy, or when damaging a vein or artery.
And some operations are round ones as per this form:
Chapter XLVII.
About the treatment of men's breasts which are assembled by females.
Some procedures cause the enlargement of men's breasts as they start to become fatty, and consequently make the breasts swell, similar to the breasts of females. We should strongly discourage such practices, keeping a safe distance.
And for those who undergo this treatment, ensure that you puncture them according to this form at the lunar section, within the line of B. to the line of G., and then scrape off all roughness, fill in the wound with a reddish ointment medicine, adjust both edges of the wound with stitches, and treat it internally so that it heals.
If the breast droops towards those sides and becomes softer due to its size as in females, then it should be cut into two halves containing pus inside them, at two sections resembling a lunar shape. Each one should be contained within the other of these halves with the longer line including the shorter one according to this form where line B. meets line G. Then scrape off the ridge that is between the edges of the wound and remove any swelling. Apply whatever was mentioned about suturing and powders necessary for internal treatment until it heals.
And if you do not complete the puncture according to what needs to be punctured for the discomfort of the patient and disease discharge, then you should apply the wound with a wet compress submerged in corrosive ointment and treat it internally while that corrodes away the fatty tissue, and then treat it internally until it heals.
Chapter XLVIII.
About puncturing abscesses that cause touch sensitivity.
These abscesses that cause touch sensitivity are of the species of scrofulas, thorns, which have a skin layer that is removed.
And among those that contain moisture; and about the ones that contain moisture, you should puncture them according to this lunar section figure: from line G. to line B. And after all that is in the abscess has been removed during treatment, then leave it covered with a cloth for another day.
And then keep applying and treating the affected area with suitable ointment until it heals.
And if the abscess is from the glands or in the case of scrofula, then you cut on that area as we have said in the section about scrofula, equally.
And if the wound extends into areas that can spread pus, then administer with the cautery according to what we have explained earlier.
Chapter 49.
Section on abscesses that occur due to an arrow or a vein.
When the arrow is broken and the wound heals above it, then pus abscess occurs. And the signs by which one can know that inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or a vein: when the abscess is from an arrow, it is long and extends into the core of the body; and when you press on the abscess at your instructions, there is a hissing sensation felt in it.
And that which is from a vein shows its redness outwardly.
And this section concerns this abscess, especially in those with the symptoms, and in anginas, and in the neck, and in localized body pains; it is large, so iron treatment must be avoided, and that which is at the extremities, or at the head, must also be treated carefully.
About the one that is due to inflammation of the outlet of the artery, cut longitudinally in the wound section; and then suture the area with thread and locate the arrow, removing it from under the layers where it has been exposed.
And then work on that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and strengthen the arrow with a double metal band at two points - which causes you to feel your strength during the removal of both arrows as practiced by the Templars.
And then pinch the spot that is between two ligaments within the space where the disease affects all of it, and dissolve the abscess.
And then apply treatment in the place where pus is generated within the area where the ligaments are; and continue treating that with suitable ointments until it heals.
And if it's an abscess due to vein section, then cover that part of the abscess with your hand in such a way that you can reach it from your possible position near the abscess on the body, and then insert the needle at the place where you had held your hand. And make it penetrate; and have that filament double within where you will extract that from the other side, and then tie up that abscess with both ligaments as I have told you in the ligament of an apple4 of two parts each on the extremities of the thread.
If you fear that you will extract the thread, then insert metal at that needle where you have all of the abscess, and make sure to cover the tip of the first needle before insertion, and strengthen your metals in four places.
And then dry the abscess in the middle of it until you reach what is inside, so then you cut off the excess of the wound, and leave what sticks to it.
And then place the powder which you have submerged in oil and vinegar over it, and continue treating with baths and ointments until it heals.
Chapter 1 of the abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
In the same way that abscesses occur in arteries and veins, they also occur in nerves when there is a compression or overuse injury, by analogy.
And the same treatment is done in the areas around the joints or at the heel, or anywhere where there might be swelling.
And it's a heavy abscess, and resembles the color of the other body, and is at the major places of its dispositions, and when stretched against vehemence, feels like a faintness in the patient.
And it is not an abscess that extends into the core of the body, and by itself causes the wound to heal, and it swells everywhere, and does not move in front or behind parts.
Therefore, that which is at the joints should not be treated with iron, for strong blood will engender contraction.
Apply that which is in the head or forehead by making a cut across it. If it's a small abscess, then apply that at the corners and remove that from the corners.
And if it is large, then suspend that with thread, scrape that area, and stop that bleeding; adjust the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
Chapter 50.
Section on the section of abscess which occurs from disease affecting the stomach.
Notice the signs of diseased stomach which manifest in the abdomens of those and in other parts of the bodies of those afflicted with diseases that are likened to fungi, among which the root is fine while the head of that is thick; already those tissues of those have changed, and it belongs to those which are small, and it belongs to those which are greatly magnified.
And I have already seen one where in the stomach of that person were two parts which resembled fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, of fine tissue.
And the tissues of those were inverted and would tear open, with dampness continuously flowing from that area.
Then I enter those and cut them in each foot up to eighteen inches. And the other up to six inches.
And in the operation during their recovery, if their body is wet, and the color of their skin is white, wet, with a slight reddening; then you should cut up to the middle line on them, and apply heat near your presence when you see any pus. You must remove that section containing the infection. And if there's still pus after this, use heat treatment on it.
And if you see the body puffy and fearful, avoid cutting with iron; rather, take lead that has recently been heated, and apply heat to that area. The method of doing this is as we have said; leave it for two days.
And then adjust in the constriction of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to apply heat with a large amount of lead inside it, until it is removed and falls out from its own effort.
And if that area is reddened, then in its operation there are some causes of fear and panic, especially in the case when it's located in the abdomen.
It is possible that you might remove the infection from there, and then heat treat it so that it doesn't return.
And afterwards, care for that place until the wound heals.
And remember that you should not cut anything with a dark color, little sensation, and requiring careful observation; for such things are likely to be cancerous.
And I will come back with more reminders about this shortly.
Chapter 52.
About the treatment of inflammation around the navel.
Inflammation around the navel is caused by various factors; either due to fissures on the belly, which is above the stomach and when this skin or the intestine stretches according to what happens in other ruptures; or because of infection that flows through veins or arteries as mentioned before, or due to restricted wind circulation within.
If it's due to a tear in the stomach wall and tearing of the tissue, then the color of the pus resembles the body's color; there is pain and fever, and symptoms appear from various locations. And if it's due to the protrusion of the intestine, then the position of that area is as we described earlier, with more intense variability. As you press that on your fingers, it disappears and then returns; and it becomes softer under your touch, becoming magnificently inflamed and vigorous work must be done.
And if due to dampness, then it's painful and doesn't disappear when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted or swollen.
And if due to infection, then these signs appear, the pus turns black and declines in quantity.
If it's caused by flesh damage, then the pus is heavy, thick, and hard, forming according to a quantity.
If it's due to wind congestion, then touching that area feels painful.
And when performing the operation for this, you should consider if the inflammation around the navel is due to infection in the artery or vein, or due to wind congestion; you should avoid treating it here because fear and panic are involved just as we taught you about the pus caused by arteries and veins in Chapter 1.
And if the inflammation around the navel is due to an intestine or tissue, then you should order that the body hold still and be extended. Then feel all around the navel area, and command it to lie face up between your hands. Also encircle it with a middle line in the navel circuit at the spot where you felt during examination; extend the surface of pus further upwards towards both sides from an inch or more; then apply strong heat or cold near that circuit.
And then cut open the center of the pus area above the membrane and insert your fingers into that spot; if you find or watch it through the membrane, then remove it immediately and push the intestine back inside the abdomen.
And if you have found or torn the tissue, then take that using an inch; cut away any excess from it.
And if it's opposite to your artery or vein, then circle that area, and proceed with your operation again; take two needles and place them in those strong points, insert the needles into the circuit around the pus where you have done previously, doing this in a cross-like manner, letting them penetrate. And strengthen the pus at four parts above the needles.
And if you want to, leave the needles in place and let that area with stretched flesh fall naturally by itself; or cut it when it becomes thinner and puts pressure on the skin, then take care of that using ointments until it heals.
And if the inflammation around the navel is due to flesh damage or dampness in it, then you should remove the pus as we have said and get rid of the infection or dampness that you find there, then take care of that using remedies until it heals and stabilizes the area.
Chapter 53.
About the treatment of inflammation.
We have previously discussed the types of inflammation and how they are treated with medicine, noting that treatment with iron should not lead to ulcers. We also talked about inflammation caused by the negligence and carelessness in treating it.
And it was said by the ancients that some cramps can occur in places where their eradication is possible, such as in the head which is found in the breasts or buttocks and similar to parts of the body allocated for extraction, especially when they start small.
When it is old and is severe, do not blame yourself for them, because I cannot cure anyone of that illness nor have I seen another, nor has it reached this.
And the operation for you is as we have said, that you should proceed and leave the patient clean of black bile, remove some cramps, and then treat it if there are obvious signs of disturbance.
And prepare the patient for surgery in the preparation where the operation is located, and provide with tongs that reach to it; and make a concave from all sides on the cord until the excision within does not damage any cause of your reasons. And let the blood flow, and do not make any pus larger, and squeeze the areas, and remove the large blood with your hand or an instrument where it is possible among the tools.
And if your blood flow is in large amounts and it stops the circulation of veins or arteries, then apply a cautery to that inside which the blood flow has ceased, and afterwards treat that with other treatments until it is healed.
Capitulum Livum.
On the treatment of dropsy.
We have already discussed in the division about the species of dropsy from water and the signs for each species. For their treatment, we use medicines.
And that one which is cured with iron is none other than the species of simple heat, and it should not be approximated to the species of tympanicus or the species of dropsy, for this one is fatal.
And when you have treated this species of dropsy from tympanicus with medicines and your treatment doesn't seem effective, then consider this: if the patient has already become weak or if it is another disease along with that other dropsy, such as coughing or abdominal pain, among others, in which case fear lies with this.
And if you find the patient suffering from excess vitality, and there is no other illness but just dropsy in them, not young or old, then the way of performing surgery for this is that you raise the patient between your hands, and take care of it properly with their hands, push out their abdomen while they are submerged in water, expel the water from the corner of their mouth, and take a needle spine according to this shape:
Let it be of two parts being sharp, with an acute end like a needle; however, it should be somewhat shorter than that, gradually, for when performing surgery on this matter, do not enter into the intestine, and make sure to stop it.
And then consider if the development of dropsy is from parts of the intestines, in which case you should move away from the navel by three fingers' width to the sides, on the right side above the pubic bone.
And if the development of dropsy is due to an illness in the stomach, then your examination should be on the left side of the navel by three fingers.
And if the origin of the issue is due to food, then your examination should be on the right side.
And don't let your examination be on the side where the patient wants to lie down, for fear that the excesses might flow towards that location.
And then puncture the entire length of the needle with an instrument, and intervene in that section, lift your hand between the needle and the anus, scrape that area; and if it's as much as a fingernail or roughly.
And then puncture the anus so that the needle reaches the place where you want to empty it, which is the location of the water. And then extract that and insert an instrument of this shape: and it is similar to a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or ivory or copper, in which the lowest part of it has a small needle, and on its sides are three needles: two from one side and one from the other side; and the tip is cut like a feather according to this manner:
And at the tip of it that is closer to the water source is a ring. When the instrument reaches the water, then immediately rise upon it, thus evacuate some water halfway in the mouth. If you evacuate more than this during an hour, it weakens the patient through the resolution of their animal spirit, or they might suffer from coma leading to death.
Remove from that according to the amount of virtue in him and according to what you understand from the disposition of the patient's body, as well as the meaning of his pulse and the goodness of his life.
Then extract the instrument, and drain the water which causes this; it is often retained by the block which drains what is above the kidney, about which you should puncture it according to that manner.
And apply the instrument to the other side on another day if you observe that the patient tolerates this, and drain a small amount of water, and do this for several days out of fear, and refrain from any error so that it does not evaporate any of the water but just a little.
If you fear for the patient's condition, and drain a large amount of water, then treat that with sand burial, sweat in a bath, and long exposure to sunlight; and treat that with drying medicines until it is healed.
And apply the cautery to the stomach, and clean up and prepare near the water extraction, according to what I have recounted in what has been mentioned before.
It seems like "Capitol" is a proper noun or maybe an error as it doesn't fit into the context of medieval medical treatise. Without additional information about its specific use in this text, there's not much more to translate or comment on. If it were referring to a place, such as "The Capitol," in the context of medieval times, it might be akin to a governmental or judicial center which could relate to laws and regulations concerning health and medicine at that time. However, without further context, this is speculative.
Regarding the treatment of children who are born with un perforated bladder opening.
Some of the children's veins flow from their mother's womb, and the head of their mixture is not perforated (or it sticks straight or is not in its proper location).
So, at the moment of birth, make incisions to facilitate the passage and under a subtle pressure according to this form:
And apply a small lead wire to the wound and hold it there for three days or until healing.
And when they want to urinate, let them urinate; and then return that (the situation or condition).
And if you do not pause the lead, it is possible that the urine which goes over the place will not close this (meaning the opening or wound).
And that which comes out of where the lead wire is stuck should be treated with a lead wire as we have said, for too many days before it gets bigger.
And those in which there is lead not in its place, they are led, the cause of this being from those, that which is born and whose lead is you must bring to the end of the head of the penis so that it cannot urinate inside; as it raises the penis with his hand above; and it is not for his generation, because his semen cannot reach the mother according to its direction, and it is a disease stuck in place.
And the method of the operation in him is that the disease be laid above his two, and then extend the head of the penis from him with your left hand with a strong extraction, and cut off the head of the cap of the penis at the location of the prepuce with an sharp knife, as if it were done by feathering, or any part you do not recognize, so that the middle of his scrotum looks like the head of the penis and that the lead falls into the middle place according to this.
And remember that in your operation of pus discharge, which wounds occur here; pause for him at this where you cut the pus, and treat the wound until it is healed.
"Capitol lvi." appears to be a reference or title related to section 56 in what seems like an organized document or text, possibly a medical treatise. Without specific context about how this was used and where exactly it fits within the larger work, it's difficult to provide more detailed information or translation. If this is part of a structured list or numbering system for chapters, sections, or steps of treatment, then "Capitol lvi" would indicate that this text or action corresponds to section fifty-sixth in the sequence.
Regarding the whitening that occurs on the foreskin in the head of the penis and discoloration, blackness, and adhesion of the foreskin at the head of the penis.
These whitening phenomena occur in the penis and are signs of fibrous growth.
And one of them is malignant, and the other is not.
Not malignant: you should suspend it with a fine string and remove that until all is gone; then apply Egyptian ointment on that spot submerged in the middle; and then treat that with clear ointment until it heals.
And if the whitening is malignant, by its coloration, then you should apply the cautery near the incision of it and its proportion.
And if whitening is in the foreskin of the head of the penis without circumcision, and one part of the whitening is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you should remove the whitening which is inside at the beginning until it consolidates; and then you treat that outwardly, when you treat that period, it may not be guaranteed that it will not get stuck.
And it also happens in the genital region and foreskin with blackness and corruption, so you should remove all that is already degraded and that wants to corrupt or that has already corrupted; then draw a line over this area about this mixture, which is treated with flour made from poppy seeds and crushed grains of mustard and pepper.
And treat that with the other treatment until it heals.
And if there is discharge of pus, then apply lunar cautery according to this form:
Lunar cauteries are done in two consecutive times, that is, during pus discharge and when the wound becomes corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and totally destroyed in that moment, then dig an opening into the meat of the foreskin with a lead tube so that the patient can urinate through that.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion happens only in that which contains the foreskin, and over it circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to infection or abscess) dig out with an oblique cut while making the ligament dissolve completely and release the entire head of the penis.
And if it is difficult to remove them precisely, then dig that you incise with an oblique cut from the head of the penis and foreskin area, and when the foreskin, which is delicate, becomes easily pierced due to its delicacy.
And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis by a strip of its subtlety, which has already been rubbed with water so that it does not adhere to another area.
And then let it be treated with a styptic stick until it is hardened.
Head 57.
Chapter 57: On the development of children and on the treatment of what happens with those who have been circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution like other diseases: rather, it is more about our operation and our will, and in the case of children specifically, it is necessary that we dedicate to this better surgery and method with less loss suffered for health.
Thus, it is said that the ancients did not perform circumcision on all free men, where they do not use laws for these, but rather due to our acquisition through experience, I have found that most artisans and barbers use circumcision and castration on testicles and on thumbs; and they use ligament for the penis and excision for the nails.
And I have already tried all these methods and did not find better castration on thumbs, with ligament on the penis as in castration like nails, where the pus escapes more above, where the foreskin has two tunics, and leaves a layer below, and it is easily torn to other excisions and secure pain. And the castration which is performed by artisans and is manual, as those blacksmiths do, it is not guaranteed that the excision of the tip of the male organ occurs, for it easily enters the wound.
Similarly in surgery on nails, easily rust sets and corrupts your operation. And the foreskin of a child is short by nature, and large infections occur in such manner that they do not require castration, I have seen this.
The advantages of castration that is done with knives and ligaments on the penis, I discovered through my own experience, where the knives have a proportional excision, thus their sharpness above is as great as the sharpness below; hence when you press your hand it has two sharpnesses, and you cut according to a comparison in one moment; and it is done compression of the penis on a figure containing the foreskin from every side, at which there are no errors.
And the first way of the operation is that you make the child stand up considerably if it's those that I understand to be small ones, so you don't do anything but tie the penis in the foreskin only and leave him like that for another day.
And then make him happy in every way possible of what he receives with his intelligence. And then have him stand between your hands well prepared, and let it not exceed three minutes; hide the knives in your hand or leave them by your side, so that the child does not see those or any other tools.
And then place your hand on the penis of him and blow in the foreskin, and pull that into where the head of the penis is released, and then correct that which is added to it in the case of inflammation.
The form of the knives in castration, this is the form:
Let the first knives be uncut and the others cut, so that no part of the key is released, and the length of the two sharp ends should be as long as the length of two thumbs equally.
The mistake in castration is that it easily escapes the whole intrinsic foreskin or part of it, and you must then perform the excision.
And so dig that you stretch that of your time on your thumb in front of the abscess at the location, and cut it according to equality.
And if you can't hold it on your thumb, then cut that with a knife and cut it there.
If it has passed three days, and you notice that the wound is still swollen after the abscess has been drained, then you should look inside to see if the abscess cavity is soft, and remove any pus there, then apply an application as needed, using a second one that was prepared for you.
And watch your head on the wound, where it will not be at him upon you.
And then treat that area with the powders we have recommended in the treatise on powders, until the wound consolidates.
And if it has overflowed beyond measure from the source, and follows its course, you won't notice it on you.
And if it has been three days, then treat that area as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter 58.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by blockage due to stones or congestion, or by pressure or swelling, and resembles those we have discussed regarding methods of treatment in the section.
And if it is not dissolved as we have said and the cause acts strongly upon the patient, then it must be made to do so by the person administering treatment with an instrument called a syringe, which has this form: It should be made of silver and be fine like a lion's claw, similarly to the needle of a pricking device from the East, having lengthiness akin to that of half a palm, where its tip is also thin.
And the method of expelling urine through that is: hold the bent tip and bind it with wool or thread for good fit; then insert the ends of the tip into the opening you've made in the syringe, and if any hair causes unnecessary obstruction, remove it. Otherwise, forcefully introduce it into the cannula. Then pump the syringe vigorously from both hands and from the abdomen.
And have the patient sit over a vessel, and warm the bladder and genitals with oil mixed, olive oil and water.
And then insert the syringe with ease until it reaches the base of the penis; and bend the penis upwards towards the navel area; then press on the syringe inside that; then press inside again until it reaches the bladder, and that guides the patient to empty their bladder into the voiding source; otherwise, do not proceed in this order but rather according to where there is twisting.
And then extend the catheter gradually with wool bit by bit, because urine will soak the wool.
And then remove that and do treatment for urine, use the syringe, don't stop doing this and use the syringe until the bladder and patient find relief.
Chapter 59.
On the quality of bladder irrigation with vinegar and similar instruments that correspond to this.
When there is an ulcer or abscess in the bladder, or congestion within it, or constriction due to swelling, and you wish to distill water and medicines inside, then this must be done with an instrument called vinegar clamp. This is its form:
If the end of it is closed off, then that's when it is sealed (closed). And in this there are three tubes: two on one side, as you please.
In the beginning is a concave shape where water accumulates, and inside you add as much as you need to. When any cause forces this humidity out, it gets forced out; when expelled, it gets forced out again, and when it's expelled far off, according to how the vinegar reacts with which is burned in sea battles using naphtha.
And if you wish to prevent this humidity in the bladder, insert the end of the vinegar clamp into the moisture, and draw out that which has been accumulated upwards, as the moisture is drawn out into the concavity of the vinegar clamp.
And then insert the end of the vinegar clamp in the penis as we have recommended for using the syringe; and then press out the moisture with whatever you press out, because that moisture immediately reaches the bladder, and the patient will feel that.
Shape of the subtle catheter used for bladder irrigation, which is as follows:
And it should be made of silver or brass, where its tip resembles a small feather, and let the rod inside it be smoothly inserted.
And then take the bladder by movement, and pause in that moisture which you wish to irrigate into the bladder, and place it between two with strong thread on the tip of the double catheter, and heat that moisture over the flame.
And then insert the end of the catheter into the penis.
And then press your hand over the bladder with moisture, stretching downwards until the patient feels that this moisture has reached the bladder.
If you do not present with a bladder problem, then take one of the gallstones and make from that circle; and perforate it all over its roundness; and insert a strong needle in those punctures, both when they are turned around; and add the circle likewise as added fat, because when you stop at the point where you want from the moisture, drain and waters.
And then place that in the instrument and do it like you did with the bladder, and direct your hand inside so that moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter LX.
On the extraction of bile.
We have already discussed in the division the types of bile and its treatment with medicines, and the difference between bile produced by the gallbladder and bile produced in the bladder, and the signs of that.
And we have discussed the bile during which the operation affects my hand, and section.
And the bile produced in the bladder is precisely that which is made in the bladder.
And I'm recounting that with clear and brief exposition.
So it says that bile produced in the larger bladder mostly goes to children; and the signs of this are that urine excreted from the bladder is like water in its thinness, and appears as sand; and the patient rubs his penis, gets red spots on the skin, and then becomes ill; and in this way one sees the anus with lumps made by those.
And it is only after fourteen years that children recover from this; and the treatment is difficult in the old. And for young people, it moves through this midway point among those.
And for the one in which bile is greater and treatment is easier; if it is small, it is contrary to that.
And how do we approach the treatment of that? We start with the beginning of its modification, which heals the patient by crucifying them to allow the entire opening through which is found in their intestines; that opening sometimes prevents the spread of bile due to the examination of it.
And then place the patient on their feet and make them stand upright so that the bile can descend to the lower part of the bladder, or escape from any other locations or some spots.
And then make that incision between your hand and the patient's legs, and let the other parts of the patient remain as they are, so that the entire bladder can be made to descend towards the prepared places.
And then take care of that and all that excess.
And if you feel the bile in the space, then you should quickly cover it with a section over it.
And if you don't clean all your touch area, then cover it with oil on the third finger of your left hand, if the patient is a child, or use the middle finger if they are a full-grown young person, and insert that into their anus. And take care of the bile while it remains within your touch. And convert that small amount gradually into the neck of the bladder.
And then press on it with your finger, and expel that to the discharge locations outside the body through the area where you made the incision.
And instruct the priest to press the bladder with his hand; and instruct another priest with his right hand to extend the legs upwards towards the discharge locations above, and with his other hand stretch the cord which remains at the legs in the place where the incision is made.
And then insert the curved tool from which this is the shape of it: And divide in him what is between the anus and the legs, not at the middle place, before the left thigh; and let the incision be over that bile, your finger be in the anus, and make a cross incision, so that the incision outside is wide and inside squeezed according to how much bile I have removed from it as possible, but no more, for strongly we hold our finger which is in the anus, the bile must be allowed to drain through this incision, and it is forgotten when the patient recovers.
And know that there is some bile that has angles and edges, which makes the discharge of it difficult because of this.
And from that which looks like thorns to a lion, and is round, it causes easier discharge because of this.
And if it's that one with angles and edges, adjust in the crack.
And if it's not like this, then cover that with oil, or strengthen on that properly, the tip of which is like a file with which you strengthen over bile, and do not escape from it; or insert your delicate fine tool with curved tip.
And if you can't strengthen on that, then expand the crack a bit, and if you see blood flow, cut it with vinegar strengthened.
And if the bile is more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand into the opening of the bladder, and proceed to insert it; and then push a small amount close to this; and similarly do so if they are spots more than two.
And if the bile is very large, then it's ignorance to insert that with a large incision, which can happen to the patient in either of two ways: it may stay or cause continuous distillation of urine, so that the location is not completely solidified.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands. When it comes to administering an evacuation of the body that is outside, or in the fracture of the patient with the scythe inside where he extracts that in pieces.
So when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with slices of aloe and dragon bark, and strengthen that. And place over it a cloth soaked in oil and vinegar, or in rendered oil and water, so that the pus may be drawn out by the application.
And then roll the patient back onto his chest, and do not move the stomach in during the first day.
And when you have moved it, wash the area with water and hot oil, and then treat it with tincture of lime and tincture of balsam until it is healed.
If pus or corrosive matter occurs in the wound, adjust and apply it, resembling when the bladder is frozen with urine (and this is known by the discharge of urine), then intervene with what you said in the wound and extract that urine. If redness causes the bladder to bleed into the bladder and its putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and against all kinds, where you need to apply what is suitable for its cure until it is healed.
And throughout the entire process of treatment, take care of both thighs and adjust the medicines that are placed on the body.
If the wound is small and located on the lower part of the thigh, inside the belly, and urine excretion is forbidden, then treat it with what I recommended before you reach this section; and after these are applied through this treatment, they become apparent. And now I mention this, and that you take a bone saw to use, of which here is the form:
of triangular end, sharp, fixed in a handle.
And then take the bone saw, hold it on the thigh and leave the wound there so that it doesn't return to the bladder.
And then place the bone saw in the thigh, making a hole so that the tool can reach that wound. And turn the tool with your hand in that small wound little by little, and you make an opening so that the other side of it penetrates; for urine is immediately liberated.
And then press your hand on what is hard in the wound from the part opposite the thigh, when that is frozen and the hole is filled with urine, and the patient is healed.
If this treatment is not suitable for any reason that prohibits it from being done in this way, then leave the wound open with one bone saw, and another on top of the wound. And place over the wound in that thigh between two layers. And then extract that (meaning the obstruction or lesion). And then move the muscle and change the frozen urine in the wound.
It is not necessary to have a bone saw on the wound itself, but only so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other muscle above this way, when it is moved close to the exit of the wound, the cause returns to its place and recovers the body.
And for this reason, it is necessary when you have the bone saw above, that you lift the cause to the parts above, or that it returns you with your help, and recovers the body like we have said.
I'm sorry but without context I can't provide a meaningful translation for this term "Capitol .lxi." It seems like it might be referring to a chapter number (.lxi being 56 in Roman numerals), but more information or the surrounding text would be helpful.
Regarding the extraction of stones from the kidneys.
Stones in women are few.
If a stone is found among those, then the treatment of it becomes difficult, and it is prohibited by complicated methods.
One of them is that in women, if they are too weak during pregnancy, it can cause issues.
And the second is that you don't find a pregnant woman who can describe if she's menstruating when she's pregnant, or if she has had sexual intercourse with her husband before marriage.
The third is that you don't find a woman who knows this art, especially the operation by hand.
And the fourth is that the location of this section about stones in women is far from the location of the stone itself, which requires a search for the section, and there is fear in that.
If it's necessary for you to do this, then consider taking a skilled woman who knows how to do it, as they are few.
If you lack that one, then approach a skilled surgeon who is careful or subtle, or present an elderly woman who is knowledgeable about women's affairs, or a woman who has learned part of this art.
So have this woman present, and instruct her to do everything you tell her about the investigation on the stone until its removal; which means that she should consider if the woman is pregnant, then make sure she follows your instructions in her abdomen and can locate the stone.
So if she finds that, let her leave her instructions as is, and then instruct her to cut into that area.
If it's not an appendix, then command the midwife to insert her finger in the patient's abdomen and inquire about the pain. Since she places her left hand on the bladder, she compresses that area well.
So if she finds that, then direct her to guide that gradually upwards from the opening of the bladder through your parts until it reaches the limit of your thigh, making use of its virtue within which it gets to know the depth of the muscle.
And then inscribe on that place at the top of the patient's abdomen, find the depth of the muscle from any part to their stopping point and center the pain in that area. The doctor must not let his finger move away from the pain while he is doing this.
And the section should be small at the beginning; then insert your finger on that section, and if you feel the pain, adjust to that section according to how much it feels as though the pain has been distributed from there.
And know that the signs of pain are lumps: those among them are few and large, rough and sharp, long and round, having no roots.
And know how many signs there are from you for this way that you might explain about what you want.
And if you want to see the pus flow, adjust on the inflamed area and leave it for an hour until the pus is gone, then return to your operation when the pain has disappeared.
And prepare for yourself the tools that are mentioned in the extraction of pus in men, so you may be helped by them during your operation.
And if you want to see the pus flow, and you know that the expulsion of pus is from the incision made during the extraction, then you dust with powder over the area and strengthen it with pulverized and powdered elements and string. Do not repeat this; allow the pain to remain and do not extract too much pus, for otherwise the disease will persist. And then heal the wound.
And as the heat of the pus subsides over several days, and then it heals, then you return to your operation when the pain has disappeared.
Chapter LXII
Regarding hernia compression section.
Hernia aquous is nothing but an addition of moisture in the white bile, which contains the essence of the generative fluids and is referred to as bile.
And sometimes these hernias occur in the natural place where their nature provided for the passage of bile, when it has been cut and more bile is there; this is the generative fluid between white bile as we have said, and it is not that which is called 'tart'.
The formation of this type of hernia occurs due to overuse on the generative organs, so this substance is poured into them. Sometimes it happens due to hitting performed on the generative organs.
This moisture has different colors: the color of it might be declining to yellow, or to blood-red, or reddish, or it could be black and fatty, or water-like white. This is what varies most among them.
And the signs by which one can tell where this addition of water is located: if it's in the bile we mentioned, then the swelling takes on a shape extending somewhat along its length, like an image of bile, and there appears the generative organ, because moisture contains that from all sides.
And if the moisture is in its natural place, then the swelling appears at the part of bile and that's why one assumes it to be another organ.
And if the moisture is between the generative fluid and white bile, then one may find that in the middle.
And if you want knowledge of the color of the moisture, then you can inspect the color of the moisture in the swelling through the cut made into it; according to what emerges from the trace of the incision, judge about what is inside.
So when we come to the healing of this, we have ordered that the patient be given diuretics if that is possible for you and increases his/her body's fluid content.
And then he should be placed on his back on some cushion or another for a short while, and place your clean cloths under him.
And then sit on the left part of him/her and command that the servant follow his/her right side, who extends their arm to one or both sides to the generative organs and the region of the belly button.
And then take a side view and divide the generative organs from their middle location along its length within proximity to the navel.
And make the incision according to rectitude equidistant from the line that should be along the skin of the generative organs, until it reaches white bile including it.
And scratch that, observe and watch carefully to ensure you don't scratch too deeply; your scratching should be at the place where you are scratching so as to find that it is hanging higher than bile and with great care inspect your scratching according to how much is possible for you.
And then puncture the white bile filled with water through an expanded incision and extract all of the water.
And then separate between the two lips of the incision with scissors and extend bile up to your parts; do not touch the generative organs including the region, and cut through the bile in that manner which is possible for you. And you should enter that inside him in pieces or in parts, and especially in his delicate stomach, for if you do not examine meticulously the insertion process, it cannot be guaranteed that the water will not return.
If the other person performs this outside of your body during your operation, when you have completed the section of the appendix, return inside him then adjust the two openings of the genital canal with stitches, and treat that wound like the others, until it is healed.
And if you find that the other person is affected by another illness, then cut off the vessels under the suspensory ligament, and remove the other person, and proceed to treat it as we have said.
If the water is added in two parts each time, then you know there are two hernias; therefore, enter that part as you did with the other equally; and if it's clear to your eyes that it's an operation, then do it.
And then you clean the wound, and between the sections use wool submerged in oil or greased with oil; then place another piece of wool which has been submerged in wine and oil, and spread that over both legs and the belly; then place more cloths folded and powders above it, and cover those from above with a cloth as this shape:
And let there be pressure with two cloths filled with wet wool according to this resemblance; let the ends have a grip that presses against dry wool or wet wool, and place them in the crotch of the underwear, one end going into the other from behind like a loop. The second end should go near the waistband of trousers. Let there be two ends at each thigh, and two others at the elbows, and all pressure should be adjusted within the crotch of the trousers.
Sometimes this kind of hernia is medicated artificially with a cautery instead of surgical removal; you should use a small surgical knife for the cautery, and cut into the genital canal, then ignite according to what we have recommended when the white appendix containing the water becomes visible. Then you proceed with the cautery as follows: And it resembles Greek lettering.
And you should pierce that appendix, and ignite when all the moisture is out.
And then extend the appendix with scissors, and scrape off the edges with scissors, and use a small heated cautery. Then cut that section as much as is possible while removing everything; and be careful not to let the fire touch the wound.
Know that this operation is safer and further from the wound's discharge than simply treating with medicine, and better than an operation on a section.
If you experience an adverse reaction in the form of pus at the time of section or cautery, or from wound discharge, then understand how this adverse reaction affects you and apply the corresponding treatment for it as indicated, adapting your healing regimen accordingly.
If the patient is scared and doesn't anticipate a second operation due to its horror, then administer perforation according to what I have advised; and it's when you are certified, based on what we discussed about meanings, that this particular hernia is water-filled.
And understand that you should lift the patient onto some elevated bench, then puncture the abscess at the lowest part of the affected area with a small hole, and proceed with the puncturing according to the length of the body.
And let the cut be wide so that it drains all the water.
And then place your hand on that spot and smooth it out, so that all the remaining water can drain away. And then treat that until the wound is healed.
If there is a conflict in the water discharge at that time you puncture it: this action should not be carried out unless the white pus in the wound's opening causes a conflict and prevents the flow of water, then proceed to introduce an instrument into the wound with which water from the dropsy is extracted, the shape of which precedes; or adjust on the edge of the wound a small.
And know that the water returns, and it is purified around three or about those months; and when it increases, then pierce according to that surgical method, so that the patient will pass their days.
Chapter 63.
About the section concerning fatty hernias and the treatment of the patient.
And know that in the section concerning this kind of hernia, there is loss of strength due to anaemia in major organs; so it's my view that you should seek relief and be saved by that better.
And I am remembering the operation on that and the specifics of the punctures.
Therefore, it is stated that the punctures occur in the parts where the glands are formed and this happens due to various causes: or by an acute overflow of pus, which spreads to the glands, or by percussion.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it doesn't stop in your pain, and it's a heavy abscess.
And a lighter one is an evacuated abscess, whose color is dark, and it doesn't move in you.
And sometimes some swellings are caused by the constriction of the veins, and due to this swelling you can already remember it, or due to swelling in the veins.
And you should know that this is due to the spreading of pus when you press on it with your fingers; and don't proceed if you touch it.
And that which is done due to swelling in the veins does not spread from any cause when you press it with your fingers. You should proceed with nothing.
And it is possible that for this type a section can be done and for the others; you should incise the duct of the glands, bring your hand close to the upper parts, extract the white pus, release the suspensory ligament of the veins, tie them up, and incise the pus ligament that you release from all parts of the area above.
And if the hand is already on those consolidated areas, then proceed to extract the hand and make an incision there.
And if there is adhesion due to some cause of the spleen, or between what is between the layers, then proceed as you release all that adhesion and make an incision through a round incision.
And if it's a new formation of tissue in the location of the adhesion which is behind, then proceed to make an incision through all that belongs to you, and extract the hand as we have said.
And once your operation is complete, then fill the wound with oiled cotton and vinegar; and after that take care of it with other treatments until it heals.
Chapter 64.
About the treatment of hernias that are related to veins.
It is an abscess wrapped in some kind of covering resembling a sprout with softening of the testicles, causing difficulty in exercise and walking on the body.
And for the treatment of this ailment there is concern due to this which leads to remembrance.
However, proceed as you would say operation in that according to what I did first.
And it is said that you should have the patient lying on an elevated bed; then proceed to prepare the suspensory ligament of the testicles at the lower parts; and hold up your hand with the duct of the glands in your fingers which are close to the veins; take those other ministers, and extend them vigorously.
And proceed to make an incision through the lower abdominal area diagonally across the veins where you will find the veins exposed.
And proceed to scrape off all parts in this manner as we have said in the extraction of veins which are located in the temples.
And proceed to insert in those a needle with a double thread, and tie that at the first of the locations where you encounter vit, and tie that another way at the end of them. And proceed to make incisions in the middle location on a straight diagonal according to the length of the body, and extract that which is aggregated from the moist, foul and corrupted fluids.
And proceed to treat the wound with treatment for other wounds in which you wish healing to occur due to those that cause the veins to turn from one of two glands; it is not bad for this.
And if vit occurs in all the veins, then proceed as you would have the testicles be extracted or that the testicles are cut through this to remove them from the veins, so that they are deprived of all nourishment by the incision of the veins, and become stagnant, or that it is done for oneself so as not to grow in those.
Chapter 65.
About the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia happens due to a section that extends in the spleen over the abdomen from parts of the intestines in the belly, so putting back those contents of the rupture into some of them.
This rupture can be due to the chest or to the exhalation of the patient, and these two species occur due to certain causes: from percussion, or through impact, or through loud noise, or due to elevation by any heavy cause, or due to movement.
The sign of this condition, when it's due to the expansion of the chest, is that it occurs gradually over a long time, and doesn't occur suddenly. It forms an abscess evenly within the pleura because the chest compresses the lung.
The sign of this is when it's due to injury of the chest; at its onset, intense pain occurs suddenly. It forms an evident abscess far from the pleura line that appears visibly, and this is due to the displacement of the lung, and the body responds by moving parts away from the chest area.
Sometimes, swellings are left outside on the abdominal wall, and this type of hernia is called intestinal hernia.
Sometimes swellings are caused by coughing, and sometimes they occur inside the abdominal cavity through a wound; here they get stuck, causing a severe ailment in patients. Sometimes these lead to painful conditions that worsen significantly when pressure is applied.
In the treatment of these species of this ailment, there's fear involved, so it's necessary to ensure that hunting doesn't occur in that area.
The method for the operation of this is that you command the patient to return the hernia to its cavity with his hand towards the inner parts of his abdominal cavity if it returns upon his own effort, and then place yourself over his back between his chest and your hands, lifting up their limbs.
Then cut the seam which joins the abdominal cavity to the upper parts, and incise the testicles' seam all along; then make two cuts in the section according to your need for opening that section there.
And if the section, according to how much you can possibly make from it, should leave a hole in that area.
Then scrape that chest off the parts which are left of the testicles' seam, while the white hard chest is exposed from each part.
And then you insert your finger into that which severs the testicle, into that which is between the white chest, which is left from the hole, and between the chest according to its position, and rinse with that adhesion that is in the part behind the hole.
Then pull the testicles seam away from the inner parts, and do this while stretching the white chest on your left hand, lifting up the hole to the part of the section; command the assistant to stretch the hole upwards and you dissolve that adhesion behind with a full solution.
And with your fingers, ensure there's no cause for the lump to be enclosed in the hard white chest. If you find any cause in him, then remove that from his stomach.
Then cut into the part left of the seam of the testicles through the section which carries strength and health as we have recommended in what we have said.
Then apply wool soaked in oil, and rest on the wound; then administer the thread we recommended (and as some swellings of the white chest are treated with cautery, which was mentioned near the incision for bleeding points, certain swellings cause those) then smooth the thread so that it can fall by itself.
If hunting in him is delayed, then let it be immersed in hot water and rest on that part where it can fall as we have said.
And then heal the wound with the other healing method for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.
De hernia ventosa.
In this hernia, no one has seen that it was burned during its treatment.
And the early ones would say that it is done like we have recommended for the hernia which is through veins; namely, you guide the vessels close to the section near that one, and then dry out in the middle area around there an abscess at this place where I open that part, within which the vessels would fall.
And cure the wound according to what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter sixty-seven.
About the disorder that occurs in the kidneys.
Sometimes there are injuries that lead to rupture in the kidneys as we have said, and you should find the spot.
And do not attribute any causes of hernias to the body; if they do occur, there are few; and return them to their place at all times.
If this lasts for an extended time at this point, it causes a fissure in the chest cavity so that hernia falls into the chest; this happens due to the extension of the chest as we have said, the cause being that the chest is stretched, and nearby the area becomes inflamed and you will find it.
And the treatment of this is with a cautery as described in the story about it.
And sometimes wounds are treated with iron according to this method: and the patient lies on their back between your hands, and you dry the area of the rupture around the pus pockets by heating it in a section according to the size of three inches.
And then strengthen the white chest that is below the diaphragm until it is uncovered.
And then take hold of the rib and place your hand over the prominent part of the chest, and press that to the navel region of the abdomen.
And then place both prominent areas at the end of the rib cage, and adjust one of those to the other in relation to the suture.
And then extract the end of the rib, do not cut into the chest all over, nor extend too far or any other cause such as I should know in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And then treat that in the treatment of wounds, and as you incise through the skin, cleanse that and restore the wound so that it is consolidated; when the chest tightens and does not allow for the reassembly of the rupture's prominence.
And cautery is better in this location, where it is closer to health.
Chapter sixty-eight.
About the softening of the cord of the testicles.
Possible causes for the cord of the testicles in some men it is softened due to this and because the muscles that are within that area become softened, and there is a care for them.
Therefore, it is necessary for the person assisting in its treatment to lie the patient according to their position, and expose the entire cord which becomes softened over the natural cord; and then adjust two lips to the suture.
And if you wish, pinch at the beginning the excess of the softened cord with three or four stitches and make a firm suture.
And then cut through the sutures; and then treat in terms of wound healing until it is healed, and let the stitches fall.
Chapter sixty-nine.
About castration.
Know that castration in our law is forbidden, but due to necessity I remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it for only one reason, which is when the doctor is asked about it, he must know how to treat him since it happens; the other way is that we have sometimes needed castration of other animals for our young ones, just like with cattle, horses, pigs, and similar animals.
And thus I say that castration is done in two ways: either through castration or by making an incision and opening.
And in the case when it is done through castration, the way of the operation is that we kill the animal while it is still young so that his testicles become softened and swell. And then take those in your hand until they are dissolved and do not show any marks on the skin.
And in castration done through incision and opening, suppose you have the animal and press on the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
And then tie the suspensory ligament, and cut through each rib on one side where two ribs meet.
And then cut those abscesses that you have opened. And do not let any cause occur on those of the chest, but rather the subtle chest which is above the ribs.
And this method of castration is better which is done through castration, as castration tends to leave no cause for the testicles so that the animal desires copulation.
And then treat the wound until it heals.
Chapter seventy.
About the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: the first is where orifice for urine and feces is located within the space of the testicles' cord, that is between two testicles with a male half having female skin hair.
Some cases involve urine flow from the location of the testicles' cord.
As for females, it is a special case: that the female counterpart on the abdomen resembles two male testicles each with their own small amount of tissue towards the front like male's prepuce and two testicles.
The cure consists of three kinds: two for men and one kind for women. And it is that you should incise those tight tissues so that the discharge of that (disease) can escape, and then proceed with the treatment for other afflictions.
And in the second kind of men where they urinate, which is in the channel of the testicles, there is no cure or operation for it.
Chapter XXI.
Regarding inflammation and swelling due to causes specific to women.
A strong, localized inflammation is adjusted due to natural causes within which it is stretched and undergoes such observation; in some cases, swellings are magnified in certain women to the extent that they spread similarly to men and permeate during intercourse.
Then you should grasp the excess of inflammation with your hand or a tool and incise it.
And do not conclude with an incision, especially at the beginning of the root (of the condition), in order that no discharge of pus occurs.
And then treat that with treatment for other afflictions until it is healed.
Fetus flesh is the flesh that does not develop in the womb of the mother within which it fills, and forcefully is pushed out to different parts according to its shape (and for this reason they first called it tail ailment); therefore, you should incise it like you would with inflammation, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter LXXII.
Regarding the treatment of hemorrhoids.
Hemorrhoids are when the anus in women is not perforated, or there is a small tear. And it can be due to nature or by accident.
Accidental is caused by tail ailment which preceded it, and that happens due to uneven flesh or due to a fine hair or an excess.
And it can occur at the beginning of pregnancy, in her ribs, due to excess liquid or under liquid, prohibiting coitus and childbirth, and forcefully prohibiting menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is made through observation of the midwife, if the protrusion is obvious, it is straightforward; more so if it's not obvious, then you touch it with your fingers or with a tool.
If the protrusion is due to a fine hair, and it's close to both labia, then you squeeze and burst that.
And you place your hands on the two labia, and then place your finger tips under both breasts.
And the woman should be on her back, her thighs spread apart, and you then spread the two labia forcefuly until that fine hair is broken and the protrusion is opened.
And you take wool and dip it in oil and place that over the area, and continue doing this for a day so that the incised area doesn't harden.
If the hair is thick and dense, then you should incise that with a needle or with mint leaf.
If the protrusion is due to pus, then suspend that with a tool, and incise that.
And use the medicines that stop pus discharge and bleeding bites, such as aloe vera, and dragon's blood, and essences, adjust it with hen's egg white.
And you should administer a large lead tube in order that the ailment doesn't consolidate quickly.
And keep that there for several days and administer saffron tea.
And after it is treated with the other consolidation treatment until it is healed.
And sometimes events occur during pregnancy that affect other tissues, and you should then proceed by incising according to this method. If that happens due to pus-filled boils, in the boil which is inside the mother, do not oppose it with iron in any manner.
Chapter LXXIII.
Regarding the treatment of hemorrhoids, tail ailment, and red boils that occur in the anus of women.
Hemorrhoids are the result of damage to those vessels' mouths where blood flows continuously from them; and for old hemorrhoids, these remedies are used.
And I have already mentioned the kinds of those and their signs, as well as distinguishing those that receive treatment from those that do not.
Therefore, it is stated that hemorrhoids and boils when they occur during pregnancy and do not show symptoms, in those cases treatment with iron should not be applied.
These are the ones that occur on the mother's opening where a sensation is felt, these are the ones that receive treatment.
And you should have the woman in mustard oil and then spread flax or a rough cloth over her buttocks, or under the sheets, and incise those on her thighs.
And after that, apply the discharge of the blood from one of the internal powders in a bleeding manner, such as aloe vera and similar to those.
And then wash her feet for an hour, and then place her in hot water.
And if the bleeding continues, then make her take a decoction of sumac and sorrel tea, and garlic and similar.
And take flour of ordinary and mix it with honey and warm water, then make a poultice with this over the patient's back.
And if the wound has been cauterized, it is good; otherwise, make two suction cups and over the nipples do incisions.
And take wool and soak it in colostrum or in the juice of elderberry or in cooked wine, then apply it to the area; and treat the area with ointment until it heals.
And treat that until it heals.
Capitol seventy-four.
Regarding the perforation of an accidental hernia in the abdomen.
Special symptoms of abscesses that occur in the abdomen, such as indigestion, abscesses on stones, ulcers, adhesion, erysipelas, hemorrhagic fever, typhus, and other abscesses. And I have already mentioned these illnesses and the specifics of those, as well as their signs, and the treatments for them in this section.
And know that I will explain in this treatise about how to use a cautery for the abscesses found in the abdomen when they are related to the healing of abscesses, and if you want to know how the operation is performed on it, here it is.
So consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp upon percussion and pus, fever, and sometimes a redness appears, and if it feels over that area, then note that there is perforation of it. Treat it with what aids in maturation until the intensity of the accidents ceases.
So make the incision along a line that has two lines; have them recline on their back and adjust their feet to the lower part of the belly, and expand their thighs, place their hands under their buttocks, and tie them comfortably with what is suitable.
And the midwife follows on their left side and administers the tool at which an opening in the abdomen is opened, its form will come from those causes that will follow.
And when you want to administer this tool, fix it on the line of the abdomen's opening in the woman, so that what enters the abdomen from the tool is not more than the opening of the abdomen and guides the patient. If the tool is larger than the opening of the abdomen, then cover the texture of the opening with powder to prevent the total insertion of any instrument into the opening of the abdomen.
And cover that you place the substance that flows from the tool on the left side and above it, and have the one administering to keep the tool and rotate the substance until the opening of the abdomen is opened.
And when you see the pus, and it is touched by hand and is moist, then cover that you dry this from his head with a cloth.
And when the healing is evacuated, then cover that you place in the wound a poultice immersed in rendered oil or turpentine oil with some heat; and place the leg on the drying in the opening of the abdomen.
And cover the abdomen, and over the place where it was injured, wool that has been soaked in water with basil bulbs.
And once it is healed around two days with ointment which suits into until it heals.
And some soaks the abdomen and the wound are washed in that they are treated with water and honey, and afterwards with water that has been boiled with parsley or rosemary leaves, and then returns to the ointment.
And if the wound is inside the abdomen inflamed, then cover that you are forbidden from treating it with a tool, instead treat it with what we have said in this section.
Capitol 75.
To teach midwives in what manner the infants should be treated with medicine when they come out according to an unnatural figure.
A necessary cause is that the midwife knows the figure of normal childbirth by its signs, and that when you have the woman panting at the openings below, she wants to smell the air, and on this it is heated because what is above her is laborious, and hastens the birth of the fetus, then you know that this part is according to a natural figure, and it is the movement of it towards its head, and the second one either hanging or suspended from the umbilical cord.
So when you notice those signs, then know that the belly of the one is compressed by itself so that the fetus descends slightly just as it descends upon its head, make the second one come to her, and get rid of those excesses for good maturation.
That is another one of this part being unnatural and inexplicable, when the fetus is sitting on its feet and the body of the one is also sitting in front of their head, and their feet under them, or at their foot,. etc. or the head of the one is sitting and their hand is either under their belly or at their abdomen, making it upright over its neck, resembling figures that are inexplicable.
A necessary cause is for the midwife to be knowledgeable and discerning in all those matters, and to avoid error and deception.
And I am showing all the form of those [conditions], and which organ is in those for it to be significant by this and to stand on this.
When the illness is situated on its head by natural escape, and it is powerful in women and happens to them at their difficult part, and sometimes the virtue of this has weakened, then make that sear, which women have with it, and evaporate its internal heat along with fennel and oil humectants.
And then introduce the needle between their armpits close to the small bone and make a little cut near it, or dry that inside her nail where this humidity resides. And press the belly of the woman so that the pain descends the fetus.
If it does not descend, then apply that the woman should be heated with garlic and fennel baths.
And then command her, and near the nostril, have her squeeze it and make her sneeze with the condiments; and keep her mouth and her nose open for an hour, so that once the fetus passes through easily.
And if both parts of the fetus are passed through at the beginning, then apply that you reduce those gradually to ease the passage little by little. If it does not comply with the treatment, then make the woman lie on her back and lift her feet off the ground, and place the chair over the earth; and the woman should be kept from falling due to this shaking.
And if the parts do not come out and the fetus is stuck, then introduce those and pull out the membrane of the fetus or fasten it to her back with a cloth and pull that out evenly, so that once it passes through easily.
When the fetus moves over their feet, then apply that you push those towards it, and then turn the fetus little by little, and make that equal this, and take one of its feet and stretch those gradually.
When it is situated in the thighs, then command her to squeeze and make her sneeze with condiments, so that once it passes through easily if God wills.
And if it does not pass through as we have advised, then return the fetus little by little so that you place it according to its natural figure, so that this will pass through easily with a slight movement.
And if all this is forbidden by us, then take sulfur and dissolved gum, and crush them thoroughly in the mortar for good crushing, and apply that woman's heat, the bottom part of her belly. And then make her urinate in warm water so she can reach the flanks.
And each time that the parts of you are softened, then have her sub-fumigate with myrtle and place this under you. And when the sub-fumigation lasts an hour, then have her lie on a chair, and make her sneeze and open her mouth, lift her from this, and press the lowest part of her belly gently, so that the fetus will pass through easily.
Lateral movement of the fetus hanging on one of its sides. Introduce the hand in reduction, but if you cannot reduce this, then lift the woman and make her go along.
And if walking is not possible, then have her lay on the bed, and shake her thighs with strong shaking, and apply remedies from mucus that I advised earlier.
And if the birth has come, then have her sneeze on a chair, and then study about hand reduction, and make the fetus equal according to its natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and command her to squeeze herself so that it passes easily.
Movement of the fetus over the hips, spreading its parts, and the surface of her is twice as large as her mother's. Have the midwife hold the hand of the fetus and then gently roll it little by little, so that this is facilitated.
And when they are equal and once it's done, then rest on the heat that we have advised with oil and mucus.
And then command her to squeeze little by little, and when you have done this, then make her urinate on a chair and command her to be inclined towards the right side of her bed, and then command her to squeeze herself; and make her sneeze with remedies. The birth of the fetus has been prepared on the side.
When the patient feels the horrors of the stomach according to this method, consider it, and then you should insert the second one into your thumb where moisture is drained out.
And if the fetus is hanging on the face and neck of the patient, then you should insert that of the belly button, so that it does not retain the mucus.
And then you force the fetus towards the parts inside until you place that second one covering it, and ask the woman to hold herself for several times, and he will be expelled more quickly if God wills.
The birth of twins or multiple fetuses. Know that twins have irregular births, and sometimes they are born after three or four months, but this is strange and it is difficult to explain; yet these are causes of nature, not disease.
And account for those, whether they are multiples, one second, and are separated by the placenta, distinguishing them within the umbilical cord of each of those. Some births happen naturally as if it's a fetus being expelled, and there are some births that occur in an impossible way as we have recounted.
And if some of them are difficult for you, you must bring the birth process to what we said about natural and unnatural figures, then you treat those as we have recounted.
And if the woman is subtle and makes what she does with ease and subtlety, and in delay, and her ingenuity according to every figure as it has been prepared for by the womb leading to health.
Remembering that which is formed from embryos in the womb, and what aborts.
The text states: "Some scabs are formed in the main one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten, then you should verify that a female abortion contains five viable ones, and another one containing all forms, which is caused by measurement of the glorious sages."
And all of this is covered as it relates to the science of midwifery which relies on her keen sense for that faint resemblance to what she feels, and therefore holds onto that according to how she senses things.
Chapter CCLXXVI
On extracting the fetus when it is dead.
When you care for the dead fetus according to what we have said in the division of medicine and it is not expelled naturally, then you must consider using surgery with your hands. Then you should consider if the woman is of sound health and not affected by any of the circumstances that could cause her harm.
Then consider if the woman is lying on her back over a table, and if her head is inclined upwards and her thighs are elevated.
And the minister should have that of both parts or be bound over the table so that the body does not extend beyond the extraction of the fetus.
And then you moisten the mother's mouth with olive oil and high-quality honey, as well as fennel and seeds of all kinds.
And then anoint the midwife's hands with those oils and medicines, and then place her hand in comfort under the mother, and then set up her position so that she can hold onto the fetus' hands.
Place yourself conveniently in this manner: then consider if the fetus is ready to be delivered by turning onto its head, and then hold onto the hands of the fetus, or at the neck, or in the mouth, or on the palate, or let it hang from the beard, or at the sternum, or on the appropriate areas of the back, or let it rest on the lower ribs.
If the descent is onto its feet, then at the heel, or in the middle of the back.
Then consider having the hand on the right side, placing the curvature of it in that location which is between the last two fingers of the left hand, and place your hand comfortably so as to hold onto one of those locations that we have mentioned, so as for it to proceed towards the lower part.
And then hold and position in the location of it another hand, or the elbow if necessary, so that there is an equal pressure, and not extension according to its straightness alone.
And be careful in every part, so that the expulsion of it is relieved as it is done with teeth when removing them.
And consider in it where the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then consider that the midwife should moisten some of her fingers with oil and insert them skillfully and rotate around those that are being retained.
Therefore, if the part of the fetus is expelled, then the hands should be placed at the location which is more suitable; and do this while making sure that the entire fetus is expelled.
If the hand is inside in front of the other one, and it's not possible to reduce that by pushing it out due to pressure on its belly, then consider wrapping a cloth around that; and then extract that while making sure that everything is expelled, and insert that either at the junction of the hands or under the arm.
And do this similarly for the other hand and both feet.
If the patient's head is large, or if there occurs constriction in the abdomen, or if it happens to have water pressure adjustment in their head, then one should intervene among these small sharp points and open the head, extracting the water, or that which can be discovered using an instrument called "alundat", whose shape will come close to the shapes of other instruments near the head.
Similarly in case the patient has naturally large head: then insert an incision like a bandage, or take that with an instrument called 'alundat' as we have said; and then extract the bones using forceps.
And if the head is swollen and constricted at the sternum, then it should be cut deep into where the moisture which is in the feet is immersed.
If it's not complicated, and doesn't affect the abdomen, then you should make an incision on the head as soon as it is feasible for you.
And if the intestines of the belly are affected by inflammation or in their lymphatic area, then you should make an incision there where the moisture runs that is within them.
If the patient's condition is on their feet, then its distress is slight and the direction to the mouth of the mother is also slight.
If it's constricted in the belly and feet, then you should make an incision where you extract that which you've wrapped around your hand, and you cut open the belly and feet where this flows within those.
If the other limbs are fine and you return the head, then the surgeon inserts his right hand; if the mother's mouth is open, then he inserts his hand into her navel area, and encircles that head, pulling it towards the sharp points inside the mother's mouth, and proceeds to insert one or two fingers, pulling them inward.
And if the mother's mouth is constricted due to inflammation in which a cautery burns out, then make sure not to overheat it; before that, proceed to administer an infusion of fatty cold moisture. And apply bandages; and continue treating the patient with waters that soothe and moisten.
And if the patient is on its side, then if possible make it as upright; and administer what we have said for live patients.
And if that's not possible, then make an incision on the sides, and extract it.
And make sure you don't leave any cause inside for a second operation.
And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what we have said for the treatment of inflammations caused by cauterizations that occurred in the mother.
And if there is a discharge of pus, then treat withic waters and proceed with the other treatment.
And I have indeed seen a pregnant woman with a dead fetus in her belly, and there was another opening used for that purpose, and the fetus was dead itself. It happened to someone for a long time with an inflammation in their umbilical region; and it was swollen inside the abdominal cavity, and started bleeding out.
And I was called to treat them, and treated them for a long time, but the inflammation did not consolidate.
Then I used some strong-acting bandages on them, and made an incision in their bone, and after several days, made another incision; and I was too amazed, because there is no bone in the belly.
And then I realized that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
Then I treated the inflammation, extracted the dead fetal bones from them, the woman was in her usual position, and I had been treating it this way for a long time, corrected herself a little bit.
And I did not hesitate to say it is strange, but rather because in this there is knowledge and help for what the doctor uses his hands to administer treatment.
Regarding the forms of the instruments that are necessary for extracting the fetus.
Shape of the cauterizing instrument which is used to open the mother:
This is the shape of a strengthener in which the free ones are equalized, to which equalization two cauterizers are attached at both ends of two sticks. However, this cauterizer should be made finer in terms of strength, and it can be made either of iron or oak wood.
And the width of each stick is two thumbs and the edge of both sides is one thumb; and the length of each is a hand plus half; and in the middle of two sticks there are two adjustments for this iron rod that are already set, from which the length is about a hand plus a little bit less, and the width of each is two thumbs or just a little less.
And those two adjustments should be placed in the mother's mouth so that they open with them when you rotate the two prescribed cauterizers.
Another shape similar to that, but finer and more lightweight:
It should be made of iron or oak wood according to the resemblance of forceps. However, at the end of it are two attachments like this, and the length of those attachments is about a hand, and the width of each is two thumbs.
And when you want to open the larger one, then you make the incision on the belly over the soft part of the feet hanging down, opening it up where is between the thighs of them. And when you open your hand towards the tool, as you would with scissors evenly according to the quantity you want from the size of the mouth of the larger one inside where the meter will make it exactly how you wish.
The form of dizziness which they used to say:
Shape of the propellant, where it is propelled by the force:
The form of union, in which the large head is contained
And it is similar to forceps with teeth at the end, like this, and sometimes certain procedures are performed long like forceps according to this form, like this, which has teeth like those of a rudder on which it is inserted and contained. The form of union for few:
The form of a vessel having one spine:
The form of a vessel having two spines:
The form of a spatula having two ends, on which the head is cut:
The form of two spatulas lying:
All those instruments are practiced, and when there are more species of that one and they are prepared by the artisans, it is easier to their operation and better for the men according to their quantity.
And do not use those instruments already when you should be equipped with them, for the need of those is not excusable.
For removal of the second one.
When the second one is retained you should perform childbirth, then command the mother to retain her breath, and prepare to sneeze on condition, and place your hand on their mouth and their nose, and if it comes out by this means well done.
And if not, then take a spoon and pierce through the cover with a needle and pause on that herb under the mother's mouth, like with camomile and rough herbs and anise and chamomile and powdered saffron and cinnamon sticks and saunf. All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the spoon, and place that on the fire.
And prepare to put in a reed pipette in the mother's mouth and have that inside where the vapor will come into the cavity of the mother.
And prepare to sneeze her like we have said, and the second one is quickly expelled.
Perhaps if this treatment goes well without any difficulty, then you command the midwife to immerse her left hand in camphor oil or in a lavender tincture, and introduce that into the womb and have her expel the second one with it, and when you find that, then take it and extend it little by little. If it sticks in the mother's pelvis, then place your hand according to what we have advised, and as soon as she finds the second one, extract that little by little according to rectitude so that the mother does not fall under the strong urge. Before you move to the right and left sides of her belly for ease.
And if the mother's mouth is cramped, we have already advised this treatment with sneezing and with medication of the spoonful herbs.
If it is not expelled through all the causes that we have advised, then keep in mind that you do not tire on that by repetition of the abstract, but rather observe that what comes out from her to the mother's mouth lies on the surface of the feet, and prepare that with grease and fourfold medicine; for that will dissolve that over a few days and it will be expelled.
When it is applied, there is an elevated bad odor to the head and stomach, and that causes discomfort in the mother; and then observe that these are administered as sub-smokes and appropriate for that.
As such, the Ancients already use sub-smoke of snail dirt and dried figs.
The form of an instrument by which the woman is sub-smoked for retaining menstruation and the second one:
It is made from wood or reed.
And the subtle end is placed in the womb and the wider end over the fire, and the sub-smoke is placed on the branches of the fire.
And have that inside so that that sub-smoke is consumed and repeat another one.
For the treatment of an unperforated child's anus:
The baby is small and its butts are not pierced, which have thickened and become inflamed. Then command the midwife to puncture it with her finger; if not, pierce that with a sharp spatula, and be careful not to touch the wound.
And prepare over it wool saturated in vinegar and oil; and then treat that with grease while it is healing.
If you fear that it has thickened, then place a reed pipette for several days over it, and stop when the child wants to defecate.
And if there is an issue with rectal prolapse due to consolidation of inflammation or abscess; then confirm that this consolidation has been penetrated and proceed with the healing according to what we have discussed about treatment and lead (metals).
Regarding the treatment of the fistulas that occur, it is left.
The fistulas that occur down the passage, leaving low pus pockets which are a disease and roughness. They tend to form close to the anus outside or in the space of one part.
And it is a fistula or spots.
And when that lump has hardened and is filled with white or moist pus, and there are some rashes associated with these fistulas, some of which penetrate.
Those that penetrate are known by how they come out from those through excretion and through wind effect; some of them cause the patient discomfort during excretion, and forcefully it comes out from those worms.
And some of those fistulas cause rashes in the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and some of them causing rashes into the joint of the thigh and into the opening of the anus.
And in the case of a recognized penetrating fistula that enters the anus and does not penetrate, you place your finger where I instructed inside the anus, and gently insert a thread or iron into the fistula when there is no obstacle.
If there is an obstacle in that case, then insert a subtle lead thread or horse hair into it where you feel the thread or the hair on your finger.
And if you do not feel that throughout nor proceed with any cause of excretion or worm or wind, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and now lie on your side for treatment.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then its meaning is urinary discharge from that and prohibition to do anything further until that location has been treated with medicine.
And if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone causing pain in the bloodstream, this is a sign that the thread goes inside here if there is no obstacle within the bone, and pain from the bloodstream at the site; and that it produces persistent pus; and that it does not benefit with this treatment, nor has it been consolidated with grease.
And in all those penetrating fistulas, not the whole treatment is cured, and the treatment of those requires work and dedication by surgeons over which they are based.
And in that one that is non-penetrating and not hardened, healing with iron was expected according to what I will tell you, and this which I have already done.
And this is that the patient lies with your hands under their buttocks and elevates their legs inside them, their thighs are inclined towards their belly, and you insert a lead or horse hair thread into it if there is an obstacle in the fistula, until you know where the thread goes through.
And if it is that the patient is lying around the groin area, then confirm where you placed your finger inside the groin.
And if you feel in your finger that the thread has already been discovered penetrating by itself, or between your finger and that siphac or flesh, then you will certainly know that this is penetrating; and then do not work on it, since there is no healing in this, as we have said.
However, some would say that it is cured in certain people who tolerate it.
And for the treatment that is expected to young in them, you ignite a subtle cautery according to the extent of the fistula, as it was mentioned before, and insert that burning into the fistula close to the groin; and then repeatedly do this two or three times until you know that all those tissues adjusted to a feather plume are already adjusted.
And then treat that with bandages enveloped in oil until all those tissues that are adjusted heal, and also treat that with medicines the flesh generating and consolidating it, and if it is healed, well that's good; and otherwise, then this is not cured within a time for another treatment.
And if the thread goes in, and does not penetrate into the finger which is in the anus, and between that and the thread that is densely covered with flesh or hair, and sometimes the fistula when it extends to the surface of the scrotum, then dry the scrotum from the beginning of the fistula, and you see if drying occurs on the thread, and there within the fistula until the drying reaches the location where the end of the thread extends, and freedom is released with ease.
And then flatten those tissues that are connected like a feather quill of a chicken, and do not damage them with any cause.
And if there is a discharge of pus several times when you are working with those tissues, then let it be like that and with any minor instrument cauterize either with fire or with acute medicine; the cauterization with fire adjusts good habits: this is adjustment to those adjusted tissues, and elimination of pus by drying out moisture.
And then treat that with bandages wrapped in oil or in hot ashes until the place gets hard, and then later cure the infection with greasy flesh generating and consolidating.
And among the medicines which have restriction and excess; when then is restored it is healed and you do not fear recurrence.
If the fistula already enters into the rectum and is lengthened from your body's surface, then you should intervene in the anus and inquire about it.
And therefore if you try and when between you and it is quickly of muscle or of flesh, and it is prone to penetration, then the operation on it is not for them but rather according to the path of faith and hope.
That cause is to administer one of three ways with it: either cauterize that as we have said; or stop that within you reach the cavity of which so that it becomes possible for you to intervene in those and the healing follows; do not operate on this through restriction because you do not penetrate into the containing canal, and you act on the body according to your will at its exit point; then care accordingly with what we have said where strength lies in health; or extend that membrane and clean out that pus if you stop that within near the anus as we have said, or on temptation or another sharp tool, then modify those flesh-filled fistulas which are in the restriction area through excision; then strive to restore all the wound through restriction, and if the pus openings above do not solidify, and splits the opened fistula at the part of the anus, there is less pus coming out. And some fistulas are closed according to this manner: when you insert the needle into the fistula, and around the anus surface on the body at the base and near the opening of the anus, then take the temptation of perforated extremity, as thus like a needle preparing the veins according to this form:
And insert in that place wrapped by many needles or around those; then insert temptation on the needle within the fistula until you reach its cavity.
If it penetrates into the rim of the anus near inside, then you extract that needle as you insert what we said into the anus; and extract the extremity of the needle and adjust both ends simultaneously, strengthen each one, and leave this for a day or two, and when most it penetrates the flesh into the anus, strengthen also in the place where those tissues are penetrated between the two ends of the needle which fit.
And then treat the wound so that it becomes solidified and healed.
If the opening of the fistula is not penetrable, then make it penetrate in whatever way you have prepared, but rather in the rectum, which should not be done by you so that you do not damage the canal; then proceed with it so that it becomes healed.
The shape of a spiked tool for what is cut in the fistula: the curvature of which becomes more acute and the other part is not as sharp, so that you do not damage unnecessarily what is not needed, just like that.
Sewing up hemorrhoids in which the wound runs through their closure.
Hemorrhoids are in two ways, whether they resemble the anus like it's of coal, or those become like fat from grapes. And of those they are small and large, and the wound runs through them all at once, and it's one thing, and it's dirt, and it's inside the anus, and in their extremities.
However, those that are inside the anus follow the same patterns of less humidity, in which water turns yellow or a little blood appears on continuous body skin, and according to the color of the body.
And the healing of that which is inside the rectum is that you command the body to relax and express in such a way that the rectum burns and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you should massage and suspend with ropes or what you have on your thumb, then proceed to cut those according to their sizes.
If the ropes are not kept in them due to their moisture and softness, then take those with rough cloth or with leather or woolen felt, extract those with your words, then proceed to cut those and sprinkle some ashes powder near the wound for they will replace that with cauterization; or cauterize those according to what is preceded in the chapter on cauterizing. And then treat those using another type of healing until they are healed.
And if the anus does not allow exit, then immerse the body in a bath with a small mastication bite and wash it with what is in the rectum that allows less expulsion when the body is squeezed.
And if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is minor, and you should take those with your thumb or take them with ropes, cut those, then treat those using what we have said until they are healed.
And whoever feels the cut, know that you should administer sewing of them according to this manner: take wrapped needle and insert it into the needle, then extract the hemorrhoids from their parts above, and make the needle penetrate in the part opposite on the other side, wrap both ends of the needle's protrusions around the part leaving room for the needle, laterally; strengthen the hemorrhoid with solid structure, and then pinch the needle and remove the needle.
And do this to all of them, leave one out, in order that the excess of the disease may flow away from that.
And place over the buttocks with a cloth dipped in rosin oil or gauze; place that over the bottom and command the patient to rest. And leave that in the box; and when it heals, treat those with ointment or some other cure inside until it is healed.
And since these are old and do not benefit in that medicine, you should treat them at the tip of the spatula or with your fingernail until they become moist and then drain the pus from those, preventing their consolidation; then cure them until they consolidate.
And you should treat them with plenty of pus, the first thing being to drain and expose them; then cure them until they are healed.
Know that treating ulcers is the key, and not otherwise, it's just like the color of the blood resembling a piece of cutlet, occurring everywhere in the body but more so on the feet and hands, and for those with pain you must allow them to breathe.
And then treat what has penetrated that which is in the circuit of the cutlet, and keep it with forceps or tweezers, and remove its root; then cure that.
And if you wish, cauterize what follows after in its head.
True warts are small, hard, pus-filled round lumps on the surface of the body, and ulcers occur in the throats of children.
And to treat them, you should spread and insert that, or place that with a needle or under the skin until it heals. And if you wish, cauterize this, as we have said, with fire or with acute medicine.
Ants are small, soft or pus-filled lumps on the surface of the body that grow around the head, and when you find them they look like the bite of an ant, occurring around the body.
And the treatment for them is to take a needle or a thread of duck quill or spider web, which must be strong, and place that on the ant until it contains the circle around the body's parts; then move your hand with the needle into the area until you reach what is in the circuit of the ant, and hold that at the base of the flesh, making sure to remove the ant from its root.
And if you wish, do this with an awl or iron needle according to this manner:
Let the tip of the needle above the cannula be slightly sharp, silent (meaning not too thick), wrapped around it such that from the hand's perspective the appearance seems shaved and the rotation of that.
And if you wish, cauterize the ant as previously mentioned in the cauterization of a wart on the head of the cautery.
The form of the instruments that are administered for giving a cure.
Some ulcers are given a cure using silver or tin or melted iron or hammered metal; some ulcers are treated with small and large instruments according to those used by you, for that which is administered in the treatment of small children's sores should be small. And from those whose butts are hot or painful, the cures of those should be small.
The form of a large and few cure:
The tip of the cannula above where the bag is bound should be wide according to this manner; and as far as from where the bag is bound, it should do so as many times.
And the tip of the pus below it, which enters the anus, should be silent (meaning not perforated), with a slight length; and on one side of the bag there are two prongs, and on the other side one prong, and the width of the prong according to the thickness of the rays and large pus is small.
And let the bag in which medicines of bladder beast or sheep skin are placed be as wide as a hand's span.
And let it be pierced with prongs like this when they are rotated; and the size of that which is between the prongs should be as large as a mentioned thing.
And place through those prongs a strong iron needle of raw blood or around that; adjust the bag to that; when placing the bag in there, straighten it at the head of the cure between two distinguishing points with strong constriction, and cure each one of the prongs: The quality of curing this way is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be heated according to the tolerance capacity of the patient; make sure not to give too much or too little.
And have the patient lie on their back, lift their thighs and place one's hand under them as if they were humans or a mattress; then smear the edge of the cautery with oil or albumin from egg whites or from fenugreek or almond milk; and smear that in the anus with ease, and command the attendant to take hold of the bag and press it strongly several times until what is inside the cure is completely drained out of the intestine; and remove the cure and the patient lifts their thighs to the wall.
And if medicine requires one to rest, have as much as possible; and if he sleeps through the whole night, it benefits better in old age.
Better if you sear him in the abdominal issues of belly and the pain, then you will apply the cautery inside until he is healed.
And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or abscesses, then his searing must be subtle and delicate, of the sears under which children's fingers can be inserted.
For the cure of the sores.
And I have already spoken about the division of the cure for sores that is suitable for free people, and I also prescribe this cure according to my understanding and medical knowledge.
So it is said that the sores are diverse according to how they occur and according to the place where the sores appear.
And the causes for which wounds occur that result in sores are as follows: through scorching by fire, or incision of space or of flesh, or impact with a spear, or with a staff, or with an arrow, or similar to those caused by wounds.
Better the sores that occur in the body parts are as follows: a wound that appears on the head, or neck, or foot, or belly, or mouth, and similar to those of the limbs.
And I recommend the cure for some sores by adopting that reasoning and rule for other sores.
And I will start with the simple head sores, and the recall of compound ones will come at the beginning of the next chapter.
So it is said that when a simple head sore occurs and there is no fracture, then consider: whether it's due to fire or something similar, and if you have burned the cord just like that and it becomes large, fear of a possible abscess in that patient. Then sear and perform the cephalic leeching at once, and don't delay this; extract from the wound according to the amount of virtue in him if no cause prohibits leeching, especially if the discharge from the sore is little.
And for the leeching of the opposite side of the affected area; and watch over the patient to avoid overfilling, dehydration, and fatty foods.
Better if you rule out any cause of the diminution, then reduce in food and do not approach to meat or drink.
And place over the sore, if it happens that an abscess appears, apply hot oil in its rupture or in water where it is styptic.
Better if you are sure of an abscess appearing, then place over the sore, if it is recent in his wound and the air has not changed that powder which I recommend to apply lightly.
And if the air has already changed, then place on other ointments until it is healed.
Better if the sore is large or due to incision and impact, and his lips are not adjusted by pins, then adjust those according to my recommendation for suturing them.
Better if the sore has already revealed from the bone and penis, and it is not retention but a small suspensorium, then incise that and treat the wound with medicines and restore meat in place of the cord, and command the patient to eat meats where there is hardness: caps and forms like them, until they are healed.
And if you find corruption in the cord and does not stick to the bone, then you need to incise all that part and remove it, and treat that area.
Better if in these sores there is an artery or vein from which blood flow can occur, and it is not excised by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find that unincised, then you need to incise it with a spatula, or tie it; and if necessity requires that what we have said does not apply, then you cauterize until blood flow stops.
And if these sores are simple and small, then their cause is minor; therefore, you apply this powder over them until the air changes those.
And the method of this powder is as follows: take oil from one part of beeswax, dragon's bark in two parts, and three parts of unextinguished ashes; mix them thoroughly and sift them, then apply it completely over the wound and secure it well internally so that it adheres to it when applied and coagulates with blood.
And apply this powder over it and let it stay until such time that it is not heated by you, while the medicine does not fully heal in him.
And some wounds do this alone with a cautery, when it's not available to you beeswax and dragon bark.
And this surgical procedure is done in large wounds when it's suitable to apply that over them and strengthen them, and those wounds which are recent with their wound, which have not been altered by the air.
And if the air has altered them, especially when it's during summer time, then this application of this powder is not appropriate in its usual position, rather you should treat those with what we have said previously. Therefore, place over those some more digestible ointments or sprinkle over those powders from the flour of bread mixed with water and honey until they form a paste; and proceed to treat those with another method until they are healed.
If a small fracture happens on bone, then you extract this bone by operation.
And I will describe the treatment for skull fractures in which poisoning occurs.
Of the wounds on the collarbone.
If a wound occurs in the collarbone, then there is no difference in treatment, and compared to skull wounds which are simple.
If already the nerves in the collarbone or artery are cut, then if it's nerve damage, not within their body but to avoid treatment that causes intense constriction, like vinegar and saying it's corrosive resembling their gall bladder in relation to nerves and causing obstruction. And don't let any cause of total freezing persist, for the substance of nerves freezes and its continuation is in the brain, which is the center of all body parts.
And if it's treated with lighter medicines, like when rinsed with warm water, some herbs infused in olive oil, either raw or cooked, and thyme when rinsed with hot water, and then other baths according to this method, and then the salve is applied.
If the wound is large, then perform suturing, or ligate the blood vessels of the patient, and afterward treat that with powders until it heals.
If the wound has depth or occurs in the lower part below the pubis, then puncture that at the most depressed location.
If in the wound an artery has already been cut and a bleed is obtained, then separate or dry that, or tie it, or cauterize it if necessity requires this.
If it has cut the sponda of the jugular or all of them, and so have saved the veins in the collarbone, then adjust the ligaments of the larynx with suturing over the carotid artery, don't touch that; equalize that and reduce that to its natural shape, and strengthen that with a decent tension, and leave that for a few days; and treat that with ointments where there is constriction and stimulation until it heals.
If the wound has already entered in bone, then puncture it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those you can from them; that which does not belong to you, leave it until the wound heals internally, and so that its separation from you is relieved.
And if the wound is recent, then apply over it the powder which has been recommended. If in the wound there is an opened channel, then treat that with what will recall its memory to its head region.
If it is a lance thrust or rib injury, and you assess the depth of the wound when the patient inhales; then know that the wound is fatal.
And if there is not depth to the wound and it is recent in relation to his breath, then rest on him of the first hour powder, and don't tighten that so as not to allow the breath to be retained at the depth of him and return to his heart and revive the patient, but rest on him an attractive ointment, and let him have two baths a day.
And if the ointment is not available to you, then rest on the opening of the wound with a cloth so that it sucks what there is of moisture; and make the patient sleep over the wound so that what is contained flows out.
If already three days or more have passed since the wound and no seizure or heart tremor occurs in the patient, then if you recognize good provisions for him, then know that the wound is saved; and afterward treat it with rest and any other good treatment until it heals.
If the recovery of the patient is excused, and it has been open for all the time, then know that a channel has already formed; therefore treat that through its head.
And if the wound is due to a cut in the armpit or rib, and it is simple on the surface of the leg or thigh, then treat that with what precedes suture, if large, or with powder, if small.
If it has already entered into bone, and if you have cut bones, then twist the wound and try to extract those bones, if they are separated. If they are not separated, then leave them until the wound heals internally, that their extraction is relieved.
And of other wounds occurring in other limbs during treatment follows the same procedure as we have described.
Of the wounds on the abdomen.
The illness which occurs in the abdomen can be large, small, or intermediate.
And for the small disruptions are made difficult by another method, and I know that their reduction is more difficult, if you do not take care of their invasion into their place immediately, which bursts and becomes enlarged due to its internal structure making it difficult.
And so the best disruption is medial, for in that one it's not difficult to reduce the hernia, as it is not difficult in the two mentioned species ahead.
And know that there are four methods of abdominal suture, and two types of suture are common that agree with sutures of the other parts of the body.
And two others are suture methods specific to others diseases, but however they are more specific in the abdominal suture.
And I advise you that for every exposure and declaration.
So say that when the disease is small and a cause of the hernia is through it, making it difficult to reduce it, in one of these methods: either due to the size of the disruption as we have said, or when the hernia becomes swollen due to the coldness of the air.
And when it is like that, you should cut into the hernia and immerse a wet sponge in hot water, or take something in cold water, such as cypress and spices, and place them inside that part of the hernia until the swelling is resolved.
And I have seen this done in some cases with a stipulation, and it is better than water alone for the resolution of swelling.
And when you find the swelling has resolved, then moisten the hernia with water to which alcohol and vinegar are added; because through this, the intestinal content of the patient is somewhat calmed due to a few reasons.
And if the patient's intestines are somewhat relieved with this treatment, then cut the disruption slightly with a small instrument on which needles are inserted.
And the first treatment is better when it's appropriate that there should be no dryness, and not a job to dry in need of and lack of food.
From the instrument, dry his/her shape:
One part of his/her shape is sharp, and the other part non-sharp, and its tip subtle, and not to the subtlety of a needle, before it becomes blunt for a little.
And when the disease is enlarged and extends outside of the hernia, you should know that its reduction should be according to its natural shape, in its proper place; if it's possible over that, which is better.
And when the disruption is wide, and it's in the lower part of the abdomen, you should have the patient lie on his/her back, place their buttocks with other parts below that; and if it's in the upper part of the abdomen, then place the head and feet higher than the sides.
And similarly if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then you should hold your understanding and consideration at all times on this for which the part where the disease is located should be more than the other.
And thus you should administer this in large diseases and in medium-sized diseases.
And in small diseases, have that which you prepared, and do that it is administered by one of your best servants; the one who holds the disruption entirely with their hand and adjusts the lips of them, and then uncover from there to here revealing any cause for another suture.
And this is the common method of suture: one that you take the needle, or count the size of the needle according to the amount of the disease's width; and then lay from the end of the disruption of the index finger, tighten the needle once, or more than that which you do not insert thread in both ends of the cord, between the two ends of the cross where the cords are left inside, so that it penetrates through that part; and you have already added both ends of the cord and both ends of the cross, and they make four orders.
And then tighten the needle twice in the circuit of the needle, and sometimes from both parts at once, and add the two lips and disease by gradual addition; and then smooth the thickness of the finger and take another needle in that place, and then tie it with thread just as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this until all the tension of the disease is completed within the needles.
And let the needles be medium between coarseness and subtlety, for subtle needles more easily penetrate the flesh; and thick ones are of difficult handling in the thread, so you should have them medium in subtlety and thickness.
And do not have the needle inserted in both ends of the thread close together, for so that the flesh is not pierced too easily and the disease heals before its consolidation.
And do not extend the stitches too long to prevent the disease from healing properly.
And then pierce the ends of the needles so that they do not slide off the patient's back in its bed; you will place on top of the stitches powdered substances from all parts, which have the ends of the needles; leave them until you know that the disease has already consolidated.
And these kinds of suture with needles in a common way are more convenient for small diseases, which until the suture of them may be one needle or two or around that area.
And the second suture is common: and that you administer during suture all four ends, of the cord and two ends of the cross, in one place, with a needle whose thread envelope has equal subtlety and thickness.
And once the needle has penetrated these four extremities, return the needle from that half of the body where it started, so that the pus cavity from that other part will ascend to the wound, making the suture follow a second layer on the cloth, where the cloths are firmly placed.
And pause between each stitch the amount of this thread's thickness.
And this stitch is known to men.
And this stitch is like the wound that befell a man in his belly where he was wounded by a stone, which was an explosion of the larger wound up to the length of a palm, and it occurred around two palms from my waist's location; it was the break in the middle of the member. And then I returned all but one after the intestine had been removed for xxiv hours.
And the wound was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or around it, and I cured that and he was healed; and then this viscera was treated with rest for several weeks, and he was advised on his actions.
And other doctors judged that it was not healed; and by a miracle of sorts, as I did not treat that with ointment, which was in the area where ointment could not be found or any medicine either, but I would apply to the wound like every two days and wash it thoroughly with honey water until it became healthy.
And may I describe two of my own types of stitches according to the narrative of Paulus.
And this is where you start with the stitch at the end, and insert the needle from that side to that other inside part.
And thus when the needle penetrates through the end and inserts those threads according to rectitude and length of the entire body, let the end of the string where you inserted the needle lie; and make the needle penetrate in the other end at the inside part to that outside side on the other end of the limb.
And when you have made that penetration, then you make that penetrate another time in that half of the limb's end at the outside part to the inside side; and let the end of the string be like this on this side, and make the needle penetrate at the other end of the inside part to the outside side.
And make that penetration through your own penetration so that you make that penetrate in the string at the end of your tool which is in that side where all of this should penetrate.
And proceed by starting from this side, stitch that at the end which is on the string at the other side of your tool, and remove the needle from the end of the thread which penetrated, then return it in this thread and place that end of the string at the other side on this tool's end; and remove that from the thread which is part of him.
And do this once and again, and repeat it after another stitch between which you sew all that is outside according to that example.
And the essence of this method of stitching is that you sew with a thread stitch in which you sew the strings, not that you sew the string at one end of the limb's extremity, and let that other stitch lie until it is completed.
And the second type of my own stitch which I call Gualia, according to your command and advice, is that you sew it like this some doctors would do, by adding all parts to their corresponding part as per nature; and apply the end of another limb to the other end of him, and this is done according to what I advised you.
And when you keep the needle at the end of your tool towards that outside side, make that penetrate in the inside part alone, and leave two ends of the string; and then twist the needle and let that penetrate from outwards to the insides on two ends of the string.
And then twist each one of them, and make those inside parts penetrate in the outside part on two ends of your tool other than this opposite side.
And this method of stitching is better than the common lighter stitch, and it's a stitch that comes with its own reminder.
This is the commandment of Gualia.
And thus some would say, the stomach stitch is corrected with two needles, so you insert into each one of them a thread, and start by inserting your needle from what you should do, make that penetrate between these other sides according to stitches where bodies are equalized.
And know that when there's a break in the middle of the stomach, then this stitch is much harder compared to other places in the stomach.
The treatment for wounds follows the judgment of other wounds.
The reason for which is when you handle the recent wound at its root before air alters that one, and you return the intestine then sew it up properly, then rest on that powdered flesh.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then rest on that with several ointments which are in your possession until they make hard crust and contain pus; and treat it just as you would treat other wounds until it heals.
If you do not have the medicines ready, then wait on that spot for now, because it begins to bleed, with pus and fluid, and change that twice a day, as you would normally do, until you are healed. When you no longer need other medications in similar situations when the diseases are simple.
If you fear that the infection might spread to the main limbs, then cover with lion wool submerged in high-quality oil or in rubbed oil, and place that around the areas involved where there are joints, letting it rest on those locations.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in his intestines, which are treated with these remedies, then apply a black stinging ointment made from the root of the wormwood, especially if the infection has reached the intestine and caused an exit that penetrates into the cavity.
And know that what is of the large intestine is a slight purifying pus, while that which is in the finer intestines is different.
And it is difficult to treat the one that is called "gastroenteritis" in which no cure for disease fits; this is due to the large number of veins there are in it and their vastness in those, and due to the subtle nature of its body, and due to its proximity to the nature of nerves.
If what you're dealing with from the disease is a thread-like structure, and if you can obtain that fresh, adjust it according to your judgment as you reduce the intestines equally.
If it has moved into his space and turned either green or black, then strengthen that with astringent on the area that is affected by him, so that fluids of pain come out, since in the tissue are veins and arteries.
And then introduce that which is another of that ligament, and suspend the ends of the thread from the starting point of the disease area for you, so that your urge towards him is relieved; you should fasten the tissue and evacuate the pus of the disease.
Reminder of diseases when they occur in the intestine.
When there is disruption in the intestine and it is minor, then it might be resolved in some individuals. This was observed when I saw one who was hit in his abdomen with a lance, and that was the disease from the right side of the stomach; the disease was old and had caused fistula, and discomfort and flatulence were reduced.
So I pursued the treatment of him even though it was not in the process of healing him, but I carefully focused on where it would heal and the site is consolidated.
And I saw the location already consolidated, feeling for the pain that arises from the bad event in his stomach; and did not suffer any of this disease accident and harmed him with his daily eating and drinking routines, instead he took baths regularly and exercised in his instructions.
And some experienced ones have said that when disease occurs in the intestine and is minor, then it can be treated like this: you should take large sticks; next adjust both sides of the disease, and place a stick from those with an open mouth over both sides of the disease; thus when he grabs onto those and tightens his mouth around them, cut off the tip of it, which sticks and is not dissolved.
And then place another stick close to the first one, and don't stop doing this by placing sticks one after another according to the amount of the entire disease.
And then reduce that and the disease; break those excess sticks inside the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not harm the patient from this treatment.
And it is possible that the intestine is tied with very fine material made from the intestinal wall of animals, since it's more resistant; you should take the end of these intestines threads, and if they are cleaned, then place the end of them on this thread, wrapping around it, and insert this thread into needles and materials within this intestine, and reduce that during disruption.
And this method of suturing with sticks is merely according to the way of trust and hope.
And if the disease is large and widespread, especially if it's in one of the finer intestines, where then there is only a subtle treatment, not full healing.
Regarding the treatment of ulcers and fistulas.
Know that every disease and abscess when it matures and becomes old, results in a ulcer, which is not consolidated and bleeds constantly, so wherever it is in the body, universally it's named a fistula, and we call this type of wound an ulcer.
A true fistula is a hardened, firm, white lesion that does not cause pain and has a cavity as if it's the cavity of a pus-filled wound; for this reason, it's called some tumors, namely inflammation.
And in some individuals it becomes wet and bleeds; and strong moisture is absorbed within a few hours. And sometimes this moisture turns into pus, it's small, it's thick, and it's subtle.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And this way I will teach you how to do the cure for fistula which is done by operation with my own hands.
Know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body; some of those are fistulas that affect large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the spine, or intestines, or bladder, or any part of the backbones, or at any junction formed by such a combination as of hands and chest; and among them, there are some that give proximity to the main limb and resemble it.
And among these fistulas that are treated in this manner, they are from the ailments of difficult recovery and not receiving a cure, and working on them is labor and ignorance.
And if there is any fistula whose depth does not reach these places that were mentioned, and you hope for its recovery and rely on it, wanting to gain knowledge of it, then try using an arrow or a needle. If the fistula proceeds correctly, then take out what needs to be taken out from it.
If the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a subtle lead. Lead in its lightness of body rises and curves to correct the twist.
And if the fistula is without motion or horror, it's not within your capability to mark it with an arrow.
Therefore, prepare the anus through its own natural processes; for the moisture with which you irrigate that area should proceed from the other natural openings and flow from them.
And carefully inquire according to the manner in which you are capable of knowing if it is here or a nerve, and whether the extension of the fistula is distant or nearby. Or it's a fistula with its own natural openings, which you examine on all parts of your strength, your investigation, and by examining the patient; considering the meanings and causes of accidents to the abscess.
And once you have stood on all those causes at true stationery, then proceed to the cure according to confidence: and then consider if this is an apparent fistula close by or in the belly, distant from junction, nerve, artery, vein, or any other location I've mentioned.
And then you dry out the fistula as was explained in its birth, and keep this process going from that filtration and decay of flesh, and whatever forms within the opening of tissue, or any part thereof, cure that inside until it is healed.
If the fistula is of distant depth and proceeds straightly, then proceed by inserting it into the wound until what seems possible for you, and carefully transform it from all its decayed flesh; and administer hot bandages covered in sharp medicines, and introduce those inside the fistula cavity which you have understood through ironing.
And do this with some probing inside, so that the sharp medicine may corrode everything within the cavity of the fistula due to decay.
And then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
If it doesn't heal through this method, then proceed by cauterizing it as we have recommended.
If the cause of the fistula is bone and you need to identify it, then inquire about it and dry it out according to our recommendation. If you do not prohibit any cause related to a vein or nerve or main limb as we have said.
If the bone is revealed to you and there is corruption and darkness within it, then extract that part where the corruption has been thoroughly destroyed; and cure that with what nourishes it until it is healed.
And if it is not healed like before in the same way, then know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; and therefore uncover it again thoroughly and carefully make an account of its condition and fleshing out of it with your final strength increase, and then restore that.
And if it is healed, well done; and otherwise, then know that this corruption is in the distant depth of the body, which has not been reached, and thus there is nothing for you to do except leave it.
And if the bone is corrupted and small, or you can pull it with your bare hands, then you do so using delicate forceps suitable for this task.
And if they are bones, then carefully perform the extraction of all them, and leave none behind with your strength.
If there is any opposition from moisture or from their location you have no fear of mistake, then incise those ligaments or tissues if they are here, and deliver the bones.
If you are not prepared to leave the bones for your time, then pause on the wound so that this wound may occur there, and leave it inside where this is around those bones of flesh and ligaments, and keep the wound from being consolidated, and restrain the area you have incised in your operation.
If you fear, place your hand on the patient's chest submerged in a hot oil, or the hand is submerged in Egyptian balm, or in any of those vert oils. When the sweat begins to emerge and when the bones are separated from them during this process, it brings relief from these tensions.
If it is a large bone like the femur or thigh bone or resembling those, and whatever from them becomes corrupted is only their flesh, then that swelling only behind goes as far as to contain that darkness and corruption, and then restore the wound.
If whatever from them becomes corrupted is a large part, and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and everything inside that penetrates into the site where the corruption has spread, and then treat that internally until it stabilizes.
And I advise you to do what happens in treating a person on their thigh, where you place that as an example and helper for your operation.
Treat a young man around 30 years of age who has pain in his thigh, and in the divisions inside there is inflammation within the body where the material has spread to the thigh, it is pus material for large abscesses, and do not attribute this cause to an external factor.
And then extend that period of time according to the error of doctors until the abscess bursts, and remove all the pus matter, and the treatment is adjusted while the change becomes fistulated, and do so with the pus holes where all exude pus and the moisture of the body.
And then the surgeons' treatment lasts for about two years, and I did not know much in those days but what was taught to me.
And I saw the change in him and what flowed from those holes of his all over the body; and by then, that man's condition was entirely stabilized and his complexion was yellow.
And then I inserted the needle into one of those holes and pushed it through to the bone.
And then I examined all the holes closely and found that they reached them from every part of the tissue.
And then I opened and incised into one of those holes where I discovered a part of the bone, and removed that corrupted material, which was already earthy and corrupted and degraded; and it had become corrupted in some parts of the tissue through which it had penetrated to the marrow.
And I tightened that which was discovered by me and prepared from the bone that was revealed.
And I concluded that it wasn't the bone but that corruption which was causing and tightening it up; and I had already removed that.
And then for a long time treated the wound with consolidating medicines, but did not consolidate.
And then I re-opened and discovered again on the bone after its initial discovery, removing continuous corruption from the bone.
And I tightened what appears to me from that corruption, and then proceeded to make the treatment of him and restoration, but it was not restored.
And then I discovered on him another time and did not cease to gradually penetrate the bone carefully making small cuts and restoring him, but it was not restored until I penetrated about a palm away from him, and I extracted his marrow, and then treated that with medicines, and it was only slightly consolidated and healed.
And there is no need for repetition in the operation of this man or section for it only requires the position of his bile duct and for his strength and breath to tolerate, which he experienced at all times due to excess expulsion leading to bad collapse.
And then he is healed through complete healing, and nothing replaces the hard flesh in the bone; it makes good use of him within his body and returns his vigor to him; it adapts to his movements and does not go against him in movement or cause harm in any case.
If it is bone that has been traumatized in the body's location, then follow this method to proceed: you should take hold of that ligament and strengthen it at the end of that prominent bone, and instruct someone to extend it there. Take out a layer of woolen thread from the first ligament; place this over the flesh left by the bone, and extend the end so that you can pull on the remaining flesh towards those left parts, then uncover the flesh on the location which you want to tighten so that the saw does not damage the flesh.
And place a pole or table under that bone appropriately, so when you do this, the saw is not prohibited to cut the corrupted flesh.
And cut the saw to tighten on that corrupted spot little by little, so if it's in the cavity of the corroded bone and doesn't appear with its manifestation in feeling, force another opening for the tightening.
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, before it continues from one part to another, and corruption is at its mid section or in any part of him, then you uncover all flesh from all parts; and then place a pole under that, and proceed with sawing from the first part where the corruption is, so that continuation of the tightening on the other part occurs.
And make the tightening according to the location of the corruption just a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw through the bone where it continues from the other side.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not due to their natural function but to some obstruction.
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or on the chest, it's very difficult; however, you should inquire about how the corruption manifests itself to you, and then remove that area once you've done an incision, demonstrating each step according to every possible arrangement which suits you, and adjusting each organ as per your command when not against your will, ensuring no veins or nerves are harmed.
Know what the penetrators and the saws to penetrate these bones are very much according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and their thickness, and the subtlety and size and minuteness of those, as well as their hardness and their rarity; thus that you prepare for every type of operation suitable instrument convenient for that operation.
Know that you should understand the operation on this specialty regarding the type of instrument for which you would need; when you have great study, long experience and knowledge of these methods in this art, and testimony from various ways of illnesses, whereupon then you already have them under your control, to which you choose what is suitable for each tool among all diseases.
And I will guide you towards the end of this chapter to know the number of tools that you will prepare, similar to which you'll proceed with your prohibition which you'll experience on others. Type of saw:
Shape of another saw:
Shape of another large saw:
Shape of a file (for metal working): The tip of this file should be according to the shape of a star key head, and its points should be according to the shape of the points of an astelfegi (a type of metalworking tool).
And only allow for the contact between those parts to become smooth when they are corrupted, or that the opening is large and wide.
Shape of the smaller knives:
Shape of the lateral knives:
Shape of another properly made saw: it should have an arc above the pus and the sharpness of iron, with its handle being a decently descending member. Shape of it:
Shape of the knives in which there's a hollowing out:
Shape of another subtle knife:
Shape of another curved-end knives:
Shape of small trimming tools resembling tongs:
Shape of another smaller cutting instrument:
Shape of another cutting tool; this one resembling a file, and its end like a saw, it is exhibited in various locations according to the position of the bones:
Shape of a file that corresponds to the one which penetrates through the bones:
And its end is triangular and has a sharp tip.
It's made of Indian iron, similar to all the causes we've mentioned about knives, cutting instruments and saws.
For the ends of cutting (or perforation) and for closing the bones.
The ends can be pressed or due to an intrinsic cause or extrinsic reason, or because of the treatment you've given that corruption with those medicines and the cure doesn't work, or sometimes the corruption continues from that body without any cause, then you should cut that limb into that place where the infection has reached, so the patient escapes through this death or malady which is a greater misfortune than the limb.
And the sign for that which happens, is when the limb becomes black inside it has burned out or if you place the blackness near that it has spread into that limb and consumed all within it; thus take heed with your cutting of that.
And similarly, if it's caused by the impact of some venomous causes such as from a sea scorpion or from venom or from a snakebite and others like these.
And if the corruption or impact is in the end of the finger, then you cut through the finger and do not give space for the corruption so that it extends into the hand.
And similarly if it reaches the hand, then you cut that from the edge of the elbow, and do not give space for corruption to spread into the upper arm.
And if it penetrates there, then you cut through the arm at the elbow joint.
And if the corruption passes elsewhere near the elbow, then death for the patient is there; treating with other remedies in this case is an abundance of virtue.
And similarly do for the chest when corruption reaches the nipple area of the breast, then you cut that near one of the nipples.
And if it spreads to the bottom part of the chest, then you cut the whole breast area. If it penetrates into the navel, then you cut the abdomen at the navel joint area.
And if the corruption has already spread up to the navel, then there's no remedy but death, and leave the patient to die.
The method of cutting the limb or sawing it is that you strengthen the ligament at the place you want to cut, and hold another ligament over the spot. Extend your assistant's hand with one ligament on either side of the place left out, and extend their other hand with another ligament across its sides; then you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments all the way down until the entire flesh is exposed; then cut or saw it off accordingly.
And when placed, make sure a cloth covers them from all sides so that it does not touch the area there, and that the injury goes to the patient's side properly and the abscess is cauterized.
If during your work you encounter bleeding from the wound, then cauterize that area carefully, or place some strengthening powders on them to help heal the wound; and soon after return to your medical treatment until it is completed.
And let the affected member rest properly at his convenience, and take care of that until he is healed.
And I recommend to you what happened to one person in his foot, this incident that I and you have discussed, which occurs to him with blackness in his foot under circumstances that were assembled to the combustion of fire.
And that corruption first occurred in his right foot, spreading throughout the leg.
And then that person prepared himself to undergo pus surgery because the healing process progressed within his leg with the intensity of his pain and suffering. He incised that foot into the joint, and he recovered.
A long time ago this corrupt incident occurred in the right hand of him.
And then it reached me, and I must consider reflecting that excess with what has accumulated on his hand from the medicines, affecting the transformation of his body; and the excess does not recur but begins to spread into another hand starting where it began in the hand.
And he urged me to cut his hand, and I do not want to do that fearing the impact of that excess, much more fearing the cutting of his hand, which was about healing.
And since he became aware of me, he returned to his land and it reached me that this person prepared and cut his entire hand, and he recovered.
And I have not recounted this story merely for amusement on this sickness, and its meaning is what it signifies and according to which it was performed.
Regarding the treatment of sinus and quality of enemas with medicines.
When gangrene occurs in fleshy limbs and the area of the gangrene is extended until it collects pus, then breaks and perforates, and discharges the pus out, leaving the place empty as if it was a vessel, and the membrane that was covering it also as a fine cloth, and it does not reach deeper corruption, nor spreads into bones or nerves, it's called a sinus, and it is not named as a fistula.
However, if the area is extended so that corruption begins in any limb, then it's called a fistula and I won't use other terms.
And the treatment for that is to cut that membrane entirely as it has moved, especially when it's delicate and done like a thin cloth, making sure not to stick to the area due to its corruption.
If you hope that the membrane will stick and that corruption has not achieved deeper consequences through subsequent stages, then in the membrane a cut has been made from face to backside, then you treat that with enemas.
And you consider it as a sinus, and if it's large, the arm that releases odor, then enema with an Egyptian medicine made from oil and vinegar mixed in equal parts, they should be placed in a vessel, and placed over the fire until the medicine heats up and spreads throughout the mixture of honey.
And soon you take what is necessary from him and dissolve it in water with honey; then perform an enema with that on the sinus, strengthen his orifice, and leave the medicine inside him for the amount of two hours.
And soon remove that through pressure; do this for several days until the sinus is transformed and the pus has been drained.
And some times enema with ash water when this medicine is not available to you; and you take the ashes of wood, put them in water; then boil that and perform an enema on it while you're convinced that the sinus is gone now.
And if the body does not tolerate this Egyptian medicine nor water of ash, then perform an enema with water and honey that is mixed with vinegar, and perform an enema with vinegar and honey mix, for which property of honey transforms and washes, and wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when in the wine there is excess of astringency and dryness.
And as you do this for some times and you're convinced that the sinus has been drained, then perform an enema with that which gives birth to flesh in him.
And you take of the dyaphanic ointment and dissolve that in rubbed oil and vinegar; or perform an enema with some medicines and other ointments which have properties that I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the sinus' orifice is narrow where no catheter can be inserted into the enema, then you gradually enlarge that with small metal tools, and stop in the wax-covered area with Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it's enlarged.
And similarly if the orifice is wide, then you add his lips with stitches and leave him the quantity in which an enema fits inside.
And if the orifice from which the arm flows is raised to its upper parts, then dry that in the area with pus below where it's located so that the arm can flow into them. When the arm is constricted within the depth of the sinus, flesh will be generated there.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus inside the bone in the vicinity of pus as you wish, then pierce it preparing the member for this procedure so that it flows from him with a slight movement according to what suits you and without leaving any cause of the arm retained in him.
Let the one who is over the sinus opening adjust it constantly, for he should prevent any fluid from escaping as suitable to him regarding the patient's elbow. And in order for you to know whether what flows from his elbow is much or little, if it is digestible or not.
And also consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in the abscess.
And as your treatment continues in this manner, you will notice that the substance being discharged over the sinus opening has started to adhere or gains adherence, then you may carefully remove or loosen it each day, and when you remove the wound, replace the linen cloth with a new one and apply fresh ointment.
Let it be if around the sinus there is ample space for the virus to spread, then do not discard the patient's healing, which takes time in such cases, as it can vary depending on whether some individuals take longer to heal their wounds or if something opposite happens.
And if the elbow remains swollen for several days with indigestion, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if adhering to the sinus takes a long time as the cause prolongs, then adjust in drying of the medicines. If the medicines are wet from their substance and lose their effectiveness, dry them like lion's ointment when they have adjusted excess addition of oiliness.
And the last advice for the one being treated is to take lion's ointment and dissolve it in lightly roasted oil, apply it on their elbow as usual with its substance, gently place that on them, and use it.
And already simulates that action when there is no elbow, apply lion's ointment and honey when you mix them together to thicken it, use this on them; or take myrrh and aloes and mix them all up, then grind them over the honey while heated in a pot, apply this on linen and strengthen that on the sinus; and apply that with the thickened honey from which you mixed it, then grind it further on linen and strengthen that.
And sometimes you administer to them the aristocratic mixture made from celestial lilies (and they are celestial lilies) and wheat flour, as well as Centaurium, using these simple remedies or adjusting them. Crush those, sift them, mix them with the previously mentioned honey; then use this on them.
And if the sinus continues for a long time and is not cured by this treatment, then you know that corruption is in him, already it investigates within the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you treat it with tubercular therapy as stated above.
Regarding the treatment of ingrowing nails and cuticles, addition of a digit incision, and sectioning.
Ingrowing nail is an abscess that leaves the skin of the digit's palm or sole, and forcefully grows the nail in other digits. If treatment extends for a long time and becomes costly, it might be treated by cautering, may become corrupted, then dig out the nail root while corroding its base, forcefully remove all corruption, penetrate its decay into the bone giving off a fetid smell, then amputate the end of that digit, and the color turns black.
And so, when you have that as we said in the division and if your treatment doesn't work, then dig out all the excess that has accumulated from the nail bed and apply cautery near it, because active cautery is beneficial in this situation.
Let it be if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the nail's additions have already absorbed the flesh from inside, start to prick him and guide that, then dig out that flesh near it. Let it be if you place a thin thread at the angle of the nail where you prick the flesh, push that towards above and cut into that flesh for ease, let it rest on what remains from the flesh with burning corrosive medicines penetrating inside until it is fully healed; then treat that with ointments when it is cured.
Let it be if corruption has already spread into the bone, then let it be that you cut out the bone where it is present and extract it, for there's no cure that can work when the bone is corrupted.
And if you notice the corrosion and corruption going into the digit, then let it be that you cut out part of it according to where its memory is pressed, and treat that inside when it's healed.
If on the nail bed there is a percussion or an incision, and if there is a severe pain in that area, then you should begin by making bleeding incisions on the patient from the start, and afterwards cleanse the nail bed with a sharp point across it horizontally below him/her. Be sure to prevent the section from penetrating into the tissue where the nail is left, because this will cause intense pain for the patient, resulting in the development of unnecessary excess flesh at that location; then cure that area by addressing the pain.
It is known as 'adjusted', which appears in the hands of some men. It makes the flesh very thick and also makes bones hard, or it affects the nails themselves.
Such conditions are found in the root of the joints, or they are the natural state of things among the knuckles of the fingers. The one that appears in the knuckles of the finger is not bad, but the one that appears near the joints makes trouble.
And for those who have fatty flesh, the section is slight; you should make an incision there in a horizontal line.
It is known that what appears at the root of the joint makes treatment difficult; so be careful to avoid amputation.
When it's the natural state of things at the knuckles of the fingers, you should make an incision when you start by cutting through the flesh with a round incision into the bone. Then use one of those suitable saws for that purpose and cure inside until it is healed.
The consolidation which happens to the fingers among their usual places or due to the nature of the person who suffers from it, or due to consolidation caused by sickness or by fire burning, or due to any similar reason, then you should remove that consolidation so that the fingers return to their natural shape.
And between their usual places, you should cover them with cloths dipped in rubbed oil so that they do not consolidate easily, and separate these areas from each other, or place a thin sheet of lead between them where consolidation occurs as you do.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs on the fingers on the palm side, then you should dry that consolidation according to its preparation and make it fit into the shape of the member.
From incisions due to vice, they are varicose veins.
Vices are varicose veins, and they are thick, full of melancholic excesses which occur in the places of the body's limbs, especially on the legs of travelers, workers, and carriers.
So when you administer the heart purge of the black plague in some places with strong expulsion, then proceed to bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
The method of curing them with iron is according to two ways: one way is that it should be cut and that the black blood be drained out. The other way is that the vein should be elevated and all of it extracted.
The section of the thing is according to this way: take from the start the joint in water and inside where the thick blood is resolved, which becomes turbid in the joint, then strengthen the joint of the patient at the lower part of their thigh up to the bottom edge of their inner leg within a bend, and afterwards drain the vein in one place or two, or three with broad sections, and then raise the black blood above your hand from the lower edge of the joint inside and above it, until you get rid of the desired quantity of it, which will tolerate the power of the patient.
Then direct that person to avoid those food items causing the black plague.
And continue with bloodletting when the veins are full, and you notice it in the patient's thigh.
The elevation of them is according to this way: if you cut the joint in the thigh where there are skin lumps, then immerse it in warm water and bathe the patient's leg with hot water until they turn red and the veins become swollen; or if you cannot have a bath available, then let the body be scraped if the member is shaved.
And then dry the incision in the direction of the vein for section at the long or at the rear of it; or if you're at its base, apply the antiseptic there, or if at its posterior part, use the salve.
And then cut the incision with scissors and cleanse the vein from all sides until you feel the pulsation, it is necessary that you observe this feeling when it declines to blackness.
And when you've drained and of the incision, check if there's a white string which is the cord.
And then you place that line inside so it's elevated and hangs from the incision; hang it on an oak branch or a wooden rod.
And then dry another section near that section for three fingers, and clean the incision from the part above the vein until you see it.
And then raise that and cut it in the last section near the base, and remove that and lift it until it's visible through the second section; and then remove that from the section above that one.
And do this until you remove that from the section which is at the very top or any other of all the sections, until everything becomes visible; then cut that.
And if you don't want to remove and elevate it, then insert a needle of strong double thread into it and pull out the needle, or insert that string into your hand and turn your hand in every direction so that it hangs. And make sure it doesn't leak; for if it breaks, you will find it hard to lift that part and the wound will occur on the patient's body through that damage.
And when all that oil has leaked out, then place over the area of the wound wool submerged in vinegar and oil mixed with unripe olive oil, and oil that hasn't been mixed. Then cure within what is being treated until it heals.
And if the vein is constricted with excessive curvature around which it encircles the parts, and does not follow straightness as we have said, then you must make cuts across that area in all parts of its curvature, and in the areas where it is enclosed by him. Then suspend that under a rope within which you lift that whole thing.
And you must guard your section so that you do not pierce the vein and do not harm that area, as it will be difficult for you to lift that part. Use your caution in this matter.
Shape of the incision when the vein is being made dry:
It should not be as hot for the patient as with normal cuts nor have a sharp tip so that it does not harm the vein; and it should be of considerable flexibility. If it is too subtle, it will cut into the vein because of its subtlety. It should have this superfluous thickness as we said.
Regarding the extraction of the leg vein.
This vein is generated in the cavities on southern lands, as at Atagi in the region of Arabs and in the dry southern lands of little fertility, where neither grass nor crops grow.
And it is generated in other locations in the body besides these cavities.
And the process of it is like decay that leaves you with a chain-like sensation throughout your body, as well as poison inside your body, snakes, worms, maggots and parasites creating within the chain and the flesh.
And the sign of the potential occurrence of this is when you feel inflammation in the area where this vein occurs; and then that place swells; and then, from the area of that inflammation, a vein begins to emerge that looks like it's rooted from the ground.
The text translates to: "And when you see the extremity of that, then take care that you cover it with a piece of lead weighing as much as one dragon. Within two dragons', and lay this down, and hang the lead suspended from the chest."
And as many times as times the patient's cause affects the parts outside, you surround this with lead and place it there. And if the disease is prolonged, then you must cut out a part of it and wrap what remains; do not cut through that spot directly within which is buried, for if you cut through there it will contract and penetrate into the flesh, causing pus formation and infection at the site and a bad ulceration.
And you must treat it gently and extract it little by little, so that all of it is removed from the rear of the body and there is no effect of the cause within the body.
And this vein extends in some people up to their waist or even further, and I've already treated one that was nearly 20 palms long.
And if it is cut during its treatment, then you must introduce the needle into the patient's artery and perforate that along a long artery within the body, so that all that is in the matter is removed. Then administer decay of the area for several days with medicines; afterwards treat that through wound healing of pus collections.
And this vein sometimes has swollen veins, especially when it appears in the junction of the chest or in the chest, and causes the patient's outlets to swell, and is present from any outlet opening.
And treat that as we said in the division and about what was mentioned above.
Regarding the operation on worms generated under the skin, it is called cow sickness.
This disease is named in some regions as cow sickness because it afflicts many cattle and one worm that is native between the skin and flesh, moves up and down throughout the body, and manifests itself like sensations through member to member, causing disruption of the skin and pus to come out.
And its generation is due to the decay of some fluids, such as when worms, snakes, roundworms and hookworms occur in the abdomen.
And it is found due to the mischief of this, when it travels in the body and rises to the head, and reaches the nostrils. Then there is a strong smell in you, which destroys the nostril and affects many swollen veins.
And when you want to treat and extract it, do so only if you notice its presence and emergence in the sensation. Then cover with what is above it and what remains behind it symmetrically and intense constriction, and afterwards dry over it and extract it.
And if it is present in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a cautery with fire on the area where it lives, and the main cause that is feared is decay of it which destroys the area as we have said.
And if you find it reaching close to the nostril near the head, then press on the eyebrow with firm tension, and afterwards dry over it, and extract it; cover that the patient uses modification of their body with medicines expelling bad decaying fluids, and beware of foods causing decay.
Of dividing over the sickness of illness.
This disease is called 'nafir' in our land, and it's pain that affects some body parts, and then spreads from member to member.
And I have already seen the second one that I will tell you about. I was summoned to treat a female patient in a village, and I noticed a small swelling on the vein of her arm. After an hour when it was heated, I saw that the swelling moved up like a worm moving up, but somewhat more gently than if you were pinching it, as if it were living silver when it moves from place to place.
And then I felt the pain in that spot and stayed there for one hour.
And then continued into the other part of the body where it reached the other arm.
And then I was told that it moved throughout her entire body as I saw; and I was too amazed by the exchange and speed from member to member. And I had already seen this before in my patients according to that manner, but I have seen movements where the pain is being exchanged from member to member. But I did not see it like this among the patients as with the woman.
And I do not think it is just like this because the woman was pregnant, as there are veins and exposed vessels in the body, and this appears with that sensation of the circulating wind.
And it is necessary that it does not appear in those who are delicate and have moist bodies full of swollen veins.
And if you want to treat her, and the patient feels this pain, then it does not seem like this among the people we have said, so you should strengthen over that and leave her a little and dry over that area where there is this constrained wind, and apply heat there, and cauterize the spot.
But if you do not find it among your patients, then treat that for congestion of the body and for what you are releasing winds, and heal those with fetid pills and with serapi pills and similar remedies.
Of the removal of arrows.
Arrows are varied according to the species, and according to the locations in the body where they are found. Their variety is that some have large points, others small, concave, dull, solid; there are those with three angles, and those that have tongues; and those that are spines.
And of the signs of poisoning occur when you find it in the arrow, and pierces through the bone, and is set free from the skull which is above the brain, which happens due to violent vomiting, blindness, dizziness, coldness in the limbs, swelling and fever in the tongue, convulsions, disturbance of understanding and nausea from anger, weakness, the word becomes detached and speech is destroyed. And it appears as a white damp location resembling dust at the wound site, with symptoms indicating moisture akin to wetness of the flesh.
And so if you observe these symptoms, then refrain from treatment and the removal of the arrow, unless it is outwards.
The symptoms of the arrow when found in the heart, if it is close to the left breast, and sensed at that spot where it is set into hard flesh, not being able to see the wound from the outside; and the movement of the arrow feels like a movement of the pulse, and runs along the wound with a black stain, and causes coldness in the extremities, moisture on the skin, fainting; and so you know that death descends throughout the body.
The symptoms when the arrow has pierced the lungs include a feeling of suffocation from frothy blood at the wound, and the veins near the neck become distended, and the color of the skin changes, they breathe large amounts of air and request for breath.
And if you find the arrow in the vest that is on the legs, and the pain then lies close to the small ribs, it causes a great intense pain and sighing, and does not affect all parts of the muscles.
And if you find the arrow in the stomach, then from the wound there comes a feeling of bloating with undigested food.
And if you find the arrow in the belly and it is stuck there, a hole appears from the wound, or the skin, or the intestine which has been ruptured, and there is no hope for curing it by removing the arrow.
And if the arrow finds its way into the bladder and causes urine to appear outside it, or triggers some cause leading parts outwardly, and there is pain over the body, then you know that it is fatal.
May the other members as well, such as the face, the neck, and the back, and the shoulders and the ribs, and the vertebral column of two, and the sternum, and the pelvis, and the shape of their limbs be saved according to the major dispositions when the dart does not find a vein or artery and is not a poisonous dart.
And I recommend to you that which I have observed about these darts, so that you may understand the treatment for this.
This is the case where someone is hit by an arrow in the eye socket of their cheek under the nose, and I extract that arrow from them on the opposite side, leaving the ear's wax for you, and they heal, and no damage occurs in your nose.
And I extract another dart from a Jew which hits him in his ear's wax, leaving the eyelid behind, and the dart was already hidden so that one could not obtain it from that without getting a small tip to which it adhered, it was a large dart among the darts of the Turks, made of iron where there were no ears.
And if it is the Jew, and no damage occurs in his ear from a bad incident.
And I extract another arrow from a Christian man which was hit in the back, and it was an Arab dart, and that is the one with ears; then I incised on that between two ribs, and was already submerged in the patient's back; then I sharpened to that, and then extracted that, and the Christian heals.
And I extract another arrow from a man which was hit in his abdomen, and considered that he would die with that; then, given that it had passed thirty days and there was no change based on any of the reasons for his disposition, I incised on the dart and inserted something into that, and he heals, and no accident happens to him from this.
And I saw a man in whom an arrow hit his back, and the wound has become fixed on him, and since then about seven years, extract the dart from under the rib.
And I saw a woman who was hit in her abdomen by an arrow, and the wound has become fixed inside her, and it is not changed in any of her natural operations, and the woman does not experience any damage in some of her natural procedures.
And I saw another man to whom an arrow hit his face, and the wound has become fixed here, not causing any pain or marks like this.
And I extract the arrow from the king's prince man which was hit in the middle of his nose and had already declined to the right side, it was hidden completely.
And I was called for his treatment near the place where the arrow was embedded within three days.
And then I felt the wound of the dart pulling outwards; and then I inquired about that with a subtle test, and did not feel it; but he felt the puncture on his right ear, and so I suspected that that puncture was for the tip of the dart.
And applied the place with an adhesive and digestive paste, confirming to me that this location is where we should adhere it so that I can see the location of the dart, in order to proceed upon that.
And no damage occurs at the significant location that you have obtained that spot; and I continue applying the paste on him for several days without any incident; and the wound becomes fixed, and reduces the patient's ability to move by about several days until I feel the dart inside his nose and report this to me.
And then I placed a quick-dissolving medicine on the wound for several days until it opened, and upon this test, I heated it, and felt the tip of the dart which adheres to the shaft.
And then I adjusted during the opening of the wound by that quick medicine until it became visibly clear to me the tip of the dart, and spent time with this for about four months.
And then as the wound was enlarged, it became possible for me to insert forceps into him, refine that, and did not experience pain during this. So I no longer continued refining and working on that with methods of engineering until one day on that, using methods of gripping with forceps downwards according to the shape of those at the end of the dart, then extracting that; and then restoring that wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose would not be restored, and I restored that and the wound has become fixed, and the patient heals with complete health, and there is no damage to him from any cause.
And I advise you about the quality of extracting some darts so that you follow this rule and significance about what I have not said, concerning these parts of this art and definitions of that, they are not understood from the narrative nor do they comprehend that freely.
And the artisans wisely compare with few on motion; and about what is presented compared to what is absent; and discovers new operation and new tool when accidents happen in the causes of foreign arts.
And therefore I say that darts are not forcefully taken out of the limbs in which they are stuck, but according to two ways: or by piercing the place where it enters; or against the opposite side.
And that which is driven through the spot goes in, or it's pulled from a meaty location, and it's thrown out and driven away.
And if you don't follow the advice of allowing it to rest for a few days after eating until the meat around it has settled and healed, then you should let it heal internally, alleviating the pain and its exit.
Similarly, if it happens in bones and you don't follow the advice, then let that heal for a few days and repeat the process of applying heat and movement every day, and it will be driven out.
And if you don't follow your own advice for such days, then it's likely that you will puncture within the path of the arrow through all parts of the bone in fine travel, so that the place becomes enlarged with the arrow, and then remove that.
And if the arrow is already hidden in the body location, and it escapes your feeling, then you should try to locate it with your touch, and if you feel it, then pull it out with movements that are suitable for its removal.
And if you cannot get to it because of the constriction of the wound and the length of the prey, and here it is not bone or nerve or vein, then you cut into the wound until it becomes enlarged and making extraction of the arrow possible.
And if it is stuck in the fatty tissue around them, then you deliver the flesh in which it is located from all sides to every tool that can be used; consider this situation too, if you cannot remove the removal of the flesh at the break of these fatty tissues and within their twisting until you succeed.
And when you administer the removal of the arrow in any place where it is, then you use twisting of your hand with forceps from all sides until it obeys; and subtlety with utmost subtlety that the arrow does not break and that it makes for a difficult extraction of both and that extraction.
And if you cannot do that in your time, then you leave for several days until the parts that are in its path settle, and repeat this process when it is relieved. And if you experience difficulty in blood flow, then you administer what we have said about treatment in its chapter.
And preserve your skill from the start of vein or nerve or string, and apply tools in every possible way for removing the arrow; do this with ease, tranquility, speed and firmness as I have recommended to you.
And when you force the arrow back by itself so that the head follows the figure according to which you must place the setting of the arrow in it, it is better for healing. And if this is not possible to you, then you administer what is possible to you by the figures.
And for arrows that are driven out against the other side, or that have already proceeded some distance towards the external parts from them, or if there is an increase in hardness at the tip of the arrow by feeling higher up from where they end, then you should feel about it; and when the section matches the quantity in which forceps would be used; and then pull it out, since it responds to reason.
And if it is stuck in the bone, then you twist your hand against opposition until the arrow penetrates into the bone and enlarge yourself, and then remove that.
And if not, leave that for several days, and repeat this process until you feel it.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in there, then you push that towards it.
And if the shaft is stuck and you want to administer impulse, then you insert that, if it's silent, hit the hollow part so that inside the cavity of it in the neck of the arrow, and then push that towards it.
And if the arrow is concave, then you push that with strong impact inside it, as the arrow is relieved by that.
And if the arrow is embedded deep in the flesh, then you should hollow out all the tissue where the wound is, if it's possible for you to do this, and then treat that with what seems appropriate.
And if the arrow hits the foot, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or on the side, and is close enough for you to touch it with your hand, then feel about it and if possible remove it from there. And avoid touching veins or nerves, then remove that arrow, and later cover the wound if necessary, and treat that until it heals.
The method of using forceps where the arrows are inserted:
Let their tips be like the beak of a pincers that are made like a saw when they take hold on the arrow, thus not letting it go.
And from those are made special spots, large, few and medium-sized, according to the quantity of the size of the arrow and its hardness, as well as the width of the wound, and the constriction.
Like a ray so that it relieves the inside in the concave arrow, and it is pushed towards that.
Regarding phlebotomy of veins.
The veins for phlebotomy which usually need to be bled, are around .xxx,. which are in the head at .xvi,. These are two pulsating veins, they're close to the temples, called auriculars by Alhasisain; two branches that are in both temples noticeable; and two veins that are in two lacrimals of two nostrils which are called aspissures; and a vein prepared at the mid-point of the forehead, and the vein that is at the tip of the nose; and two jugulars that are at the neck; and two veins that are on the upper lip; and two veins that are on the lower lip; and - these are the veins called algecile; and they're two veins that leave the tongue. These are the veins that are usually bled from at the wrists, they're .v,. One of those is a cephalic vein, it's located in the wild heart; and the people call it "the head vein", and flat, it's a medium-sized vein, and composed from a branch of basilica and another branch of cephalic; and they call that the commoners "the whole body vein", and basilica is a vein which is placed at the domestic heart, and called "citillar", and they call that the vulgar "the belly vein"; and wrist vein, it's placed over the flexor, and that's the one where phlebotomy is performed, and that appears above the elbow by a manifest appearance; and small intestine, it's the vein between what we just called auricular and very small vein, and they are in both branches.
And in the chest and the ribcage there are three veins; one of those is that leaves the curvature of the wrist heart; and the second is sophena, its location is near the ribcage of the domestic heart; and sciatic vein, its location is near the wrist heart; and in the ribcage are other similar veins.
The youth of the veins that are near the temples is to be considered in the old aural catarrs, emigraemia and bleeding ulcers of an ancient head disease.
And the quality of seeing those is according to what I recommend to you: that it be red on the top of the head of illness, and that the head of illness be rubbed in the back of the neck at the location of both veins with a broad cloth for good friction; then strengthen the body's neck by having a bend inside which appear the two and the locations near the temples are approximately below the two bumps at the bottom of the head; and feel that on your said, and if you feel the pulse of those on your said, there is indication here to try.
Then you take the surgical knife, and that is the one which pierces downward, then you insert your finger into the vein in the neck where the phlebotomy flows to the bone. And then lift your hand towards the vein and neck up to the parts above, and cut into the vein at an angle downwards. And let the length of the cut be either two fingers or close to that amount; and let blood flow out as much as you want.
And then strengthen with powders and leave it inside until it is healed.
And this has been discussed previously in the introduction of this book about the incision of those and their cautery treatment.
The youth of the two arterial veins at phlebotomy is in old emigraemia and bad domestic illness, frequent ophthalmia, and chest diseases with acute excesses flowing out from the nostrils.
And the quality of performing phlebotomy on those is according to what I recommend to you: strengthen the body's neck with a movement where both veins are felt by manifest appearance, and show that you can feel the pulse at your said location; then you will have indication here to try.
And then lift the neck over the vein up to your indicated location, and insert the phlebotomy downward, and raise the vein up there; and cut it in this way as you have done with the other veins; and let blood flow according to the amount of your need.
And then release the constriction of the neck, place your said over the vein for an hour, and pause over that knot and powders, strengthen it from a strong constriction, and leave it inside until it is healed.
And this recollection of them, as well as the incision and laceration, has been detailed in the beginning of this book.
When performing the first sentence of bloodletting for facial veins, it approaches the venipuncture of the cephalic vein in old facial ailments and migraines, as well as inflammation and infected ulcers.
The quality of the bloodletting for you is according to what I recommend to you; so, when the patient strengthens his collar with a bend where the vein appears; and then takes the instrument which is named 'fossor', whose form is this:
Place the point of the 'fossor' over that vein and strike on it with your hand or some other tool in the manner you do, let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; then carefully close the wound in the patient and strengthen that area so that it heals.
Some veins are opened during bloodletting but one should not let the bloodletting be of an acute extremity like other bloodlettings, rather it is on the lateral extremity, and that particular bloodletting according to the cross, where bone proximity makes it robust; if this bloodletting were subtle, it would break through in the patient.
May the youth of both veins that are in the tear ducts of two eyes through pus from the eyes and by inflammation, as well as in the cheeks, and for facial illnesses.
The quality of bloodletting is when the patient strengthens their neck with a bend, and then perform bloodletting there, standing above them.
And when the bloodletting is done according to the transverse direction along its length for a few with bloodletting points, where there is no flesh in that place; and if the bloodletting point is subtle, it makes the extremity of that strong.
And then let the blood flow as much as necessary and place over those veins, hold them for a night, and carefully close that area.
May the bloodletting of the facial veins is recommended for acute fever and strong heat, as well as facial illnesses and migraines that occur in the face, especially when they are old.
The quality of the bloodletting for you is that your neck strengthens and places its nose against your left hand, take the subtle long bloodletting and place it in the middle location of the nasal cavity according to straightness, where the vein does not appear here, and when the blood begins to flow shortly.
Make sure to end your hand on the small bloodletting gradually and let the blood flow according to your need; then close that area for a night, as that is quickly restored.
May the youth of the bloodletting of the two guides lead to constriction of the air and the beginning of leprosy, as well as bad skin ailments, itching, and corrosive ulcers, along with hyperthermia.
The quality of the bloodletting for those is that your neck strengthens each one on its collar with a bandage; and place the doctors on the head of the neck, and let the neck lie on a pallet.
And then perform bloodletting along the length with a broad, small bloodletting gradually; and remove the blood according to season quantity or according to what you need times it; and make it as if for another vein.
And then remove the bandage and strengthen both veins with a mid-strength compression so that your neck is not overheated, and leave it in place until the illness is healed.
The youth of the bloodletting for the alerich veins corresponds to small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, decay of the gums, bad ulcers, and cracks, as well as bad ulcers that occur in the nose and on your face.
The quality of bloodletting for those veins is that you cut in front of the neck and strengthen its neck with a bend, then turn your head to observe both lips where one vein is on the right side of the lip and the second is on the left; each demonstration by each is through the darkness of each from both sides, and more so when in their circuit are small black veins; then you pierce each by incision perpendicular.
If you have any doubt and do not know which one among them is, then you understand the incision of the most significant one, and the pus that is evident from those.
And make it as if for the two veins that are in the lips above.
The two veins that are in your tongue show the bloodletting of the cephalic vein around the preheated points that are in the gullet, as well as throat illnesses, and mouth ailments.
The quality of performing bloodletting for these is that follow the neck between your most forward on the solar plexus, lift the tongue from them, observe the tongue, from each side of its vein and the other side's vein, and the color of each declines to darkness.
And then perform bloodletting for any one; and be aware that you do not end your hand on the bloodletting ones, as those are arteries.
Your veins that are bloodletted in the armpit are in those where pain is usual for all people, and their bloodletting is done according to two ways: or they place on bloodletting points of myrtle or olive with subtleness decreasing; or they cut with a bloodletting instrument, and it's called an incision; this is its form.
Let the cushion of the patient be in this position, and you should open the full, visibly large, convex veins, and at those that contain large hard stones.
This type of lung puncture is narrower in width and has a more subtle extremity, it's suited for puncturing subtle veins that contain small citrus-like stones.
Let the young patient for the lung puncture of the basilic vein which is one of three veins: extract the stone from the maladies that leave the gallbladder and liver, as well as that from which the feet and belly are affected.
And when performing that lung puncture, the operator should hold it firmly there and be over-tired in that position, as long as they are applying pressure on the patient's artery, if they err or adjust during the puncture procedure, that artery will bleed and blood will flow out, so ensure not to pierce the artery with a lung puncturing tool before doing anything else, especially when you're ready for surgery.
And if the basilic vein does not appear through an obvious manifestation, then know that you should leave it and try another area, or search for any nearby branch; or do a lung puncture in place of where your hand ends on the arm, which is visible. Perform this lung puncturing technique as we have described up until now during surgery.
If you wish to perform the lung puncture of the meteysa (lung), then place yourself in front of the constriction on the arm where you recognize the location of the pulse, and move your hand gently over it. Then adjust the position of the arm and perform this on the concave area with a lung puncturing tool as we have said; be careful to do so within the space around the artery without pressing too hard.
And when you apply force, using your strength, inflate the area that you have moved over gently with your hand. Then that inflation is an indication of the presence of an artery there, so avoid it accordingly.
And if the stone flows during lung puncture like urine in children, and it's small and hard, then you know that it belongs to the stone of an artery; and then hold your hand over that gently for a long distance. And adjust your position, and once the stone is removed, where there are marks that indicate its removal, then lift your arm and leave it.
And watch over the patient's recovery from their wound, and be extra cautious of them and don't let it heal too quickly for a few days until they're fully recovered.
And if the stone is not removed, and you should not give medicine as it's present, then you'll be cutting into an artery, if that appears to you; for its extremity contracts, and the stone is removed. Or take a slightly longer pulse, apply it on the area of the vein at the constriction down towards the arm and under the powdery skin by another day.
And if the stone is removed then it's good; and otherwise, treat that according to what was described in the memory of the removal of powdery substances that bleed.
And removing the stone from there is difficult in narrow positions for the area of the wound and the possibility of the arm.
Of the dark vein lung puncture is young as it extracts the stone from the upper part of the head and below the chest; for this reason because it consists of branches of the basilic vein and of cephalic veins, as we have said.
And when lung puncturing the operator should hold it firmly in this lung puncture of yours, as long as that thing is a nerve; then adjust during the lung puncturing procedure and if you find a nerve, it will cause your patient to lose consciousness, making healing difficult for them, and strong it won't be completely healed. This nerve can be felt by touch; and if hidden in some people and it's subtle and not visible, then know that when lung puncturing the part of the middle, avoid touching the nerve with your strength, instead move on from the middle area as instructed earlier.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should puncture the vein along its length.
The method for lung puncturing the cephalic vein is to extract stone from the head and alleviate chest ailments.
And when you do this properly, if you want the lung puncture tool to pierce in an olive lung puncturing or a mirti lung puncturing; that is the saved metal of all veins, which doesn't leave your artery or nerve.
And indeed, strength should be applied in some individuals, when lung puncturing is not done in the first palpation, but it's not noticeable under that lump.
The first concern is that you must know whether or not to administer phlebotomy only when health preservation and the hope for the patient are maintained, as well as caution against future illnesses. You should perform phlebotomy on one of these veins located in the thigh: cephalic, dark, and basilic; and perform phlebotomy at the start of spring, after breakfast in spring and autumn, and around winter when there is an indication of overfilling.
And phlebotomy should be performed until three hours have passed since the first drop of sweat during the day.
Phlebotomy should be administered as long as it produces convenience and need, whether at night or during the day, in any hour and throughout time.
And it's to be known that an infant should not undergo phlebotomy until they are 14 years old, and a pregnant woman should not receive phlebotomy within the first three months up until the seventh month, elderly people should not undergo phlebotomy if they have already passed sixty years.
And if anyone wishes to undergo phlebotomy for any reason, it's to be known that they should change their organs before the phlebotomy with leonid juice, if in those there is a retained wound, so that the veins do not draw excess from them during the phlebotomy of the organs, which are purified, and do not send anything to the main members.
And do not subject patients to unnecessary phlebotomy or from weakness, illness, or drunkenness when their condition has not improved as expected, nor from diseases of the stomach, and more that phlebotomy should be feared in the case of colic pain, vomiting, and bloating, and all causes that diminish its virtue, whether physical or animal.
And it's important to consider in the subtlety of humors before this if the illness is due to food and drinks, and with medicines if this is possible for them.
And it's good to consider rest if there are any causes that don't allow it, or through some exercise so that the illness becomes subtle.
And suspend phlebotomy on their feet in the morning, around the time of three o'clock, as we have said.
And ensure that one's feet are protected from all kinds of animal accidents on that day of all illnesses and accidents, as well as anxiety, anger, fear, and any physical accidents, such as work and unnecessary stress or sex and similar to them.
And according to their wish, make the causes be presented in the use of which they customarily follow among men for fragrance and aroma, like balms and similar things as per the amount of possibility.
And have the phlebotomist sit on a cushion that is at least as wide as the cushion of the person who will be undergoing phlebotomy.
And adjust their arm, and rub that with their hand the phlebotomizer two or three times; and tighten their belt at the corset and wrap that around them two times.
And if the constriction is adjusted, when the constriction does not equal it, or when the constriction is due to excess, then prohibit any flow of sickness; or when it's due to alleviation, then prohibit the body of the sickness altogether.
And during the constriction, it's to be known that the one who is about to undergo phlebotomy should rub their hands among them until the veins are swollen and this is declared through feeling.
And as the phlebotomist uses their phlebotomy with a little of ancient olive oil; and then pauses their last touch on the back of their right hand over that vein, they determine the place where they want phlebotomy, so that the vein is slightly exposed, and percussion is stopped when it's from which veins you find this, as you must perform phlebotomy against them. And of those, they are filled with windiness and when you press the phlebotomist on that spot, they should be contracted by the phlebotomist, and then revealed by the phlebotomist; and the phlebotomist does not pierce the vein, and if they do, it is pulled.
And so, know that the phlebotomist must be firm and should be attentive to all these causes.
And then pause the phlebotomist; however, if the vein is punctured in one go, then yes; and otherwise, repeat this at another go over that spot, or with a bit of urgency on their behalf, if the spot isn't soiled.
And if the spot is soiled, or if the stomach is upset, then let it rest for a day or two, and don't tighten the belt, lest he pulls pus from the wound, nor go into bed.
And repeat the phlebotomy if she desires it.
And if the pulse is small and allows for subtle illness, and you fear that not enough of this sickness will be removed, then repeat the phlebotomy at that place according to rectitude and adjust in the pulse a little bit, and do this with urgency before the spot is soiled. When the spot is soiled in many people, you should have less pulse.
And if you notice that it has already soiled, then do not repeat over them, for there is no excuse for any reason; and pause over that a part of the olive oil's opening, which soothes the body of the sickness. And it's better in this place that smell and the other smells are.
And similarly, in all phlebotomies where there are phlebotomes that should avoid the blood of diseases, they administer an oil cut in it, making a tincture with alcohol and salve when one is placed on that spot, where the disease is subtle and becomes agitated when it is thick.
And if in the location of the phlebotomy a large abscess is generated, where drained spots occur, especially for those who have not bled but that spot, or at the point of the small vein, then you scrape it, and place your hand over the area with an infused sponge in water and salt, one that has been sliced, and strengthen it for an hour, when it is dissolved.
And know how to do this near the source of the blood flow from that vein towards its completion or another vein.
And if there is some darkening or greenness in the spot for a few days, do not notice this; and if you wish, place on that something like aloes and myrrh dissolved, or something like mint juice or calamus or similar.
And if draining spots occur with abscesses and swellings, you should perform phlebotomy on the basilic vein.
And then place your hand on that spot. If later you feel softness, maintain your compression on that area. Then, know that this swelling is bad and harmful. And then remember to place your hand on that spot with what we've discussed earlier, where it will drain from the blood artery.
And apply plaster in the water where it is moistened, so that the place withstands, and then treat that with another treatment once it's healed.
And know how to extract from the blood at all for each person according to the quantity of their virtue and according to the color prevailing over the blood as it appears.
And if the blood is black, then let it bleed until it becomes reddened; similarly, if you find it thick, let it bleed until it becomes thin; and likewise, if it's sharp, let the sharpness be contained within.
And know that for someone who is full and strong, needing blood extraction in a lesion, the phlebotomy of the vein should be expanded, and the phlebotomist should be skilled.
And for those who are weak, do the opposite of that. And know to extract that in drained spots, and have it done straightly.
And the best thing that is administered in venous phlebotomy is a cross section, not piercing.
And this method of phlebotomy prevents blood flow and nerve damage, and is more advantageous and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude.
And in this situation, where fainting is likely to occur, you should perform phlebotomy. And know that before phlebotomy, cure it with a small amount of infusion in vinegar or simple diluted oxymel; and extract blood from the body in three or four drained spots.
And if it's relieved by composition, then take before phlebotomy an infusion in balsam of myrrh or in scented honey water with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger and similar things, or in a scented and aromatic elixir.
And if fainting occurs, you should perform phlebotomy. And it's because of the patient's blood flow that is disturbed by disease, then know to drink in water from meat and scented balsam with a subtle odor; and use aromatic remedies for their chest, and let his feet be near that.
And use the other reasons we've discussed in the chapter on fainting for evacuation.
And if someone wants to empty their arm and dissolve their blood gradually in two stages, know that for this phlebotomy is through the means of evacuation, and the virtue of which is cool, it will drain the blood little by little, so according to the amount of its virtue on continuous days.
And if someone wants to empty their arm and gradually drain their blood in two stages, and their body is strong, then do this about seven hours or nine after the first phlebotomy.
And if someone wants to drain the blood of their body against the direction in which it tends, know that this should be done on the second day or third day.
And if that body has a fevered blood that is sharp and causes it to become heated, know that you should drain it in one shot from your sanguineous substance, with a large quantity being drained and the point of entry should be expanded so as not to cause death due to fainting, for drained spots need this when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent; and place your hand on the pulse of that person concerning their blood stream, so it does not end in death instead of fainting, since drained spots require this when the one performing phlebotomy is unaware and careless.
And do not know when you want to loosen the arm and drain the blood in two stages, once the opening of the vein is closed and it becomes difficult to evacuate the blood, then press under that with forcefulness and slightly bend it outwardly, for this is too bad.
Let the blood drain until you complete phlebotomy again; or remain in this with the strength of the phlebotomist that has coagulated in the opening of the vein; or place your hand on it with tincture of myrrh, or salve, and apply a light compression until the blood is drained out.
And if the vein is inflamed, then smooth it out without touching it until the abscess is sedated.
And if it is necessary to provoke the release of the disease according to its symptoms, and not for excuse, then you apply that above that spot or on another arm at another vein.
The vein referred to as "the arm's cord" is phlebotomized in the place of the small or the basilic vein, when they are not congested or hidden, which is made up of those.
The quality of the phlebotomy for the patient is that the patient dips their hand in hot water until the easy redness appears and the vein manifests itself clearly.
And tighten it on that with a ligature or with a narrow constriction; and perform phlebotomy according to the transverse small one, not laterally nor longitudinally.
And make the incision wide and your phlebotomy at the location where you will perform the phlebotomy on the wrist joint, a small one.
And if the flow of the disease's symptoms is prohibited, then you dip your hand in hot water and let the symptoms run in the water until you achieve your need.
May you excuse if you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from dipping your hand in hot water, and similarly restrain the body of the disease in hot water during winter.
The phlebotomy of this vein is particularly safe compared to all others, because for you there is no pulsating vein, nor a nerve.
The phlebotomy of the wrist on the right hand corresponds to the diseases of pregnancy.
The quality of the phlebotomy for you is to strengthen your hand with a ligature or with your own hand, as you have it laid in hot water, until the vein swells and is demonstrated visibly; then perform the transverse phlebotomy there; and if you incise that completely, do not let go of that one afterwards.
Remember to not finish your hand during the phlebotomy, because for you there are only the nerves of the fingers exposed without flesh.
And then dip your hand in hot water and let the disease run through that; if you do not dip it in hot water, the disease will coagulate in the opening of the vein, and there will be no flow.
And as you extract the disease according to the amount of need, then place a pause on the vein oil and salt so it does not solidify slightly; similarly ensure that you do this for all branches tightly.
Let the youth of the phlebotomy of that on the left hand correspond to the diseases of the belly.
And do something similar for the phlebotomy of this as you did with the other one.
Let the youth of the cephalic vein phlebotomy correspond to diseases that are in the right side of your body, such as pregnancy diseases and retention of menses, and diseases related to blisters and ulcerous conditions on thighs and old chest diseases, all corresponding to diseases.
The quality of the phlebotomy for this is that the patient dips their palm in hot water and makes friction over it until veins appear; they place a string on the chest joint; and at the site where you see the prominent vein, you should mark that spot, and from there its branches spread out on the chest surface.
And then perform phlebotomy on the larger branch or remove the lump wherever you find it necessary and suitable, which is better and more salt.
And if you perform phlebotomy on the chest surface, then you protect yourself from the nerves that are exposed there on the chest surface, and pause your phlebotomy at the location where you perform it transversely, as though you want to incise it.
And if the phlebotomies are possible for you.
Let if the release of symptoms is prohibited; then you dip your hand in hot water and let the disease run through that until it is evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist misses in the first attempt, then retry with the phlebotomy again in its vicinity, where the area is safe; and do not fear for your disease, but rather protect yourself from the nerves as we have said.
And similarly perform on the other chest surface in equal manner.
Regarding the sciatic vein, as we have said, it should be marked at the point where you find the groove of the wild part.
The youth of this phlebotomy corresponds to the groin when it's due to disease heat.
The quality of this phlebotomy is that the patient dips in a bath and quickly tightens their thigh muscle at the knuckle of the calf above the groove on four fingers along a long delicate bend; it does not appear like this otherwise.
And when it appears, then you perform phlebotomy on that according to each method that is possible for you and transversely, which is better; or incise that by cutting or cut that by suction, where the area is safe.
It is in the thick parts of men, and if you find that one, but it doesn't appear to touch everything, then perform phlebotomy on some branch of it, and this is the one that appears behind the right side of the chest near the auricular.
And protect yourself from nerves, let the flow of blood be as much as you want through the vein.
And then relieve the constriction and place yourself on the site of the phlebotomy, strengthen that spot, so that it is slightly cured soon.
From suction and of those qualities to use them.
Suctions are from corneas, or from iron, or from blood.
And suction is performed according to two ways: one of them is through incision and blood extraction, and the other is suction followed by incision.
And this suction that follows incision does so in two ways, either with fire or with heat.
And among the suction treatments that are performed along with incisions and blood extraction, there are fourteen body sites. The first one is the navel, which is the last part of the head, where the suction is placed. The middle location is on each side of the chest cavity; and the ones by the throat divide into two parts of it. Suction treatments for the chin leave the jawbone but not the mouth; those for spatulae are given; those for the anus are located at the end of the rectum; those for the torches, they are two arms apart; those for the cavities are given; and those for the thighs each.
And suction does not remove the blood from the small, scattered veins in the flesh. Thus, it does not exert its force through those; like bleeding by phlebotomy; nor should suction be performed with fire or heat in any ailment caused by overfullness, until all of the body is evacuated.
Or if necessity calls for suction due to illness or continuous ailment, administer that treatment at all times in the middle of the month and at its end, as well as in the middle point of that period and any other time it may be needed.
And therefore, when it occurs in any of those causes, especially if it is during the third or middle part of the month, then commanding suction to be performed as soon as possible after dawn, for at least three hours.
And the purpose of neck suction is that when it takes on heaviness in the head and where it settles in the cheeks; but note that this involves the evacuation of all over the body.
And this suction is done at the site of phlebotomy for the cephalic region.
And it's not mentioned to use that which comes from overfullness or in the one where there is catarrh, for it causes great harm to those.
And thus, it's not advisable to use that on the elderly or with heads where there are illnesses due to fever.
And for those who continue to work on that continuously over it causes forgetfulness; thus, you should command the suction operator to place their hand slightly under the suction device at each location, fearing the generation of forgetfulness.
And alcohol suction is at the site of phlebotomy for the dark vein and basilica: hence it causes asthma, constriction in the lungs, and the splitting of the lung's tissue, as well as coughing and overfullness.
And it's important that the alcohol suction be slightly covered; if left exposed, it causes weakening in the body and stomach.
And the suction with aloe causes accidental pain in the head and ophthalmia, migraines, fever, and toothaches; it is performed at the site of phlebotomy for the basilica.
And it's wise to command the suction operator not to press their hand too much during incision, so as not to cut into an artery and cause bleeding.
And suction of the chin causes alcohol in the mouth, and decay of the gum, as well as symptoms that resemble oral illnesses, and are found at the site of phlebotomy for allican which is located on both cheeks.
And the suction that is performed over the two spoons causes coldness, which occurs due to excessive warmth.
And the suction that takes place within two thirds of the torches causes youthfulness in phlebotomy of three veins, they are basilica, dark and cephalic. This one draws blood from all those scattered veins throughout the body, as well as the small veins of other veins that lead to the drawing out of blood to these three veins.
And command the suction operator not to proceed with incision, where the area is exposed of flesh, leave his nerves and arteries alone.
And it's one suction over the buttocks that causes hemorrhoids in the anus and ulcers if left untreated.
And command the suction operator to create a strong suction, and use iron tools; where the area needs strength, let the soft, subtle pull of suction be performed repeatedly, and apply it with a scalpel during the scraping process.
Suction over the joints decreases by a clear manifestation, which pulls out the disease from the whole body and confirms old pains in the lungs and liver, and in the bladder; it initiates menstruation, confirming discomfort in the bowels and around; and stands where bloodletting is done for two syphilitic conditions, at cauterization, and for two types of pimple.
However, motion weakens the whole body and causes fainting in middle-aged men.
And of the suction at cauterization, youth is attracted to youth in the suction over the two joints.
And the quality of the position of the suction points is that you place the suction at the beginning view and continue with a warm breath, do not prolong the position of the suction points, rather pause those briefly, leave them gently, and let the fluids move to the location evenly for an even occurrence. And do not cease repeating this until you see the area already turn red and swell, and that the sign of the disease appears.
And then you scrape and gradually increase the suction little by little, and properly consider in the disposition of the body.
That person who has rare flesh prone to ulcers, you should scrape once and not more, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And command the suction operator to expand the scraping and only do a little more, always facilitating the suction.
And if in the disease there is thickening, you should know that you need to scrape twice, where in the first scraping you open the path of subtle elimination to the disease and to his aqueous content. And for the second one, at the scrutiny, acquire knowledge about the extraction of thickened disease matter.
And if the disease is dense and feculent, then it should be done with scraping for the third time so that it reaches the end.
And gradually, when we wish to extract a little at a time or even just a small amount of pus, suffice with one scraping.
And if we wish to extract pus that is fluid, scrape with a scraping technique; and if we know that the pus is thick, you should know that you need to scrape through wave-like scraping.
And the end of scraping where it's only about reaching the depth of the disease up to this point.
And if the disease is thick, hard, dark, and their veins are strained, you should know that the suction areas be greasy softer, more open, more resolved; in summer times, as with oil of aloe or oil of violet, or oil of lemon leaves, or oil from the juniper berries; and if it's winter time, then use oil of narcissus, or oil of lime, or oil of chamomile, or oil of the disease, and add those together.
And if the excess is thick and large, then use oil of wormwood, or oil of balm, or oil of aloe, or oil of nutmeg, and add those together.
And if the suction operator has large and tender flesh pores, you should know that oil is forbidden for him, and you should add to these areas of the suction points with warm water or with hot water from solatrum leaves, or with water from juniper, or with water from bay leaves, and those added together.
And for that where the pus is of liquid consistency, wash his suction points with vinegar or with water from myrtle and sumac, and add those together.
And for those where the excesses are thick, wash his suction points with vinegar old, or with water from saussurea, which is tarragon, or from decoction of nutmeg, or from chamomile, and add those together.
And you should know that bathing should be done before suction; it's also known that an hour or two after the bath, or by suction immediately afterwards, one should rest.
What is necessary for regulating the blood-sucking instrument before suction?
And when you consider at the beginning: if the suction operator or the one due for bloodletting is hot and full of pain and inflammation, then it should be given cooling remedies, such as sorrel, and endive with vinegar and lettuce water, and senna tea, and julep, and those similar.
And give them foods such as poultry, meats of roasted rabbits, and cooked vegetables with herbs, and those similar.
And for those whose complexion is pale, it should be recommended to drink almond milk or almond seed alecane tea with sumac, and fragrant wine between old and new; and that it's advised for them to use little drinking and eating, and pause the foods of poultry, cannabis, parsley, small rabbits and pigeons.
And it should be known that on the day of suction and bloodletting, his water intake should exceed his food consumption.
And it should be known that in a few hours before some people with tyriaca alfarac, or muscle medicines, such as muscated, or alumina before suction or bloodletting or nearby, so that the main members are comforted and the disease is softened; do not recommend taking those scrapes.
The fanning out of those that are cuts due to scarification should be cuts over the belly, and on gout, and on the navel, in the places of joints, and on the waistband, for these members do not suffer from scarification upon themselves.
It is not sought by those cuts but rather by the pain from the member's veins, like suction on nipples in gynecological disease due to blood flow of the veins of the arms; we use that for dissolving excess moisture inhibiting circulation in limbs, like suction on stomach and navel; for that causes contraction of the limb and shakes him up, resolving that windiness pain.
And when it is applied to the cheeks when they swell up or inflate, for by virtue of strong suction, the person swells up and removes the inflation from its place.
Likewise when it is applied to the belly and back, it resolves excess wind in those confined areas.
These suction treatments are administered with grease alone; some treatments are administered with fire.
And some treatments are filled with hot water in gynecological diseases of the belly.
That is why the suction should be filled and have a large amount of pus, either just hot water or water in which herbs suitable for the case are steeped.
Form of suction treatment applied with heat: let the size of the opening be that of two fingers, according to which we have formed it; and the amount of the paste should be as much as a palm; and in its middle part, at the place that is in the circuit, the same size as the part, let it be small depending on how much enters one needle into it.
Let it be made of elderberry or citrus fruits, large slices, lion's flesh and clean ones so that it does not move the member from its position on it.
And at the middle of the cross-section of elderberry or iron, where the candle is placed over the fire.
And this is that large suction treatment which we prescribed; and the little grease from that according to gynecological diseases and the condition of whom uses that.
And suckers for children and those who are weak are different from those for young people and large cross-sections.
And the quality of applying this suction treatment over a limb is that it extends the wax from wood fire in front of one small candle made of beeswax, and place that over the middle section of the cross-section in the middle part of the sucker, so that the fire should be ignited around the space to prevent burning the patient's body.
And it should be applied over the limb of the patient, and let them know about the one we said, within which when we have the suckers and they do not need to be kept as such that vaporizes on that part, then the suction treatment will dissolve right away.
And according to its nature, heat the wax, and repeat that if you need more of it.
When suction treatment is administered in gynecological pleuresy, with water, without any cross-section or part, and it should only be filled with water and placed on the limb alone.
And this is its form: And this suction treatment; the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive large quantities of water.
Chapter CVII.
Suction treatments are not administered in moist limbs but in those limbs where it is impossible to place suction cups, due to the smallness of those areas, like the buttocks and gums and similar; or in limb devoid of flesh, like that and their similar parts.
And the quality of using those if you have found blood-sucking suction cups that are in the hot waters used for purification.
And let them rest in hot water until they become accustomed, and ensure that no harmful causes occur inside those limbs; and proceed to evacuate the body through bloodletting and suction treatments; and rub the limb of gynecological disease until it turns red; and then place them on it.
And when they are filled and follow the case.
And if it's possible to use grease from that place with suction, it's better during adolescence.
And if not, then wash the place with vinegar and add hot water; and let it be rubbed and squeezed.
And if the blood circulation of the body extends to the attachment of the suction cups, and this is what happens, then put a cloth dipped in cold water on it, and place that one over so that the excretion can be drained.
And if the blood increases, then sprinkle it with unrefined vitriol or saltpeter and similar things that cause coagulation, so that the blood will clot; or place the ashes of roasted fava beans on the spot, and let them rest until the fava beans stick to the spot, and the blood will clot.
And indeed, if necessary, repeat the use of suction cups when it's possible to replace those.
And if blood-sucking cups are forbidden for suspension, then rub the place with recent blood or leave a needle in those places where there is some bleeding; and let them rest, because when they feel any blood right away.
And when you want to clean them, grind a little bit of powdered aloes, or salt, or ashes on those, and clean them immediately.
So this begins the section for treatment: restoration. This chapter addresses essential methods in the art of medicine; it is about the restoration of fractures and accidental dislocations in bones.
Oh, son, know that many doctors and common people, as well as those who for some time will neglect the works of the ancients or not read even a single letter from them.
And for this reason, this method of the scholars on earth is kept private; I have not forgotten to do so even after all these years; and I have included nothing here that I did not learn, but rather through the extensive reading of the works of the ancients and study into their understanding, from which I extracted the science.
And direct yourself towards experimentation and study throughout your life.
And I have described in this chapter all of my science and the experiments that were carried out; thus, I will abbreviate this for you others and relieve myself from the occupation of description; and shorten this at the end of abbreviation; and demonstrate this at the end of explanation; and shape this towards various forms of disturbances that are administered there, as done through explanation, as I have done in two previous chapters.
First chapter.
Summary and collections from existing fractures of bones, of which preliminary descriptions are necessary before we begin recalling the limbs of fractures and various ones for each. Therefore, let us say in the preliminary part of this chapter the summaries of the discourse; and the chapters that are understood by those who are to begin their art as they progress towards understanding the truth of those ones; these are you and those who are quick to learn or acquire this noble art along with others for you.
And let it be known that when something happens to a fracture or dislocation or twist or injury, then you should consider starting with bloodletting or releasing it, or at any time, if there is no prohibition by any cause, such as vertigo, or to the thing that happens to be affected, or old age, or during intense heat, or of intense fever.
And let it be content in food, eating herbs and venison of rabbits and crabs; and forbid large meats and fill with foods and all types of foods that fill the veins of sanx, within which you can ensure a scabbed boil, and if you do not fear the expulsion of matter to the member.
And then return the patient to their first regime, which is customary for them.
And let it be known when the broken bone begins to be restored, that the patient should consume nutritious foods of dense and heavy substance with viscosity, such as those made from wheat cooked in water, eggs, pulses, fish, stomachs of cows, haws, fresh meats, large viscous substances like these, and under this regime there is a mild coagulation of bone pus.
And know that bones harden when they are in young men and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to continue as they are and be consolidated according to their nature through drying of their limbs.
However, nature adjusts and allows for any cause similar to gluttony on a broken bone throughout the entire part, with a substance that adheres and strengthens it internally that becomes consolidated and solidifies over time, as during the start of strength and firmness, such as fire at the beginning, within which you should not prohibit it from its works due to any cause.
And for this reason, it is necessary to pause the foods of the patient, foods which have gravity, viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
And know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of limbs, a fracture in the skull bone is different from a fracture in the head bone; and a fracture in the leg bone is different from a fracture in the two bones; similarly, all other limbs are different among themselves.
And I will conclude with recalling all species of fractures, which are detailed in their chapter separately from each other.
A variety of self-discovery about fracture. And they are diverse in the species of bone fracture within their divisions; one is made an arched fracture another that happens in its stars; and some are made fractures according to the length of the bone: these are fractures of its sagittae and asterisms, whether caused or not, as done when preparing to write, and this is a fracture with scratch and disruption on the head, and it is small crack fracture.
And for every species there is its own disturbance in restoration according to which will come the recall of it separately in their places.
A sign of bone fracture. And thus is known a bone fracture: it's the curvature of it, and the sensation of its prominence and attachment to your hand when you press it.
And therefore, when there is no obvious twist in the place or it does not occur when you touch it with pressure on the bone during palpation and the patient does not experience significant pain, then it's not a fracture here.
It's possible that there is a twist or small crack, just feel with your hands where you suspect it and during compression of the whole body; rest on them with the medicines whose memory returns around at that moment which suit the place; and straighten through subtle constriction.
Know that when the place is arched and does not split into two or more parts without occurring in the body, just feel where you suspect it starts from your current hour to correct the condition that happened when something afflicts him.
And if something afflicts him with heat, then smooth that area for a few days until the heat subsides; and then equalize that according to any method you have of elevation and ingenuity.
Know that the restoration and repositioning of him is as gentle as from the bone where it happens to occur in his body.
And strengthen that according to the memory that comes back about him.
If it's in the bone that's injured, then an extension of this broken member from two parts is necessary, if it's the hand or the foot; or with your hands if the member is small; or with two strings or with one string and the hand.
And place your position where you pause the member in a location equal according to its natural figure, while stretching the parts of the broken limb outward; then force yourself to make those additions return with ingenuity and according to any method that can be used in their places.
And guard yourself so that it does not occur upon the body of the patient due to your operation or injury, and force yourself according to your ability to apply one bone in accordance with its best forms next to the other.
And know that in that moment you effectively touch with your hands, and if you find any different cause here, correct that and equalize it according to the amount of your virtue.
And avoid excessive extension and compression, just like many doctors experience heat or forceful contraction occurring due to their operation when they use rough techniques, or cause contraction in the limb as we have seen with the operations of their rough methods.
And the quality of the constriction of the broken limb is what I recommend; for you must know that limbs that are broken vary in their smallness and greatness, and in the shape of those.
And for those that are small, like the arm and such, then know that the wrapping should be of soft, thin fabric.
For those that are large, like the thigh or chest, know that for those there should be a wrap of firm, hard material, so that the bandage connects with the large and strong limb from all sides in equal constriction, provided it does not cause any mark.
And start to continue your process of equalizing, gently pause at that point, over the place of that fracture with three bandages or four according to what the limb needs; and strengthen your hand a little on this.
And continue towards that to the upper part of the place of the fracture, and strengthen gradually so that you do not force your constriction at which you have strengthened the place of the fracture. And gradually extend the bandage on the place of the fracture, and soften the constriction little by little, while you take hold of a large part of it.
And then take another bandage and wrap it again over the broken area with a bandage, and continue to move towards the bandages toward the outer part of the fracture; and your operation is in the constriction of the bandage and softening of that according to what we said in the first bandage above.
And pause between the bandages of a length or fabric where the twist of the fracture is equalized if there is a twist in it; and if not, do not pause for any reason.
And pause on the other bandage, and properly equalize over these star-shaped bandages that were just made, if there is no swelling or heat in this place, then pause where is that heat and where the swelling occurs; leave that for a few days; then strengthen on that.
And let the stars of the middle part be red, and made wisely; or they can be made from wood; or from palm leaves; and let each star have this form and this figure:
And yet know that the star placed on that fracture should be much thicker and slightly smaller than the other stars, and the length of the star according to how it reads in size and smallness for the limb; and then strengthen again above with another bandage as per your first constriction; and let yourself adjust decently according to what we said about constriction, so that your constriction is more at the place of the fracture, and the longer you extend from the fracture, the better the constriction.
And consider that the threads should grow in size and complexity during pregnancy, and be long; if the threads are large, as I have seen through an operation for a few times severing the cords of some on their length, this is a great mistake, when tying the constriction before equality.
And fine threads are not convenient, for you will not achieve through constriction what you want, and do not consider that between these and these there are spans of a finger.
And if the patient has been moved to the ends of the stumps close to the constriction in their sensitive areas, then place those stops of lion fur or woven wool between which does not cause injury to them.
Some burns and fractures occur as an injury, and there's disruption in the chain, and I will recall this again according to uniqueness in that at the capital.
And know that not all broken members are sewn with stitches on the first day; the reason is that when the limb, if it's large, cannot have pauses over its stellae but around three or seven days or more, according to your confidence in the occurrence of an abscess cautery.
And this is the manner of the splinting on which the Ancients would restore, those who pause over fractures and dislocations and twists.
The method of splinting as abruptly restored from fracture repair, suitable for complex wounds and especially for women and children, which is about what does not accept heat or rub: this involves taking corn powder, it's the essence of flour that remains in the walls of the mill.
And consider it like this, rather than sifting that with hen's egg white, and make sure the preparation is neither thick nor subtle; then use that accordingly.
The text translates to: "Another method for setting broken bones and dislocations and twists is through the prescription of asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, rue, and myrrh, which are powdered and mixed together with a thousand grains each, all amounting to one dragon's weight. For myrrh and aloen add five dragons' worth; for almond oil add twenty dragons; mix these all finely with water or egg white if the patient is sensitive; then apply this plaster, which has good composition and restores broken bones slightly, giving strength to human limbs."
The text translates to: "Another method of plastering that strengthens fractures and twists is made with myrrh, white sandalwood, frankincense, myrrh, and cinnamon amounting respectively to one dragon's weight for each ingredient."
They are ground in a mortar on the patient's wound, they are sifted, and they are mixed with water or with hen's egg white, then administered.
The method of splinting for joints and bones separated from their places, and the relief of pain in those and cracks and fractures: take waxed thread wool and immerse it in vinegar and oil of cod liver, then place it over the area.
This plaster does not perform restoration magic, nor does it create an abscess cautery; it simply expels the pains properly.
Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take fig leaves and salvaged poppy seeds; mix all together and make a plaster from them.
A brief method of applying plaster for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want resolution of the remaining abscess: prepare extracts from alum, from chamomile and violet flowers, from flour of ashes, in all parts .i.; They are all ground and mixed with vinegar, if the member is not sensitive.
If it's sensitive, then mix that with wet clove water or with water and use it.
Another method for plastering that provides faster resolution than the first one when an abscess occurs during healing: prepare extracts from alum, from lime seeds, and borage leaves, as well as yellow yarrow, honey bees, basil, violet flowers, chamomile, all in parts of equal measure; they are all ground and mixed with water from cress or with two-fold water, or vinegar, depending on the quality of the member and the color of its rest.
Moses Hipocrates did not write in his free works that you should restore the injured limb using only wax and oil, and not any other substance; he recommended applying a mixture that is both thick and fine.
Moses Galien observes that when one should place something on the broken limb to restore it and the causes in which small heat quality is involved can also include myrrh, resins, and similar substances like those we have recommended.
The method for dressing injuries and easing pain: mix finely ground ashes of burnt human skin or hair, along with alum and another ingredient (likely a type of mineral or plant), in equal parts; sift them together and create powders; these are then used to make the dressing.
Moses considers the amount according to which inflammation spreads and if it's properly diminishing, you should assess whether there was no pain or bruising and the bone wasn't broken. If not, then don't disturb its natural healing process for several days. And if there is intense pain or bruising or swelling at the site, then you should remove or displace it immediately, and apply that dressing to it.
And take linen and a sponge that's wet with sea water, immerse those in hot water, then wash the affected area with them until the bruising stops and the pain subsides; afterwards let it rest for an hour. Then place on it wool soaked in vinegar and oil or roasting oil, cover it with this overnight until you're sure of a boil forming, and to ensure that swelling goes down and to alleviate the pain.
And then gently stretch that tightness and apply a small dressing, don't strain it with your initial stretching. Do this inside until it is healed.
And if you notice that the boil and the heat and the pain and swelling along with all accidents have subsided completely, and you lack dressing and stretching, then continue doing this in the same way as you started equally.
And if nothing of those causes happens to the limb, then don't disturb it, but after about three days or four or five; And some scalds of all this are left for twenty days according to how it appears through the easing of the limb, as we have said, during which the fracture adheres, and it comes to rest on the coagulation of the flesh over there.
And then adjust the stretching more than your initial stretching completely, and adjust to the swelling of the patient's food, according to when it is confirmed that its restoration has occurred.
Moses if you notice the fracture site has dried and weakened more than it originally did, then you know that nutrition should not reach there; hence soak that area in hot water every day; do this for all three days; slightly relieve the stretching, and with this operation provide nutrition to the limb, and it gets restored slightly.
Moses whatever the folks who restore fractures in limbs do differently than when it is restored to its original state, according to how it progresses and is restored according to its shape, is an error according to their operation, causing great fear. If they were just craftsmen they would have exaggerated the ancients' works in their free writings and improved upon that treatment process.
And I haven't seen any of them do this, so it is more reasonable to think they are not doing this.
The second case: About fractures that occur in the head.
The types of fractures are hits, and their appearances vary. The causes differ. Some fractures occur due to impact from space, where the force remains within the skull, leaving the bone intact, similar to what happens in a stick, hence this type is named "ascial". Or the space impacts only part of the bone, affecting the flesh without penetrating deeply into it; thus, this type of fracture is named absolute elevation.
And the impact of these two types can be severe or minimal, and for fractures that cause pain due to friction or compression; and their causes are impact against stone or crushing on stone, similar to them.
And this fracture either almost reaches the brain leaving the bone intact; or it occurs in the facial part of the bone. The impact of these two types can be severe or minimal.
And for fractures that expand in the bone, in its slight thickness, like hair, thus this type of fracture is named 'capillary'.
And this is the fracture that occurs due to impact or crushing of stone and it is similar, causing some layer of bone to enter its parts inside. It happens in the concave area like when a hole is made in an ear by impact and part of their entry into the inside parts.
And it is mainly done this way in wet bones, such as children's heads.
And for all these species of fractures, they are separate like stars. And I will come back with a restoration of all this in its original place.
And I know all these species of fractures through examination and inquiry about them, as well as testing the decayed flesh that is over them.
And the capillary type is known by this that it is discovered over the bone, which is cleansed and bounded around it, where the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, consider the patient's injuries, and then observe the symptoms that manifest as clear signs on them. Such signs may include vomiting due to colera, extension, loss of understanding, loss of speech, fainting, acute fever, sneezing fits, and fits of coughing, as well as similar symptoms in major conditions. It is advisable that they are not healed.
And if you encounter non-fatal accidents, you expect healing; then you start the treatment for them.
This is the reason that if it comes to you like being wounded during a journey just as one gets wounded and this happens in the days of winter, then conclude that you study in the bone's anatomy on the thirteenth day according to complete disposition.
And if it is during the days of summer, then conclude that you take care or examine the bone before the seventh day; because what gets corrupted in the bone due to heat (pannicol) and accidents that have been recounted occur.
And if the fracture has already been corrupted by heat (pannicol) reaching the brain, and it is divided into small parts with discoloration, then conclude that you should scrape and rub the affected part according to what I will instruct you.
And when you examine the head of the wounded patient, and expose the bone according to custom and your ability as per the figure of the wound, make sure it is done lightly on the body.
And if it happens to you, you must detect the bone, pus, or abscess flow from a cautery burn, then you oppose him with what is necessary, and this when you smell the place of the soaked sheets in vinegar and rubbed oil. You make sure that the abscess has settled down; and indeed, you start within the circumference of the bone and its removal process.
And this should be done according to one of two surgical operation methods.
And the first method is that you make an incision in the bone with a straight cut instrument. This is how it should be done: Then you administer another cutting tool slightly above this one. This is how it should be done:
And then administer more of the cut instrument further down than the second one.
And know that you need to name various cut instruments, among which some are longer than others; and some of them have shorter cuts compared to others, and they should reach the tip's extremity in terms of sharpness. They should be made of iron or steel.
And use them with ease in striking against the cutting instruments, so that you do not crush its head and damage it.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then conclude that you should pierce through its circumference before administering the cutting instruments at their grooves; which are named as non-deep grooves.
And they are not named otherwise than those that do not reach the edge of the bone, up to which it is near them; whereby when the groove has its rounded end or margin over that which leaves the sharp head of it resembling a margin or small circle, this must not be submerged and should not pass through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient for you to take many of these grooves among which each adapts to the thickness of each bone, as long as they are present in all bones of the head where the end of them is sharp, and the quantity in length and width should be according to the thickness of this bone.
And this is the form of three kinds of grooves: The quality of piercing in the circuit of the broken bone is that you place the groove on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has penetrated; then, move the groove to another location, and ensure that throughout the process, you have taken the quantity of its thickness or around this.
And then you make an incision with the cutting instruments among any piece of bone you've extracted, making it as subtle as possible at the end of its flexibility, just like we have said, while removing or scraping the bone, or on your hand, or by some other means using tools you will be equipped with for this purpose, such as tongs and fine forceps.
And know that you must exercise utmost caution so that the cutting instrument does not touch any sensitive part of the mouth.
And when you have pierced the bone and separated it from the mouth if this continues with it, and you extract it, know that examine and compare it to the roughness of what is in the bone by another tool resembling a cutting instrument but instead, ensure that it is more precise and more subtle than other cutting tools.
And if there remains any part of the petticoats or stockings, then take that with ease using the tools you should use for these purposes; and then treat the wound with cleanliness and ointments as we have said.
And the other method of operation is light and distant from the body, which was described by Gualia and Lauzec through great authority; this is what it means: It's necessary for you in the beginning that you start discovering the part of the bone on the location where the fracture is most violent and most evident. Once you have discovered that part, place your hand at the end of this cutting tool gently and quickly as follows:
And it is that the round partition is lion and does not accommodate any cause, and the sharp partition is from him in two latitudes before in length, as; so that the round partition should be adjusted to the ciphac at his face meeting the acute one inside the bones.
And then hit about the incision of one partition in a small hole inside where it has penetrated all the bones in such a way as it has turned, and you should be sure of the technique that does not lead to your fear of an accident in any manner; indeed, if the doctor was the pus of all people and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he was sleeping.
And if he finds any connected cause to the bone of the technique in some places of bones, that one will penetrate that from him at the end of the round incision, and relieve that from him easily, which is relieved from his hurt and pain.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate inside the technique, and whatever is attached or remaining from the bones is the face of him, and it remains in him with roughness and subtle secrets, then carve that roughness and eliminate those secrets through sharpness using the number you have prepared, with various quantities so that it's possible for you to administer these in all places the most suitable pus of them and the right pus from those according to where you lose your operation on this broken bone and its shape.
And carve to administer in your ratio at which you sharpen the bones from the beginning of the thick pus, and then use the subtle pus of it closely, and do not cease doing this until you reach administering the thick pus and the subtle pus of all those.
May in any of the other minor and small fractures or subtle fracture, carve to administer care according to what you lost on correcting it.
And this is because it does not please on all those who have studied in that art. And stand on what we have written, showing large fractures.
And if the technique is twisted when you remove the bone, then carve that you take cloth according to the size of the injury, and immerse it in a well-oiled substance, and place it over the wound; and also take another folded or tripled cloth and immerse it in water and well-oiled substance, and place it on top of the first cloth; and carry out this procedure with a small amount of pus so that you do not hurt the ribs; and then apply a thin layer of fat over it, and do not press it except by the size of the injury only.
And leave it under this treatment for one day or two until you are sure of the pus blister; then remove it and apply medicine with which excessive drying is unnecessary, such as flaxseed and flour of eggs, and powder of ashes and aristolochia, and powders of those.
And it is that you make these medicines into powder that is ground over the injury, such as dry ones; universally, apply all medicine of property which repels and do not bite.
And keep according to your virtue that the injury in your treatment should be clean; and it should not be in the softness of ointment or any other thing; nor let you add toxicity to it; for when it is adjusted on the technique of the brain, corrupts that and poisons those, and spreads malign malice over the body near this evil.
And it happens in the skull, as from him are changed the bones and especially when you neglect the treatment of him, and there is a blackness on the surface of him; and therefore consider now if any accidents happen to the body that we have said, know that they are harmful to all.
And if no blackness happens but only from the medicine that is placed on top, and it's due to the medicine that causes this blackness, then carve that you take a part of honey and parts of well-oiled substance .iii,. And apply these lines with a cloth, and then place that on the skull; and then treat it with the remedies of healing that suit you until it's healed.
Third chapter.
On restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken only from one part but two parts are usually separated on top, or one of those few broken ones, because in him there are two bones, which the separation from these is cartilaginous and not broken; it does not affect him but rather inflammation and tightness and congestion.
And if one of the two parts of him is broken, then carve that you introduce your little finger into his nose, and equalize that fracture internally according to your little finger indicator, and outside your little finger position; so that the nose returns according to its natural figure. And do this for you with ease, and watch over yourself that it doesn't fall from your operation onto the body as a whole.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the bone of the nose, and your finger doesn't reach that, then carve that it should be placed at the end of the ray where there's slight swelling.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make this likeness.
And take care of the restoration of him on the first day of the fracture, if it's possible; otherwise, then around seven or eight days you should rest from the pus blister.
And then insert a piece of cloth at the extremity of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or place two clamps, if the fracture is in two parts, and make the clamp size fill as much as fills the nasal passage.
And among the ancient restorers, let the clamps be encased in plaster and be left for an entire day, yet I do not follow this practice; instead, have it known that the clamp should be enclosed in duck white as a powder and mixed with bone ash. Then smooth out so that the bone is set and hardened by the cartilage.
And sometimes, when a pus pocket is found in the nose instead of a clamp, it could lead to an accumulation that wraps around like duckskin; and indeed, if there is already a broken nose pus, the patient should not be prevented from breathing.
And this method is not necessary for you; if you wish, do it like this, and if you wish, use clamps.
And if another pus pocket occurs on the nose, treat it by covering the nose with a paste of turpentine or one that is made from fat and oil that has been rubbed, or with vinegar.
But if you do not experience a pus pocket, then treat the area outside with corn flour and ground cinnamon, and mix with duck white powder; then place a cloth over it instead of any cause, and do not pinch the nose for any reason.
But if there are broken bones in the nose due to a small fracture or they are not treated, then treat it by spreading over those areas, and remove them with tools that suit those; then apply around the cut, and heal that with what heals and consolidates, and apply plaster suitable for that.
And if an internal wound occurs in the nose, then treat that with clamps and administer lead pipes into it until it is fully healed.
Chapter IV
On restoration of the mandible when it is broken.
When the jawbone that you have left is broken and the fracture of it is not enclosed in pus, examine if the fracture is only on the outside, and it is not cracked into two parts but bent towards the inside, then its consideration is light.
And when you are doing this, if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left index into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is in the right jawbone, then insert your other hand's right index. Then push out the internal tension of the fracture towards the outside with ease for both parts, with your other hand from the outer part of the bone; do this properly equally there as well.
And if the fracture of the jawbone has already been separated into two, then treat by applying extension to both parts according to rightness as long as it is possible for its equilibrium.
And if there is movement of teeth in disruption, then strengthen those that you expect will break into gold or silver or copper; and place a stop on the broken jawbone with plaster, and another cloth on top of this, and another large star-like patch properly made, or one piece of only equal to the length of the jawbone; and apply it according to what suits your ability, while ensuring it does not destroy.
And command the patient to rest and be calm, and abstain from drinking with his lion's cuisine.
And if you estimate that it has been altered in any way, then you take care and relax that on the third day; and properly correct what is already altered from you and plaster that with bone ash, with duck white powder, or with corn flour, for you will have finished all the plaster of your patient, and place a lion's wool over this plaster.
And once this is done and the plaster has been placed over it, and if the position of the bone remains unchanged, leave it alone, do not disturb it until it heals and strengthens the fracture; for this particular fracture will be fully healed in three weeks.
And if another pus pocket occurs in the treatment area, then administer what we have described for treating a healed pus pocket until it heals, and make sure to remove that pus pocket.
And if the fracture is accompanied by pus, then consider whether it is a bone fragment detached or not, in which case you refine that fragment with what suits your skill for removing those from the instruments.
And if the wound openings are stretched, then you enlarge them with a suction syringe according to your need's quantity.
And when you have finished removing those fragments, and if that pus pocket is not enlarged after removal, then treat the wound opening as it is wide; otherwise, place one of the plasters suitable for this on top of that, while waiting until it heals.
Chapter V
On restoration of the hyoid bone when it is broken.
Widened views show that the hyoid bone is broken behind the front part of the muscle, and this fracture occurs in three ways.
Or it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts without fragments; and this is easier for its restoration; or indeed there are fragments in you, making the restoration difficult; or also if the fracture is accompanied by pus.
And in that operation, when the fracture is at its worst, you must have two ministers present, so one holds the assistant and follows the broken beam, and the other extends the back part of the head towards that side.
And then adjust the fracture with your hands inside where the shape of the thing has been formed, so it is neither in a small lump nor a depression.
And if you need more extension, then dig into the fatty part of the patient's buttocks with your fingers, using a piece of cloth or wool; its size should match your need in quantity; and extend and elevate the beam while holding the lump with your hand so that you adjust the fracture according to what is formed.
And if you cannot pull the end of the beam outward to the sides, as it is confined within the body, then dig in such that the buttocks are folded over the neck, and place your hand on the muscle at the hip about midway, with pressure.
And the minister presses on the muscle at the sides where you place your hands, so that the bones of the beam are elevated as they would be in front, and then you correct the fracture and adjust it with your own hands.
And if you feel stiffness in the beam and it's painful, then dig as if you are splitting that area and remove those stiffnesses with ease.
And if it is stuck in the bone, then you make an incision into it with one of your surgical knives which you have prepared for this task, as you have placed the beam firmly against the stent that serves the crotch; and this stent is made of wood or iron whose shape is like this:
It resembles a knife with this curvature; and its width depends on how much you need from it, according to the size of the bone or lump.
The length of it depends on what is feasible during the operation; let there be two ends like this time, and one end should be broad while the other one should be narrow.
And if the breakdown of the wound you have incised when removing the stiffness from the bone is wide, and you are certain of a pus pocket, then adjust the two edges of the wound for suture.
And if the breakdown is small, or you fear a pus pocket, then use the wound with cloths and powders according to the size of the cut in the wound.
And if you happen to get a pus pocket, then apply cloth soaked with vinegar and oil rubbed onto it, and place your hand over that.
And in general, when the stick does not hurt the broken bone; and as you should see the buttocks every day, that when the ligament is softened or you already see the stick becoming hardened again, then you correct this and strengthen the healing.
And then place the patient's buttocks on their head, and place your hand on the fatty part of them to have their buttocks touching their neck at night with a small cushion; so that under this one holds the assistant of the patient in the back region of it, and therefore elevates the fracture up to its elevation point of the beam; or let their arms lie on the back of this.
And do not soften the ligament if it does not occur suddenly or pus appears within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster when you have seen its appearance at that point, adjust in the narrowing and restore it and let it be smooth until the beam fracture is restored and has coagulated.
And it is strengthened and made comfortable according to the month in twenty-eight days, and some people take additional times of this duration.
Capitol .vi.
Regarding the restoration of shoulder fracture.
Spatula tart has been broken at its back part and not at itself but only on the margins.
And when the location of it is broken - and it's broken in the middle part of it - and only known by touch, then according to what is the shape of the fracture force you prepare for it and reduce that according to the natural figure everywhere using any tool which is feasible for you.
And then place over the location flour of mill with egg white and lion's skin; and then place double cloth powder; and then place over it a thin table stick according to the size of the spatula or slightly more than that.
If you leave the blade curved in one of the spots on the spatula surface, then you round that curvature with a round stone, and proceed to adjust the blade according to equality.
And reinforce it above with human saliva against constriction, and adjust the blade inside so that it does not slip from its place.
And consider the ligament in every day; and all times when it is softened, apply another time and strengthen it and adjust the blade if it slips from its place.
And leave the patient lying on their back there.
The spatula is restored within xx days or in .xxv (which seems to be a typo and might be intended as xx).
And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the ligament, and you should know securely that that comes from the bones where it began not to be feared or its dissolution.
And if you proceed from the bone of the heel and place yourself below the tendon, then cut over them, hold it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the sternal notch for pus in a boil if this happens here.
Chapter VII.
Of restoration of the fracture of the foot.
The foot sometimes breaks at the middle point of it, and there is a sharp pain; but its ends should not be broken or pulverized.
And of its accidents when it breaks in the middle of it, it declines towards the parts inside and happens to it great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, and nausea; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from feeling.
And the restoration of it is that you place the patient's leg over their foot, and place a cushion under their shoulders; then press on their muscles, adjust their back against the two ribs, and refine your technique in the operation and according to all methods as possible and suitable for this, so that when they return the shape of the bone according to its context.
And then place an ointment and cover it, hold it above a thin table of wax or pitch and in the airiness, because you wrap that with cloth; and refine this upon the broken bone so that it does not stick; and follow the swelling according to its roundness on some days, strengthen that with normal constriction; and then consider the swelling throughout time, and when it is softened strengthen that.
And if necessity causes the breakdown or pressure, or pain, or pus that happens in this area, then you remove and release it and eliminate the ointment, correct what happens through this method of treatment; and then reduce the ointment, if you notice something about this face; and adjust to its constriction so that it is healed.
Chapter VIII.
Of restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
Know that the fracture of the ribs only occurs in large areas that cover both; and from their ends on the front part, they do not come into contact with those due to them being cartilaginous. And the awareness of it is not hidden from feeling you should inquire about it through touch.
And the restoration should be like this: you align the fracture with your fingers according to the possible method, so that it is aligned according to its context, and then apply the ointment and strengthen the broken bones with a blade, if you need that.
And if the fracture of the ribs declines towards the parts inside, then it causes great pain and punctures, just like a puncture that happens when someone has suffocated, for this reason because the bone puts on the skin; it also causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of motion sickness; and this is hard to treat.
And already the Greeks were skilled in that with movements like these.
And from them we say: care for that by placing foods of the abdomen which cause inflammation and wind, so that the belly is inflated and stretched outwards, and the fracture is driven towards the parts outside.
Let's avoid causing that through this way which would hardly generate pus in the cautery, if it doesn't happen; and if it already happens, then help with this.
And they say some that it is placed against windedness and close to squeezing with strength; it's similar to reasoning, yet however, the windiness is thought to throw away excesses due to weakness.
And they say some: that the area be covered with wool already immersed in cautery oil, and lay powders between the ribs until full, making it swell as you wrap it according to roundness; then heal the abdomen with the treatment of food distress and medicine.
And if the constant constriction of the abdomen that doesn't tolerate it causes pain in the skin due to tooth marks, we fear for the abdomen, then you should cut over the area, uncover from the broken rib, and then place an instrument below which preserves the cipher, as its predecessor is memory, and I will engrave the bone with ease, and remove it.
And refine the two lips of the wound if it is large with stitching, and heal that with ointment until it is healed.
And if an abscess occurs inside, then you cut and fill with powder in oil rubbed, placing it over the area, and heal the patient by letting what comes out from within cure the abscess.
And place them on their side over the stomach where they sleep, until they are healed.
Captulo IX.
Chapter 9: On restoring fracture of the second and third cervical vertebrae.
Some dislocations require fractures in the bones of the neck, and damage to their ligaments, similarly with the thoracic vertebrae. And when such a situation arises with another and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider this: If their hands are already softened, numb, dead, cannot move them anymore, cannot stretch or strengthen them, and when you press those areas or prick them with needles without feeling pain, then understand that they are not healing and in such cases it is fatal.
And if squeezing those areas or pricking them with needles causes constriction in the words and pain, then know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover from the treatment.
And if you see something similar to this in the thoracic vertebrae and want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider their feet.
And when you find that they are already softened, it is similar to what happens in the hands. If their feet get numbness and loss of appetite as per their will, then some cases require them to be on their back and urinate, but cannot do so. In such cases, know that it is fatal, and therefore do not proceed with their treatment.
If no cause for those things does occur, the cause is better and more mild.
And the treatment for them is to perform desinfection on the cauterized abscess that you place oil rubbed over the dislocated cervical ligament, or with hot embers; place it there for some days until the cauterized abscess is desensitized.
And then place one of the bandages comforting and present, strengthen over that with liniment; and instruct the patient to rest and be calm and not sleep on the part where they find pain until they recover.
And if it happens that the ligament of the neck is torn or any reason causing separation from them, then heal what opens on the seam and remove that bone; and properly align the two edges of the wound, with suture if it's large; and treat that with some cooked meat substance until they recover.
And if the lower part of the spine is broken and it's at the tip of the coccyx, then heal by inserting your right hand's middle finger into the anus, and aligning the broken bone with your other hand according to possible second-order equation; and then place a plaster and ash over them, if you need those, and strengthen that.
And if you feel torn ligaments in them, then apply over that, stay there, and treat the wound according to the treatment until it is healed.
Chapter X.
On restoring spinal curvature.
The bones of the spine are broken; if they break, then the fracture is merely communication in the extremities of those and are implanted along their length; and it happens to the patient pain at the location and pricking sensation when there's a fracture. The change is numbness when it's a fracture.
And the restoration of them is that you extend your hand over them until it is on top of the fracture which is the figure of them.
And if the fracture is only at the extremity of them, then you align that according to what suits you by equal equation until it's assembled to its natural figure.
And if the fracture is in the long or already declines towards your parts, then you make the patient lie on their abdomen until you prepare for restoring that fracture. And when you have aligned that, place a plaster over them, and then place an ash of wood or seam over that. Strengthen with bandage on which don't fear the puncturing of fracture nor moving of the star.
And align the curvature with that which fills that until that accepts the bandage according to equality, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or their side.
And if an abscess cauterization occurs, then you cease the extension and restoration of them until that abscess cauterization is desensitized. Place there what sedates that according to what proceeds; and then return to their restoration and strengthen it accordingly.
And if they occur in the ligaments or are fragmented, then you treat them.
Chapter XI.
On restoring fracture of the auxiliary (possible referring to a specific bone or structure in the body).
The auxiliary is that which is between the shoulder blade and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of them can be done in one of two ways, which you take with wood half-thick according to this form:
And if they are in two extremities of two ligaments, then it should be suspended from the elevated place.
And have the patient lie on their side; and then straighten out the broken arm and place it inside a bundle so that it reaches the nipple's position in the middle of which the curvature of the bundle is connected.
And hang over that some heavy cause, or the physician extends it to the parts left; and then the doctor waits for the fracture on his hands, as the fracture returns according to how it covers.
And the other method is for the patient to be curled on their back and raise their hand from the neck; and order one of the doctors to have them hold this place where the fracture is above his hands; and the other holds the rest of the body. And each of them extends to their part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you press on the fracture firmly and also press on that area, and each of the two doctors extends their arms to both of their parts.
And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then cover half of the bundle over the nipple and the other half you should place on the side of the fracture.
And similarly if the fracture is close to the corner, then cover it with the bundle over that place and over that corner.
Gently perform this and complete the task, then approximately when it is evenly matched according to how it fits and is applied properly, then strengthen that without causing a blister from the cautery.
If a blister does occur from the cautery, then loosen the constriction by the seventh day, and place woolen thread over it with an ointment in abundance inside, as it rests the blister, and then you should strengthen that.
And the method to strengthen that is to place a plaster over the fracture, then cover it with a cloth wrap; and adjust the hand over that support, and place your open hand on their muscle.
And place the cloth and strengthen over that support with your hand so that the arm is in the position of stars, otherwise you will prevent any cause from that broken bone.
And then use stars.
And that is to place over the fracture that star which is more accurate and stronger than the others; and between each star place the width of the same, and let the length of the stars according to the breakage be added by three digits from every part.
And then strengthen over the stars with that constriction which I mentioned at the beginning of the title.
And that is for your constriction about the place of the fracture to be more tightened. And when it is stretched out further, the constriction should be less.
And so if you note the position of the stars and the constriction as we have said when restoring the limb to its original position, then do it.
And if you fear a blister from the cautery, then loosen the constriction and the stars for seven days as we have said.
And then consider the bundle in all parts for three days so that it does not occur at the place of pressure or swelling; or prevent food from reaching the limb by the disposition of excess constriction; and therefore correct all this according to what we have said.
And if you are concerned that no cause occurs from this, then do not release the ligature but consider three days or more.
And let the patient's back be on their two legs, and their hands are on the stomach.
And place over the support a full meal of wool, and consider throughout the night or day that it is not broken nor dissolved in the figure of the broken limb, or that the bundle has been softened; therefore correct this entirely with your skill.
And serve the food of the patient according to the order which we have before mentioned, so that the food is subtle at first until strengthening begins; and then notice when you thicken the food for them.
That which is customary of the support and of their chest is that they be strengthened in forty days; and then notice when they are released and are given baths and are treated with ointments, which correct those.
And if the fracture is laid out rubbed, then do not release that bundle and stars for one day or within two months.
Capitol .xii.
Of restoration of the fracture of the arm.
The arm is made of two bones which are called the forearms; of which one is small and it is the one that holds the term 'palm', while the other is large and it is placed over the small one from below.
And a slight break affects only the larger forearm, or the smaller one, and they both bend at the same time.
And when it is broken above the smaller one, then its restoration is slight, and its healing is even more slight.
And when it is broken from below the smaller one, then its fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And even worse than that is when both bones are broken at the same time.
And so if the bone that is broken is the smaller forearm above, then it is convenient for the doctor, you should restore this, that allow a small extension in ease until that is matched.
And if it is the larger forearm that is bent, then you should notice an extension more vigorously.
And if both the kidneys are simultaneously inflamed, then you should vigorously press on the extraction point filled with pus.
And you should place your hand in the shape of a restored patient's body and stretch their limbs on a cushion, and have the wrist of your hand touching various parts below them; besides everything else said, let the auricular command be as low as possible among all others, and the patient shall lie on their back on an inclined cot.
And place a cushion in front of them at the height or alignment of their body, so that the patient does not move unnecessarily.
And nearby, have one minister extend their arm from the affected area to their own hand or similarly on their other side, and another minister will extend over in a similar manner.
And nearby, the doctor should match the bones inside to realign that according to the best figure possible.
And if in the bone's structure there are distortions, then you should thoroughly reduce all parts to their place with your strength.
And if you find separate distortions that cause hindrance and are not within your hope for restoring the patient's health, then you should operate on them and proceed as we have instructed above.
And if the fracture is due to an injury, I have already addressed this unique case, and thus proceed with treating that.
And if it happens that you encounter an abscess while beginning your restoration, then apply a cloth saturated with roasting oil and white wax, alternating between coarseness and fineness. Tighten the cloth over the area inside which the abscess is being softened; then remove the bandage and apply a plaster prepared from powdered moli in the clay of oil, and place stars; let this star be placed directly above that fracture with care and strength.
And know that the number of stars on the arm is seen in the major arrangements, or for a kidney (fracture) in one or simultaneously in two kidneys.
And nearby, place your grip firmly over the spot of the fracture as strongly as possible. When the tightening can be more pronounced on the limbs above or below the fracture, or even lower parts of them, place your grip a little wet after initiating treatment in the beginning of this treatise.
And the cloths that cover the fracture should be soft and damp, not hard or rough. The paste applied on which strength is built should be of your own proper middle between subtle and coarse, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and the joint for several days. And if any cause arises that requires correction, as what usually happens to the limb, then consider when you immerse the limb in cold water until that inflammation subsides.
And let the limb not be strained until it rests, and then return your grip.
And if the tightening has already softened and the bone has returned to its original state, then correct everything with your strength.
And consider more if nutrition is prevented from reaching the limb due to excess tightening; then consider when you should gently soften that and leave it for a few days until its nutrition begins again, and then strengthen that.
And if nothing of those causes that we have discussed happens to the back (patient), then do not let it be discharged within approximately twenty days or roughly around that time.
And nearby, have the back (patient) hold their hand up by virtue of vigorous movements, and let them sleep on their back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or forty days, or somewhat stronger in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the composition of parts and the virtues' dispositions.
Capitol .xiii. (This is most likely indicating the thirteenth chapter or section.)
Of restoration of fracture in the wrist and fingers.
Know that in the wrist and the joints of the fingers there can be fractures, but they do not occur directly to them, only sprains are common.
And when there is a fracture or sprain in the wrist, then consider that the patient should lie down with their back facing up and in line below them according to equality, and place your hand over that which is extended.
And nearby, have the minister extend the broken bones, and the doctor should match those back together as they fit well into each other.
And then consider when you apply plaster and wadding if there is no abscess formation. And nearby place stars according to the size of the area; you have already wrapped that in a cloth of your own.
And if the cracking is in the inner parts under the palm's belly, then make a semblance of a cloth bed, and command the patient to strengthen that on their cracked palm; nearby have it strengthened with long cloth.
And let the star of the heart be on a cloth bed where it is raised, so that the heart is applied to the palm; strengthen that according to what you consider.
And if the fracture is on the outer parts, then consider when you place stars and another star of the part left in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; nearby place your grip as the hand turns like a mouse between the fingers in an intimate manner.
And if there is a fracture in one of the joints of the fingers, then when it's your hand, match that according to what you consider and nearby have it strengthened on the palm; optionally place your small finger straight for lifting the fracture up without damaging it.
If the fracture is in the other ditz, such as at the waist or backside location, or at the chest, or in the ear or ring bone, then it should be treated equally and in a manner that suits each; or if they pause over that small peak, similarly to what we have said about gout.
And consider, in your restoration, and nearby that area, the position of applying a cautery burn and opposing it - in relation to your operation - according to what protects against any cause of those conditions as detailed in the subsequent narrative.
Chapter XIV.
On the restoration of fractures of the thigh bone.
The thigh bone, when broken, is felt by the sensation as it turns to the front part and to the superadded pus.
And the restoration of the patient is done so that the ligaments are strengthened over the fracture and other ligaments remain around it. The sufferer should lie on their belly and face up.
And the minister should extend all the ligaments to its part according to quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
If it is close to the axis of the thigh bone, then make the ligament close to the knee at the part of the patella, so that the extension fits them, and the other ligaments remain around the fracture.
And similarly if the break is close to the knee, then make the ligament close to it, and let the extension be at the remaining parts.
And the doctor equalizes the bone between his two hands so that it is reduced according to its natural form; and if the bones are joined by good connection; then cover with plastering and bandaging, unless a boil occurs in the limb. And if a boil occurs in him, then leave it for some days until the boil caneserises and drain; then proceed with your treatment.
The bandaging of the patient is done like this: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap around the joint until it reaches the axis of the thigh.
And insert a long needle between the thigh and the area near the knee on the remaining parts, with its ends reaching from the inner part of the joint to the outer side of the two parts; then roll it around the joint and thigh until excess of the bandage is superfluous.
And place star points on the thigh at that fracture location, and place another point under the bone of the joint with a star.
And fill the spaces between the joint and thigh with soft cloths, so that the bandaging is able to clot.
And begin with strong bandaging in the middle over the location of the fracture with three or four wraps, and as you move away from the area of the fracture, your bandaging should be smaller and lighter and wetter.
And extend both ends of the needle to the remaining parts until it reaches into the chest cavity, strengthen both ends of the stars from the other side so that the ligaments do not move from their location.
And let the bandage lie on that area so that no harm befalls the limb to a corrosion or cautery boil or swelling, resembling those; and if any cause of these occurs, then treat it with rest for the patient, and adjust accordingly as we have discussed broken bones.
And if in the bone there is a hollow part to which you can place something, then make sure that you equalize it according to what is possible for you; and if not, apply treatment on him and keep the rest of the treatment until he is healed.
And some times this thigh bone fracture is strengthened with the rest of the treatment that is adjusted to his stars, as we have mentioned in the assistant and the arm.
However, in the restoration of the patient in this manner, no limpness occurs on the body; and if it is restored alone, then for another reason that the other joint receives treatment, then it becomes necessary that he limps from which he has been in contact.
And know that the thigh bone is strengthened in ten days or a few months or a few months, and all this varies according to the diversity of conditions and other arrangements.
Chapter XV.
On the restoration of the fracture of the knee cap.
Know that breakage of the knee cap is rare and it usually happens to broken bones accidentally.
And if it occurs to him fracture, then it is simply a crack or injury in its parts, and on this whole thing is established according to the feeling.
And the restoration of him is done so that it is equalized what breaks from his parts among those, added and connected according to what is possible by balance and convenience and manufacture.
And then apply plastering and place a round star on him if you need that one; and strengthen above with bandaging as is suitable.
And consider all the arrangements that we have recommended in other fractures, such as applying a cautery burn and similarly to those so that you oppose all accidents to what is suitable for him until he is healed.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Regarding the restoration of the thigh bone fracture.
You should know that there are two bones in the thigh, one of which is thick and it is named as the thigh bone; the other is delicate, and it is called the femur.
And for the types of fracture affecting both bones of the arm, it occurs in a similar way to what happens when the two bones of the arm are affected, and thus the restoration of it is done in the same manner as the restoration of the arm, and the operation on it is one.
And if there are three bones affected at once, the thigh becomes damaged in all parts.
And if it is broken inside the delicate bone, the thigh is damaged ahead of its parts.
And if it's broken in the thick bone, look for that cause, and those are reasons not under your control.
And then administer extension, equalization, and adjustment of the tendons according to that manner.
However, when the thigh bone fracture is free of solid particles, let the extension be gentle and more mild, and rejoice with your strength.
And in the thigh, there is an operation on the arm, which occurs when you equalize the stars and complete your entire operation. In this case, you take weights of wood from under you which are placed to prevent the causes that are taken off by walking, and they are formed by branches of palm trees; remove those where there's a slight pain, avoiding any damage to the hands, and have their length according to the length of the thigh, and bring them into the middle when you place them under.
And then envelop over each cloth in two layers according to the length of it, place one over the section of the thigh bone from one side and the other from the other side, and have them near inside the middle at the location of the chest.
And then bind the two tendons at three points of each extremity and in the middle point. With this structure, the thigh is prevented from moving to the right or left side, staying in good position.
And already, administer a bundle of wood according to the length of the thigh; and let the thigh be placed in such a way that it retains this of movement.
And mainly know when you must do this for a fracture, and when that is properly treated.
And then consider the thigh in each day and study it thoroughly from behind onward, and keep it away from pus or swelling or other similar causes; and when any cause of those occurs, pause your treatment until such time that it is healed.
Moving on to the next sentence for translation:
Regarding the fracture of the heel bone and the bones of the foot and fingers.
As for the heel bone, fracture does not occur in entirety; but fractures do happen to the foot bones on some occasions. And as for the fingers of the hand, fractures do occur occasionally too, but they do not happen randomly, only during certain months.
And when fractures occur to the foot bones and those bones tend to rise above each other, then the patient lies down on their prepared bed with their foot on the ground in such a way that they can proceed.
And then place one foot on that which rises above those bones, and also press down on them, and level them within the places.
And then apply plaster and bind it above, and place some on the belly of the hand too, using two cushions as a small table.
And then strengthen that with the hand at the correct position downwards; because you have enveloped it with cloths and from other causes too.
And as three or four days pass by, then you should loosen the bandage; you will find the bones straightened out, or if they are broken or dislocated, your operation is done in this manner.
If some fingers are broken, then restore those and level them as I have advised you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. And then place the broken finger with its tendon according to the length of the finger, and let it be somewhat close to you; and also put your hand on this table which is recommended for you, and strengthen that at a downward angle.
If what is broken are the bones of two or three or more fingers, then cover each finger with its quantity enveloped in a lion cloth, and strengthen the table at the lowest part of your chest, standing on one of the corners of the table so that the hand has good control.
And it is necessary for you not to forget that you should not consider all the causes which we mentioned about these other fractures of accidents as said; and pause your treatment for any occurrence that happens.
Capitol .xviii.
Regarding the fracture of the uterus, and the bone of the penis, as well as the prostate gland.
When the uterus of a woman is broken, then let her lie down in this position with both knees bent, and incline her to the side slightly, keeping it supported behind.
And then the midwife presses on her abdominal region, and it should be done in her abdomen like she hopes; and so the woman is bent over, and both of her legs are lifted gradually, until this whole area is out that is located before the exit point of the abdominal cavity as she hopes and the bone returns.
And then place powders on her back, and when she wants to urinate, she lifts her head with ease and facilitates urine flow, and returns it as long as you mix that according to the way she has started eating, and then return to her original powder.
And do this for seven days or about those periods, until that is restored.
And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and stretch it over the penis with a cannula of reed; and immerse the whole bladder in her abdomen, and then inflate it inside the abdomen through the cannula as soon as the bladder is inflated within, until the fracture returns.
And then fill her with water and let it stay for several days as we have prescribed, until she is healed.
And when the bone of the knee of man or woman is broken, then in the restoration and adjustment of her/him, administer what we have prescribed for the bone of the hip.
And what is straight is not concealed in these nearby fractures for the most part, which do not occur often, mainly because those who have studied and know this my free reasoning; for that fracture means to you in the major directions via of direction in restoration and constriction of him/her, therefore understand well.
In the case of bending the knee in men, take up the knee, and put the knee into that; then place your hand over her knee envelopment of bandage, and she should be covered, then leave her for three days or about those periods, until she is healed.
Head 19.
Regarding the restoration of bone fractures when they are infected.
It is convenient for those who suffer from fractures infected, and especially if the bone is large such as the bone of the elbow or the humerus, or similar to these, that you consider them and immediately apply leeches and bloodletting to them as soon as your conditions allow or confirm so as we have said.
And if the infection drains out slowly, then seek that you consider the retention of it away where you pulverize over her burned spot, if there is no other cause present.
And then start restoring the fracture on that very day, and do not prolong this if an abscess does not occur.
If an abscess does occur with cautery, then you pause the restoration of her/him until the abscess subsides, and do not approach him/her on the third day and throughout the entire week, where you will cause harm by this.
If the broken bone is prominent over the exposed wound, then seek that you forcefully reduce it and make it even with your own hands in a manner that facilitates and limits its excessive extension.
If extension is not prepared for you and the equality of her/him with your own hands, then reduce it using this instrument; and this tool is made of iron, its length being seven or eight inches long, and its width according to the amount of infection; thus, a surgeon needs three or four of these according to the quantity that they require for treatment in all kinds of fracture.
And make it round, and be gentle with her/him in such a way that it does not bend, you should press on it during the time of surgery.
And it should have an acute end with her/him at the ends of them; and it should be straight everywhere except in parts.
And this is how she/he is:
And it's called in Greek "laboring hernia", therefore it's a small palette.
So that she/he is placed with the extremity of her/him raised above the prominent part of the bone.
And press it into a groove until the bone returns and is equalized with some equality.
And therefore strive to equalize the ends of the fracture between them, and if the broken end is subtle, and does not take that with good access, then seek that you insert her/his bone end into a place where the instrument can do this.
If you cannot reduce the bone of all as we have prescribed, then cut it with whatever is suitable for her/him among the scalpel knives that we have mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in any way possible for you.
And then cut down to what is rough on the bone and the small, fading edges.
And when the bone is reduced, and the pain in the patient becomes extremely intense afterwards, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; therefore, give this to the patient a large amount of rest.
After you have completed your restoration for the bone and then soak bandages in a dark tincture of vitriol, especially if it's summer, do not cover the wound with ointment or any other cause that might smell like vinegar, so as not to cause blisters and corrosion on him/her.
And immediately administer plasters during the time of your completion of bone restoration, and leave the wound uncovered to let it heal naturally; scrape the debris with a spoon and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
And take care to use all caution not to contaminate the wound at the fracture site, as doctors have shown this over time, and let nothing happen that could cause damage or corrosion on their limbs or body, thus ensuring healing. And if your tightness is light, soft, different from the tightness of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear those harmful accidents that we have mentioned, and there is pain in that area, then do not press on those points, but make an area with hard cloth instead of plasters, and support it where needed.
And as the wound begins to heal after about one or two days, have someone support it with your hand which you had placed on that area before, and then apply ointments, those we commonly use for healing wounds, such as tetrachemical ointment, in that place.
And ensure that you loosen the bandage and check the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and sealed, then make sure that the member is prepared in such a way that perspiration can flow from you to the parts left with ease.
If the wound lasts for several days and does not consolidate or is not removed by your hand, then you will have to wait until you can remove any pus from the wound with attempts. And of those that are separated from each other remove and extract them, those that are not separated from them, if they cause pain upon the limb, perform scraping as much as possible according to what is feasible for you.
And if pus or scabs appear on the wound, it is inflammation or another form of corruption and decay, then be careful not to touch each one with what you determine for it according to the treatment which has been described in its chapter regarding the healing process.
And in the case where you should let the best judgment guide and your presence be: when the bone is fractured, press on the limb as if it were the bone of the thigh and helper like those of large limbs, and do not assume damage to them, nor the extraction of those that have formed with this, leading to death; hold it there where it can settle, which will fall by itself approximately 20 or 30 days. And then treat the wound if you have seen it, and if not, leave that area alone.
Chapter XX.
On the treatment of healing that occurs in the remnants of a fracture.
Pus that forms during this healing are characteristic of the residual healing from a fracture, and particularly when it is close to the joints, and makes the figure of the limb protrude; and forcefully prohibits the member from its natural operation.
Therefore, consider if the nodule is recent and administer medicines that have aeffect such as aloes, poppies, herbs, vinegar, and hot water; examine them carefully and apply them. Consider using some or all of these, and test whether they are applied to stop bleeding or to white water, or with honey on oil, then place that over the nodule in a cloth, and compress those onto you for good constriction.
And leave the constriction without removing that for several days; then loosen it and repeat another one, until the nodule is reduced; or strengthen with a sheet of lead underneath, which has the property to reduce everything that inflates in the limbs.
And if the nodule has already turned yellow and is hardened, if necessary, start removing it gradually, then cut along the pus-overflowing part of it, eliminate excess or reduce it with certain remedies until it is reduced. Then treat that area until it heals.
Chapter XXI.
On the restoration of a fracture when it is restored, and then this manual instructs you to restore the subtle and flexible parts not according to their natural state.
When a bone fracture is restored, and this manual instructs you to manually restore the subtle and flexible parts, then it should only be done for certain causes: of which one is an excess of fluid in the ligament and the connection made not according to how they should; or due to excess tightness of the ligaments within which nutrition is prohibited from flowing to the limb; or due to excess grease; or due to excessive movement before its time; or due to lack of strength throughout the patient's body and weakness.
And the treatment of this is to give relief to the patient and make the body tender so that strength multiplies in it; then take baths; and apply healing and rest on you.
And place grease on the limb, so that the grease draws out its nourishing force, or continue to apply the patient's greasy grease with hot water, until nutrition flows and returns to its natural figure.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of fractured bones that are restored in a tortuous manner, and you should refrain from performing operations according to what you do.
When it happens to the already restored member during its healing of deformation and protrusion at the broken bone and nodule, as if it is forced into shape of the limb; however, the member should not be prohibited from its natural operation, so you must accept the word of that person whose limb exists in a new broken.
Doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is highly reproachable, leading to great fear of the sign which is fatal.
If there are recent limping and swelling, then they should be immersed in hot water containing soothing herbs such as mint leaves and other plants; do this for the affected area with a moist dressing like chamomile tea; or prepare the dressing with a paste of almond leaves well made; or use a mucilage from almond seeds and apply it with gauze or oil of camphor, then cover it with that; or use fat figs and wrap them in linen threads, similar to those used in medications known as consolidants.
And sometimes it is dissolved by regular light rubbing that is done with the most humid substances, and should be administered movements of the member in all parts at all times.
If the twist has already progressed and is made forcefully and transformed into pain and caused by the need for treatment with iron, then consider that pus is above it, and the continuity of the bone is dissolved, and what should be applied excessively from the swelling of that substance on the bone using sharp instruments, and it should be administered in that area with diligence and study.
Chapter XXIII.
On speaking about dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of any joint in its place, which prevents movement and causes it to appear deformed, leading to large injuries and pain on the body.
So when a dislocation occurs, you should immediately puncture so that it can be reduced, and do not delay in reducing it, because if it is delayed, the place becomes inflamed and stiffened by the body, making the reduction of dislocation difficult.
And for this, do not make the person either hot or stretched during the time of inflammation, which causes intense cramps and piercing pains.
When this happens, you should take care of the patient with the hot needle on the body, and allow it to remain inside until the inflammation rests. And place the limb in warm water and oil, and then reduce it with ease.
And all members should be treated with that which will remember its place when recalled.
And now I shall order the chapters of dislocation according to what has been mentioned about fractures; from one part of the body, above the part with pus, to another part below it.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the treatment of dislocation of the jaw below.
When the two jaws are dislocated but do not click; and the dislocation of both is performed according to one of two methods: either they are partially returned to their places by a little movement, and are soothed somewhat; or they are completely dislocated in full dislocation, within which they are softened at the part of the joint where saliva from the body flows, and cannot hold that nor can they close their mouth, and the tongue of them is enveloped in its own way.
When the dislocation is slight, then in the major positions it returns by itself due to a little cause.
When the dislocation is complete and full, then you should administer a gentle reduction to it, and do not delay in doing it completely.
And let the doctor have the head of the body, and insert the surgeon at the place of one hand in the tooth area of the dislocated jaw inside the mouth if the dislocation is from one part; or insert his two hands simultaneously if the dislocation is from both parts, and the rest of his commands on all other matters should be outside those with which he equates; and command the body to stop its jaws and allow them to go in every direction; and the surgeon aligns the jaw and pushes the jaw back into place.
And if the reduction of it is difficult, especially if both jaws are always dislocated, then administer sweat with warm water and oil, during which a slight reduction should be done for both, and do not delay the full reduction of both, as we have said.
And therefore when they return and are aligned, and the mouth of the body is closed and is not soothed, then pause on those powder dusts from wax with cerot, and make it out of wax and oil rubbed; and then be applied with ease with moist wraps.
And let the body sleep on its back, with his head between two pillows, so that it does not heat in the right or left part; and do not force him to eat any food by compulsion; have his meal be forbidden lion meat, until such time as the pains are soothed and the jaws are opened, then let him eat what he wishes.
And this should be administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the mouth for eating, drinking and gargling until the jaw is opened and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce the two jaws when they are dislocated in any hour and have not been converted to their respective places, then intense cramps occur causing fevers and excessive heat, and the body's belly becomes swollen and there is strong nausea with pure colic.
And when you do this, then know that it is a loss; and intense cramps will kill the one to whom such happens in three days.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors. And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out. You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
The reduction of the dislocation of the sternum and the end of the muscle.
The sternum is not dislocated within the thorax due to its continuity with the ribs; sometimes it is dislocated at the part outside, which is indicated by the feeling.
And the restoration of him is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms. And apply pressure with your palm at the site with strong pressure, so that it will return.
And place an ointment and powder on that, strengthen that area.
May the end of that which is located in your chest be continuous with it, not dislocated on any day; then know that it should be reduced and adjusted according to what we have said and according to what you are equipped for.
And place an ointment and powder on that area, apply pressure, and command the patient to maintain rest and ease until they are healed.
And with this method of treatment, it reduces the end of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Section Title: XXVI
The reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated except in three ways, of which one is when it is dislocated from the place of the nipple to the place below.
And the second is when it is dislocated above the muscle, which is done by twisting; and it is not dislocated from behind the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in front of the nerves.
And mostly it is dislocated and set outside at the places below of the nipple, especially in those where there are few muscles, somewhat dislocated; but in those with many muscles, it remains out due to difficulty.
And often happens in some people due to impact or blow, and the muscle of him gets swollen with a hematoma from the heated needle, and it is displaced due to that which has already been dislocated.
Therefore know how you treat this when you are overstretched by him, and then proceed in the treatment of him.
And when you know the dislocation of him which is at the places below of the nipple; thus distinguish between the displaced muscle and the intact muscle, which you find among those with obvious differences; and find in the head of the muscle a concavity and place the nipple behind the head of the muscle as if it were an hourglass, and the patient cannot return his hand to its own elbow, nor that one further by any movement.
If it is dislocated from below the foot or on it, then you easily find it by touch and it is not hidden.
And with this kind of dislocation, a gentle reduction is done when it is fresh and the patient is young.
And the reduction of him is that the minister raises his hand to above for him; then place your fingers behind the nipple of him and raise the joint with strength to its place; the minister raises the hand of him and extends it in such a way; then press it gently so that it returns somewhat.
And if for what we have said it does not return, and is due to the nature that causes dislocation, several days later know that the patient should bathe in cold water and take a soothing treatment that moisturizes and calms as if they were their own skin of altitude, fenugreek, and wild thyme in water, and should be taken.
And then the patient should lie on his back and be held behind the nipple of him with wool that is equal between lightness and constriction, and place the doctor's arm over the spot, and raise the head of the muscle vertically, and pull the hand of the patient so that it does not hurt at the places below, and another minister should hold the head of the patient so that it does not get hurt at the places below which it returns to its place almost immediately.
And if you wish, reduce it according to this manner: and that you make present a man who is longer than the patient, and he stands on his own side, and puts his muscle behind the nipple of the patient and raises the nipple above him in such a way that the patient hangs in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the places below his abdomen. And if the patient is slight, then know that something else causing him to be suspended, because seriously enough it returns almost immediately.
And it is reduced gently according to another manner: and that it be placed in the ground a long rod whose tip has a round shape like the handle of a mortar, not thick nor thin, and then place the patient over the tip of the rod with lions' skins, and the patient stands according to the length of the rod, and then extend his hand at the places below from the other side; and stretch his body on the other side with strength, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if it is difficult to reduce him due to all the causes we've mentioned, then use this remedy: and that you take a rod whose length is two arms' long, its width is four digits, and its thickness should be the width of your nipple in such a shape:
And around the head cover it with lion's skin so that the heat does not harm the patient.
And place a cushion under you, supporting the patient's buttocks, and extend your hand or arm over the heat inside the parts where you are working, and place the heat on the helper and the arm and the end of your hand.
Place your arm on a scale ladder according to the width, and extend your hand at the parts you are working, and the other leg hangs from the other side, so that the joint is within reach.
And as the treatment of your patient is completed according to whatever method possible, then cover that you pause under their buttocks with a piece of wool equal in quantity; and place ready-made plaster on them made from powdered moli and egg white over all the muscle; so when it is mixed above, and place your hand firmly under their buttocks; and the treatment is mixed over the plaster, and your hand is connected to their neck, and left there, and your hand of your patient should not be disturbed for seven days.
And when the food of the patient is slightly reduced, within which their member is comfortable, which is easier for the healing of them.
And gradually increase the food to about seven or five days and exercise some movement; and therefore if it is closed and not softened, then they are already healed.
May it be that the joint is dislocated due to wetness causing them or by other causes, then when in that place a cautery should be applied for three times, as was stated in the chapter of cauteries.
And if all this is done and seven days have passed, then the muscle and joint are relieved of its stiffness on some applications, and it is not closed or hardened, and that arm cannot lift above their parts, then you should know that their nerves, which are at the head of the muscle, are already cut or stretched or softened, and you should know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
From the dislocation of that which is done to their feet or behind the mammary gland, the reduction is performed with impulse and extension at their hands, so that it returns.
And the other treatment is administered in that place, and treat it while it heals.
And if there is a severe healing in the limb and tardiness in their movement, then the patient uses baths with hot water during which that heaviness should be relieved and return to their natural state.
Chapter XXVII.
Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the hip.
You should know that the hip joint is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; it is dislocated in all directions, but mostly forwards or backwards. The dislocation of it does not hide from you when you feel or touch it according to any figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated thigh, this is made clear to you, as the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch their muscle at that place.
And when you grasp both of them, reduce the dislocation as soon as it reaches their wound heat, for if it reaches their wound heat, it is difficult to reduce this, and it will not be healed completely; especially when it's on the rear parts, which are worse than all other types of dislocations, and from pain, hot baths result in death for that one.
And the restoration of them, when this is possible to reduce it, is that their hand should be extended at two sides, and their arm should be stretched out, and the doctor's elbows are on their hip, under your place, and you push the joint with his fists in turn or inside his palm until it returns to its place.
May it be that the dislocation is on the front parts, then return as such that bends the hand at their own hand, while striking the hip inside his palm.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer vigorous extension and strong motion.
And that two ministers stretch their arms, and have that strain of the body by them so that it should not be exaggerated against extension.
And then rotate their arm in all parts, as it is enveloped by a doubled long cloth over their hand, or muscle.
And when the doctor touches the joint with their hand, apply some oil to that for so that those causes which help in the lubrication of the joint make it easier; and then push the joint with strong impulse until it returns.
And when the reduction of them is covered by pausing on that plaster in which stiffness and movement are provided for egg white, and it is stretched with firmness downwards, and the arm is hung from the neck, and left for some days.
And then it is released; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you release the muscle of them and leave that.
And if you see the joint is not strengthening, then you apply more plaster and muscle, and leave that for some days until it is strengthened; and then release that.
May it be that there is heaviness near the reduction of the joint, and their position is in movement, then apply moisture in bath and subtle friction, compressing, until it is relieved; or pause on the joint alternately, which is a thick flesh; then bind it and leave that for the day and night. And then hold that there, put some butter on it; and when it gets wet, then you rub the joint with a tempered friction, and repeatedly apply this treatment with various oils, once, and again, and the third time, and so on. The text translates to: "Corruption has already spread within the body cavity during surgery, once it is inside the limit."
And if you wish, place your hand over that wet and scorched hole in the cow's skin, pressing and rubbing it. Do this for several times until that area is damp again and then return it to its original position.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the treatment of dislocation in the arm and hand joint, it is between the joint itself.
In the hand, some veins are displaced, and the reduction of dislocation is easy, but for other joints, more effort is needed. However, it's crucial to move the limb quickly during its reduction before it gets frozen or if an abscess occurs in that area.
And the reduction of dislocation in the hand is that you place the wrist joint of the patient on a table and extend their arm. The doctor should hold their hand or palm over the edge of the joint area, and by pushing into it, make the limb return to its correct position.
However, it's important to consider whether the palm is already in the hand's belly (chest area), then the patient should place their hands on a table and extend them for the extension and reduction; if the dislocation occurred previously, both hands are needed, then naturally the position of the patient's arm should be over the table, so that the doctor's hand falls over this edge of the joint.
And if it returns quickly, that is good; and if not, then press that with ointment that soothes the abscess and let it alone. And don't repeat this process, because otherwise, you can neither endure nor manage its reduction when other things start happening to him over time.
However, the joint should be treated according to its degree of distortion; and do not blame the patient for any reason, just because their arm is softened and can't endure any cause; then you'll understand that the nerves are irritated or torn, and in this case, instead of a cautery around it, strengthen it with heat and let them take care of this themselves.
And once it has returned, then place your hand on the ointment that we have applied and leave it there for three days while strengthening it; and later make sure to relieve any strain and leave it alone, letting their arm be exercised.
However, if the motion of that remains and any gravity occurs, then apply that with warm water and some friction several times until it is relieved.
Chapter XXIX.
On the treatment of dislocation of fingers.
Several times you should dislocate the fingers in every direction.
And when one finger is dislocated towards the back of the palm or inside it, then hold the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs, until it returns.
And then support the tip of the finger, hang it from the part where it is dislocated, and leave it alone for two days.
And then hang that outwards until its rightness is equal to that day's position.
And when it begins to heal in the night, lie that according to that narrative, and do not stop exercising that during the day and with movements, and lie that at night; and do this for a few days until it is straightened.
And pretend to do this even if it's dislocated in the chest of the hand, and lie that towards that side and perform your first operation on this, until it is healed.
And similarly do this when it's dislocated in other parts.
Chapter XXX.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulders.
When it happens with any of the shoulder blades or collarbone causing full dislocation, and if there's a lot of pain in those places, then there's no cure for this, because death is feared by the patient.
And the sign of this is that the patient's body discharge comes out forcefully against their will and they can't hold it back. Several times you should soften some limbs or both knees or their arms, or one of those; or if mass friction is applied to one shoulder blade in its place, then with mass friction, it causes moving these four parts.
And once it's moved back to the parts behind, it is named galebozia.
The treatment of this is that you then need to consider if galebozia occurs during childhood, in which case there's no cure nor healing for it.
And in those that come through injury or impact or similar to those, the Ancients would say that their treatment methods are lengthy and exhaustive; however, I have shortened it from the one you often justify with too much of this, because of my close proximity to your understanding explanation, which is what I've elaborated and organized using various tools for which I show this and explain this.
And of those, it is cured only that which happens in the feet properly among what I recommend.
And have the patient lie on their face with the back close to a wall, and stretch them out further below their feet in such a way that not even the toes touch.
And have a straight stick placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the foot near the head, and another stick opposite their feet at the other end of the body.
The minister holds the stick, not to be fixed in a hole; and another minister holds the other according to that manner.
And wrap over the head of the patient and tie the lion's girth firmly around it; extend the end of the girth to the stick, which should be at the head of them, and secure that on them; and strengthen the other girth around their buttocks and the heels of them, aiming for their chests; and adjust all the girdles and tie those onto the other stick which aims at their feet.
And the minister extends the girth to the juncture of the stick, and do not let the two sticks or the girdles on their body areas where they are fixed touch each other entirely, rather, it should not be as tight as we have said.
And the doctor places his hands on the vertebra with strength between which it returns, or places one hand on that surface, and adjust their feet to return under that table.
May if it does not return in this way, then take a table whose height or length is approximately three braccia away from the wall which we said is near the patient's body at the end of the table. And place the table under the vertebra, and the doctor stands on the other end; he strengthens his feet in such a way that the vertebra is tightened and returns to its place.
And if you want, open both sides that are twisted around the hand; and it is that you place in the ground the head of the patient at the end of each stick on the buttocks, where the length of each stick is a braccia. And place the head of them similarly under two sticks on the buttocks; and let the length be between any stick one palm's length. It has already been done so that each pull is made in such a way within each stick turning around it, and each is firmly placed in the ground so that they are not disturbed.
And make a stick on which the turn is made, and it should twist in both turns of the two sticks.
And at the end of which is a turn on which a stick is formed, the length of which is one hand's length where it twists; and in the other two sticks there are similar ones.
And then strengthen the girdles that you have tightened around the feet of the patient on the turn which should be at their head, and tighten the girdles that you have tightened around their thighs in the turn which should be under their feet.
And you must have each turn with one minister who twists the turn around their hand, and the doctor matches the vertebra according to what we said.
And this is how the process goes once the vertebra has returned and the location matched: take a tallow wax poultice and stop it; then place it on the poultice until you have a table whose width can be three inches or about those, and its length covers the area of the fat, over the juncture of the vertebra.
And after that, use the poultice as we said, and let the patient eat fine nourishment until they are healed.
And if there is any lingering discomfort in the area at the end of healing, then it should be administered with medicines that soften and clean until long after the table has been used, which we have recommended; and already lead sheet is being administered in that location.
And some inflammations may occur at the end of the vertebral columns on both sides, and it gets caught with that dislocation; and that's the place which already inflamed so that you shouldn't suspect anything to happen to him from this medicine, which will cause his death to occur.
Captulo xxxi.
On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Know that only a dislocation occurs at the junction of the thigh bone and the muscle joint, not to those what happens in other joints with minor movement and concavity.
And the junction of the thigh is dislocated in four ways: it can be dislocated towards the inside parts, or towards the outside parts, or towards the front parts, or towards the back parts.
And it is mostly dislocated to the inside parts, and little to the front or back parts.
A sign of the dislocation towards the inside parts is this: when you adjust the healthy buttock against the patient's buttocks, it becomes longer and the heel becomes more prominent than on the healthy side; the patient cannot bend their foot up to their leg, so they must bend them backwards. This is where you place a cautery stick at the edge of the sticking point, because the top of the thigh bone has already penetrated here.
The sign for the one where dislocation occurs is towards the outside parts; it's that Lu's accidents are against this accident.
And as for the person to whom you have caused dislocation in their joints, it is a sign that their intestine expands according to its capacity, however, it does not double the pain that was there before. If this continues and cannot proceed beyond the affected area; their urine is retained, they are prevented from swelling, and you should walk around them on the talus.
And as for the person to whom you have caused dislocation at their back parts, it is a sign that they do not expand this area anymore, nor can they double up against what doubles their swelling. Their intestine is shorter than the other one's, and their swelling is relieved, the tip of the thigh is where you should address this issue.
A possible reduction of this dislocation is what you should consider. If the dislocation is old and long-standing, then, when addressing your patient for treatment, you may proceed with reducing their condition according to their situation, not considering it as a complete cure; therefore, there's no need to think that in this treatment alone, everything will be fixed.
For the one where dislocation is recent and belongs to one of the four types of dislocation, then you should guide your effort towards reversing the joint and extending it both internally and externally. Move it to the right and left sides where it returns to its normal position without needing any other treatment.
If it doesn't return in this manner, then you should prepare to apply force and extend the patient's intestine from its side or over their chest, or directly on where it is protruding; another should spread their hand above this so that their fingers come into contact with them. And reinforce by pressing tightly at the junction of the thigh, while having another hold onto the extremity of the ligament firmly and steadily.
And whether it is an extension of the patient or of the internal part towards the swelling on the sternum partition, or of the back part to the partition at the second rib.
And when all these extensions are done in one go, so that the patient is lifted up to their earth-based body height and hangs down.
And this type of extension is common for all four kinds.
And so if the dislocation returns as we have said, it's good; and otherwise, then for every kind of treatment that you should consider on your own.
In your own reduction, when dislocated internally, the patient should be tilted back onto their left side. Then place the ligaments on the junction of the thigh where they are located between the knee and the area that leads to swelling; then extend the ligament from the side opposite the swelling towards the other partition of the sternum.
And then another should firmly take hold of the patient's arms. Tighten up on the large area of the thigh, and extend the parts outward with strong extension until that returns to its place.
And this kind is of lighter treatment compared to other types, in which this member is reduced.
And if you are excused from following this method of treatment for all these kinds, then you should have the two feet of the patient lying at the same time on a strong ligament, gently and firmly, on both heels and both ankles.
And the length of each is by quantity of four inches. And the thigh extends more than the other by a quantity of two inches.
And so the patient should be suspended from the head of the spine, and in their right hand. And the length of the earth's part is the quantity of two arms.
And so command a strong youth to pinch the top of the thigh, and have them suspended by another youth's thigh, and the other youth to pinch the thing with such force that it returns at speed to its place.
And in your own reduction, when dislocation is external at the hip part, have the thigh push against the ground as we instructed during our yellow treatment. And strengthen the ligament over the outer thigh precisely and over its foot.
And place two poles, one under the foot of the patient and the other on the head; and adjust two poles in the middle of the knee placed with wet cloths wrapped around them, so that the thigh of the patient is not dampened because the pole is between their thighs. And when you extend the parts, you mustn't pull it too much.
And each should extend to their part, and the doctor with his hand completes the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is at the front parts, then have the intestine extended slightly, and as per this method described on the knee; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the protruding thigh, and has him push against that with his other hand, and through that pressure he pauses while extending it to the front parts towards the area where the dislocation occurred.
And if the dislocation is at the back parts, then it should not have the thigh extended to the front parts, but be lifted above the ground. Having said that, place it on a hard cause as when you would do when lying down if its width has been dislocated outward, according to what we said about the position of your body between two widths; and both their faces and their ligaments should be extended as we have stated, almost without error.
And ensure that a compress is placed on the area where there is pain in the joint.
And once the reduction is completed according to this, if - and you are sure that there is no sign of the reduction in your view, then extend the patient's legs. And when you make these movements equal, and the patient bends their body so that it extends its leg and expands their excuse, then you know which part of the body, once reduced, has been returned - and then you adjust the thighs and apply a poultice and stretch them as much as possible on this side; and keep the patient at rest for three or four days.
Then loosen the ligament and poultice, and compare one leg against the other.
And when you see these movements in the bed, then you know that the dislocation is already healed, and hence allow the patient to move.
And if you see any sign of softening, then you return and plaster that area, and stretch it according to your first correction, and let it rest for three days.
Then loosen that area, and have the patient walk around on both feet for several days until they are comfortable.
Chapter xxxii.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated to the outside of the joint, and inwardly towards the joint cavity, and further outwards than the latter. It is not dislocated from the front side.
And the sign of shoulder dislocation is when you command the patient to put their arm against their thigh; then you know that the shoulder has been dislocated.
And the restoration of all these ways is to make the patient lie down straight, as if they were extending their arm above them, if possible; attach your two hands to their face, and place their foot between your feet; then guide the shoulder into your palms, hold those between your fingers on the patient's shoulder with strength, and another serves to extend their foot until the shoulder returns to its place.
And the sign of restoration is that their arm sticks to the thigh without causing any strain.
Then plaster that area and have the arm stick to the thigh, then rest those parts on one side for three or four days, then loosen those areas.
And do not allow the patient to walk around for a few days, until they are healed and comfortable.
Perhaps if your reduction of the patient is justified, then administer strong extension to the ligaments as described in the previous narrative about the treatment of the hip.
Chapter xxxiii.
On the treatment of dislocation of the collarbone.
The collarbone can sometimes be caused by slight trauma, and at other times it is dislocated according to the completeness of the injury. The dislocation of the collarbone occurs either inside or outside the joint.
And the sign of collarbone dislocation is that you see the collarbone swollen proceeding to the part where it has been dislocated.
Perhaps the treatment for the removal of this is a mild restoration, that it be extended with ease on the chest and made equal until it returns.
Perhaps in the treatment for when it is dislocated completely, you should make the patient lie straight, and have one servant hold that part strongly and bravely behind their arm on the middle of them.
Then have your right hand under the patient's foot on the higher part of their body, and with your left hand on the lower part of the chest near the belly.
And then pull the body towards you with your right hand, and with the left by two parts, and extend it on the left side; and push the feet of the chest to the right against their arm.
And make those movements in that way as we have discussed.
And then push the feet towards the arm on the third part, and you are at the belly.
So if it returns in one or two movements as per this manner, and if you see the body equalized, it's good; but otherwise, then on the patient do the operation again, which is when it returns.
Perhaps if you are prohibited from reducing the patient as we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and hold a small pillow motionably on solid ground, and place that between their thighs, and already wrap a blanket around them so they don't move.
And the attendant should have their hands on their thighs, and another servant extends their foot against the extension of their side or onto the ligament that lies over the chest; and each person should extend themselves against the extension of their own partner, and the pillow stays between the patient's thighs holding them, so their body is not pulled towards the outer parts opposite their extension.
And the doctor equalizes the dislocation on their own side, and another attendant holds the healthy thigh in the outer parts, where the dislocation returns easily.
And when the dislocation returns and you declare the health of the reduction in your view, then rest with plastering and stretch that vigorously on the ligaments, and join the foot to the arm.
And when you fear or protect yourself from the nerves that are behind on the leg, to ensure that the ligament over there is not overly strong and does not hurt it heavily.
And let that rest for two or three days; if the ligament has softened, stretch it out.
And on the third day or fourth, gently untie that area, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days. Mayhaps if it is forced to go before that space, without safety the dislocation might not dissolve and become rotten, and so that nothing receives treatment.
And if it happens that there is an abscess, then consider what we described in the conclusion of this narrative, elsewhere in the area of healing and dressing, until it is well treated.
Chapter XXXIV.
On treatment for dislocation of the feet' fingers.
When that which is dislocated has been extended slightly for six sessions; and what is not difficult, before it becomes easier.
Perhaps if the dislocation is in some toes of both feet, then consider that you make the patient stand on a level surface or on a table, and remain like they would walk.
And then stand on your feet, place your hand under where you are pressing the joints, and gently press it onto your foot with strength until it returns, and see that it is already evened out and does not appear in the pressed area.
And then place the patient's foot on a table that supports all of their foot, with two points, and strengthen it with a strong and sturdy structure for three days; and then gently untie it and allow rest from walking for several days, until it is strengthened and its functionality can be assured.
Chapter XXXV.
On the types of dislocation that occur from injury or fracture, or at any time.
When any cause of those happens, and you fail in the treatment of that or in restoring them, deaths result from these.
And do not presume over the treatment of them yourself, but rather someone who is skilled in the art, long experienced, merciful and compassionate, not hasty, without zeal or presumptuous; they should use only those medicines that help to subdue abscesses, allowing the patient to remain under divine judgement, not towards themselves seeking salvation from loss, with alleviation of their illness in which you have some hope. And then make every effort to promptly reduce them during the onset of the cause before an abscess appears.
And then, if the limb returns as we wish, then administer a regimen that helps with abscess dressing and treats injuries using what you judge suitable from desiccated ointments.
And if dislocation occurs from a fracture and there is separation of the bones, then you make the bones straight, and proceed as we have said in the simple injuries on this topic, where it was preceded by the locations of those.
And observe and avoid according to your virtue that of the medicine in the ways of fear as it has preceded my teaching; for what is better to you you should do to your Creator, more permanent to your glory, and more healing to your body when you see those things in your time. So ends the words of Al-Buqais, perfectly from which God may be praised. Amen.
