O you, dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of medical science together with its filling, and I have finished it through explanations and declarations. And it has come to me in a vision that I shall complete this treatise with the subject of 'surgery', which is part of the work of hands.
And because the work of hands is practiced in our region and has been adopted throughout all places, it is therefore a complete science and widely spread, with only minor details left from ancient books describing surgeries performed by skilled hands. And from this comes the mistake and folly, and understanding is closed off, and knowledge is misplaced.
Or it seems to me that I must revitalize this treatise with the arrangement of its teachings according to the method of exposure and explanation and abbreviation; and together with the forms of surgical instruments and other aids of craftwork, along with preparation as needed.
And because no good masters are to be found in our time, the art of medicine has been abandoned. And it is necessary for the person attending to elevate themselves in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until they understand the judgment of members, and their forms and connections and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and sinews and the number of veins, and the movement and moving vessels and resting vessels, and at the place of their origin.
And for this reason, Hippocrates says that without a tool is much more difficult, and with the hand is little; especially in the art of surgery.
We tell you in the introduction of this book that those who are not mindful of what has been mentioned, should be careful to avoid error and causing harm; thus I have often seen many from those who engage in this science abandoning knowledge and experience.
I saw a mad surgeon who made an incision on the abscess of a scrofulous swelling or neck of a woman, and cut her arteries there; hence so much blood came out that the woman bled to death in her hands.
And I saw another surgeon treating a stone in a man's bladder, and the stone was large; he removed with it a piece of the bladder itself, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been summoned to treat him, and I saw the condition of the sick person and the size of the stone, and it was certain that he would die as they cut into it.
This other wise woman took care of the duke from our land who had his leg broken, and with the fracture was an open wound; and due to the healer's ignorance, the fracture was set on top of the wound by forceful means without using a splint, and left no bandage at all for the wound. So it ended up like this: she instructed him not to dislocate it again; and it remained thus until his leg fully healed with the foot also improving but ultimately leading to ruin.
I am called upon to come to him, and I hurriedly dislocate his leg; and when it was dislocated again, he found peace and felt no pain.
But the contagion had already taken hold of his limb and couldn't be healed; and the corruption continued to spread through the member until the entire limb was utterly lost.
And see a certain physician who fells an incrustation of an abscess, which then becomes inflamed due to the spite of its lordship.
For an ulcer, when it is filled with black bile humor, does not require that you touch it with iron unless it can be partly lifted so all the corruption may be removed.
And so, dear son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, places where there are dangers in multiple conditions; and I will show in each section of this book where there is fear and danger.
It is why you must take care of yourself so that the foolish may not speak ill of you.
If you take up your arms in thoughtfulness, and address your troubles firmly yet gently, using the best method so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and are praised; let go of the hopeful diseases causing grave health issues, remove your weapons of doubt, and have faith within yourself so that you may transition from this world to another one of glory.
Galien in some of his warnings says: "Do not take careless illnesses to heart, that you may be called foolish by the wise."
I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauldrons and medicine boils, and it consists of chapters organized from the head to the feet; and forms of strumens, and iron implements for cauldrons, and everything necessary in this work.
The second chapter is about tailoring and cutting, and cupping and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and it consists of chapters organized in accordance with the forms of strumens.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and sprains, and similar matters; and it orders from the neck down to fingers, and shaping of extremities.
So that we remember the work, it is necessary to describe the nature of help and the harm from each constitution.
I say that the qualities of help and harm are longer words, subtle science, and hidden answers; and on this many wise men have spoken, agreeing with it; but their words suffice not to me because I return to brevity.
I say that fire cautery helps in all constitutions where there is matter; for two types of constitutions exist: one hot lacking matter, and the other dry lacking matter.
In constitutions that are both hot and dry lacking matter, some say fire cautery is greatly helpful; while others claim the opposite: that fire cautery is only useful for diseases arising from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot and should not be treated for heat-related illnesses with more heat or drying out; however, those who argue otherwise say that fire cautery greatly assists in treating diseases that are both hot and dry within the human body. When you examine the body and its moisture with respect to hot temperament, you find the body cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it no time through experience.
est a quo: CLEt le t-B the mot s that les que pas. And all the physicians gathered and agreed on the use of fire cautery.
And know, my child, that fire cautery combines the secret arts of healing and brings greater mercy than incendiary medicinal cautery.
And do not worry this member is it comes to the body of fire.
Burning remedies come from moving one member to another, bringing severe illnesses to the affected limb; and sometimes it kills the patient.
The heat for its high value and due to the goodness of its substance does not act unless there is excess.
And this is what I have found through experimentation and long service in the field, as well as my studies, regarding the truth of things; therefore, I excuse myself for the length of words, because it does not please me to keep you from the secret that lies within fire or work, and the quality of craftsmanship, how it deals with bodily diseases, as the philosopher explains in his demonstration; accept this in your thoughts.
And know this, son, that they agree on when cauterizations should be made, and the prayerful seekers choose them.
And I say that cauterization is suitable in all cases, because the harm occurring can be removed by the aid of cauterization; especially if the cauterization is for urgent and severe pains that cannot wait until greater evil comes to the limb.
bye t’s cide of f lits are c (t; est a re and to say the paindust prist:
And the thing that can happen is that illness may come any time according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease and its nature; and excesses are assembled in him from the acquisition of meats and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered at their source where there is little excess and moisture, as with cauterizations for pain, and similar issues, so that no great pain returns; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why caustics are called the last of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that caustics have value after medicine, their understanding is false, and caustics are the last of medicine because when we administer treatment methods in any illness and they prove to be valueless, then we administer our caustic, and it has value. Then properly speaking, caustics are the last of medicine, not according to the foolish beliefs of people.
The ancients said that surgical instruments made of gold are more effective than those of iron, and they did not consider them inferior solecuite due to the quality of gold and its high substance; and they said that the wounds from a cautery do not decay but heal faster, indeed I have tested this, finding it true in some men; and gold instruments are as effective as those made of iron, as they claimed.
And yet when you heat the instrument made of gold, it does not remain hot simply due to the color of gold and cools quickly; and if overheated, it catches fire; therefore there is ample hindrance.
And for this reason we use iron cautery because it has proven effective in our work.
Or I have ordered this chapter from the head to the feet so that the path may be easier to find.
About the olive oil cautery
These cauteries are for moisture and coldness in the brain; there you do by reason of a disease called "soda," and because of many humors that descend from the head into the eyes, and to a multitude of dreams and pain in teeth and throat, as well as all diseases coming from coldness such as paralysis, stroke, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
cride.
And then have the patient sit with a cross between their hands, and place their hands over his thighs; afterwards put the root of your palm above the root of his neck between both elbebows; and wherever come your two arms, let it bleed before using the cautery called "olivare," which has this form:
And then place your hand on the injured area with ink, and draw and stretch it slightly by turning the arm bit by bit; then lift your hand gently, and observe if you see a small piece of bone; and if you do not see it, continue cauterizing until you can see the bone as I have instructed; afterwards take some sealing wax, and place soft cotton within, and position on the affected area for three days; then apply fine linen soaked in oil; leave until the burn is healed; afterward treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healthy.
And if said by elders that the more openly the wound remains, the more it purifies itself; and for this reason, help it heal.
And some say that one must grind the fire cautery so a part of the bone is burned away, and then reset what has been burned from the bone, and treat it accordingly.
And the others say that one must grind the fire cautery extensively, and push hard enough to flatten the bone as wide as the woolen cloth women put in their hair for moving fluids; and the wound should be ground open for a long time beforehand; afterwards, it should be cleaned and dressed.
These two methods of fire cauterization do not seem to me good in all cases, rather than in some men who have a way out of fear; and I think it seems wise that I should leave them alone; for the head weakens by continuous natural solutions as we testify from other limbs; similarly when the head of an unhealthy person is naturally weakened, and the first sign of fire cauterization is more healing and beneficial to me, so with such cases my work is thus equally salutary.
Of great pain from a toothache at the back of the head.
When pain occurs throughout the head and lasts long, the patient should use years and pills called "cochie," as well as cleansing of the head and oils and plasters; if one performs the cautery we have mentioned before, it is not effective.
Be mindful if the patient's headache is of a strong nature and not too cold; then cauterize below that cautery we have mentioned above just slightly.
s (a.
For fire cautery of the head When sudden pain occurs in a part of the head and the illness extends to the entire body, and the head is purged with mildly laxative medicines, along with other treatments I have mentioned in the division of diseases, yet none helps: then you shall perform fire cautery as per two ways, that is, using aqueous medicine and pitch.
The fire cautery using aqueous medicine involves making an incision of about half an inch, removing the surface and covering it with two small pieces of lead, then placing the temple where the pain occurs so that you can replace the alum paste under the skin; and once placed, leave it tightly secured for twelve hours. Then loosen and treat the wound for either three or four days, then apply a poultice made of cotton soaked in butter until suppuration ceases.
After the ointment treatment until it is healthy again; and if you see, prepare a batch of certain burning remedeburning medicines that I have written or designated to treat with burning medicines.
The iron cautery is made as follows. Heat the cautery of this kind, where its shape lies:
And it is called 'close' because the head is shaped like a bell or has .i. protruding part, and there is a small opening; place it on the painful area, hold your hand and gently turn the feir slightly until half of its edge looks charred; then lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which runs forward, and allow an abundance of blood to flow.
After placing cotton in the wound for three days, then put moistened cotton with butter, and afterwards treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellaris," do so at the tip, and be careful not to puncture an artery in this migraine that is not old.
Migraine
When you are treating migraines as we have previously mentioned in sections of diseases and it doesn't help or the medicine and iron implement do not suffice, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellaris" until it is white; and so place your hand a line of half an hour long on the aching area, remove your hand once, and stretch enough to not puncture the artery or reach up to the bone; beware of the jaw that moves when chewing, and ensure that the nerves have no regard for it and spasms do not come upon the patient, and beware of blood flow issues from the artery once it is capped, or if there's fear of excessive bleeding and to those who are unaware and untested; leave the wound in its current state. But I will tell you how to stop the blood when the artery has been capped, and I will show you where to do this on-site in this book.
If you see that these cauteries do not ease the illness at all and the patient is suffering, cauterize in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the caustic remedy or lithotomy extractor with the caustic that has two knives; this caustic is better than the others.
From pain of the ears due to coldness.
When pain from coldness comes to the ear, and you have used soluble medicines and other remedies as we have described in that division, and the pains do not subside, then use this caustic called "point", of which here is the form:
After pointing around the ear, where both sides hold pain equally and you move away slightly from the root of the ear once you have secured its position; and do so at six points around each ear; then treat the area until it is healed.
The treatment for oral affliction involves applying pressure to specific areas near the mouth, ensuring a gentle but firm touch that alleviates pain without causing further distress. This method has proven effective in managing various dental and facial conditions throughout history, reflecting the medieval understanding of bodily humors and their influence on health.
The only type of torture that should be treated with cautery is those caused by humors, as we have described in the division of diseases; and do not apply cautery to conditions resembling pus and snake venom. This instruction reflects medieval medical practices where treatments were categorized based on perceived causes like bodily fluids or external agents such as bites and stings, with each requiring specific interventions according to the prevailing humoral theory of medicine during that era.
When treating this type of torture that causes weakness from hydromel and chief purges as well as gargling, if it is not effective, then you must caulk the patient with three cauldrons: one at the root of the ear, another a bit further back on the temple, and the third between the two lips; place the cauldron in the healthy part, making the cauldrons as long as half the skin has been burnt off; this is the effect of the cauldron.
And this is the appearance of the scalpel that we have described earlier, but it is slightly more subtle and requires the knife to be slightly larger; after treating them as I have previously stated, until they are healed.
When apoplexy is longstanding and you treat it as we have said, and there is no improvement, and the patient does not have a fever, then you must make four cauldrons: two on each of the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the head, and one where they are called "vessels" as we have previously stated, and the next cauldron under the mouth of the stomach; treat them as we have said before.
Of languor
For this disease, give the patient large years and medicinal pills to calm the brain; after removing all hair from the affected area, place the saffron frame on its occipital bone as written or prescribed for poultices; and here is the method of cautery: do as I have instructed.
If it is well done so, good is it; and if not, then do three cauterizations of the head descending down to the collarbone with space between each cautery being two inches apart; treat as you would the others, and if there are any obstructions, then do one cauterization in the middle; and if surgery is required, do other two on the two edges, and treat until it heals well; and let the cauteries be called "olivary" as I have previously mentioned.
of the coldness in the head It is necessary that the head be scraped for years and as we have previously mentioned; after washing the head of the patient, then perform cauterization in the head and at each point, and three on the spine of the neck; and if more is needed, and the body is moist and the patient suffers greatly, and the disease is severe, make four cauterizations along the spine of the back; and let it be until the skin has healed, then remove your hand; afterwards treat until healthy, and apply the cauterization called "olivare" that we have previously mentioned.
for epilepsy
Epilation should not use a heated caustic except for those who are phlegmatic, and first it is necessary to prepare the brain with various treatments that we have mentioned in the section when patients are large and suffering greatly from medical pains.
And if it is a child who cannot bear it, they are given gargles and chewing treatments to refresh the brain often with bone meats; afterward, their head is immersed in hot water, followed by one cautery as we have said before, and another on their shin, and each horn-like projection; and if patients are far gone and suffering, they undergo cauterization just as I mentioned for those with paralysis and softening of limbs, along the spine at the back and neck, using an olive oil cautery as I have described.
If it is a child patient, they undergo a subtle cauterization in this manner:
When caused by melancholy are the excesses or corrupted dampness and heavy phlegm; then one should perform the fire cautery of parts as we have told to those with paralysis.
And if the excesses caused by melancholy lead to further melancholy and the body becomes weak and damp, then give them something to drink so their brains may be clarified, as per what is before in the section on divisions.
After examining the head of the patient; after making a well-made piece in the shape of a circle, place it within the head; and cross the malady, ensuring all sides are held firmly; present the poultice, and warm with aged cow's butter; heat quickly so that they can bear the heat; after removing the circle from inside the head, let it cool; do this to a patient once every week with good governance until healing occurs.
When you see the need to cauterize, do so in several places over the entire cautery. This method of cauterization warms the skull evenly; then place a cloth soaked in butter and lamb fat upon it.
From under the edge of the eyelids When the eyelids first become swollen as described in the division, then begin and give the patient things that purify the mind, and protect from all dampness, and let them sweat or bathe several times on an empty stomach.
After the command to return his head, and make a fire cautery in the head, and two cauldrons on top of the two temples where the nerves of the temple are together, or in one they are separate; seal up all veins and arteries that come from behind the skull; and be sure the cauterization is long according to the width of the temple; and guard against bleeding too much, and if you see too much blood flowing, stop it as best you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and making an incision for how to cauterize it; and never make a fire cautery or ligature below the two bones behind (neck).
on les trairez et tu cuires l’origne des os et li capillons qui sont dessus, et tesulement en la coupe du corps.
When tears are long-standing and accustomed to the veins or near arteries that appear above the forehead; and it is seen as superfluous cold phlegmatic substances, then apply the cautery as described at the beginning of this chapter: one on the head, two on each temple, and two just below the eyes; and if more is needed, carefully cauterize a small amount above the eyebrows.
When tears flow into the body through the eyes
When you treat according to what we have said in the division, and if it does not help, then give a sick person three small cups of medicine; after that do a scalp cautery or oil caustic (cautery) and make two "clavilis" cauteries on each eyebrow slightly below the brow. Be careful not to injure the artery. And this is the shape of the fire cautery, called "clavis":
When the flesh of the oil is softened by illness and dampness, then apply the paste of this fire cautery called "olivale". Here is its form:
And if you see two cauteries on the two scars as long as the eyelashes are; and do not leave the hand except until the third part of the paper is burnt, according to the method I have described.
theyre ;r; if: �.chief; dont (orso: soe f it s Never does the hair of the eyelids turn to scales, and touch the eye, for which a fire cautery is made according to two methods: that of fire or burning medicines.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they are born and grown evenly, then place the patient in bed with their eyes covered so that it is like a veil of mist, and let the beginning of the sign be under the hairs; then put moist cotton mixed with egg white and musk essence over the eye, then apply this form of cautery:
After cauterizing the area you have marked only slightly and multiple times, let the skin be raised at that spot; and signs of the health of the wound are when you see the paper retracted, and hairs rise to the level of the oil; then clean your hands and leave it so for three days, then apply a cotton cloth greased with butter until the burn is healed; afterwards treat with ointment until it becomes healthy.
And if after this hairs appear and the paper is softened then repeat the cautery at the same spot as before; and if hair becomes sparse, then cauterize until the paper rises to its natural place, and they are evenly distributed without touching the oil.
The cauterization of hot medicinal fire is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of a sprig of myrtle; then take French soap and freshly boiled water, each half an ounce, and grind them well together quickly so it does not cool down, then apply onto the form that you have made like a sprig of my지티슨 as the patient feels pain in one joint only, work on one at a time; and if both are similar; and put cotton cloth greased with butter underneath the joint. The patient's head is in your hand steady and place your two fingers showing over the medicine, and press gently each time that the patient feels pain from the medicine, for it causes a burning as of fire. When you have done this for a while, apply the appropriate medication to the wound. When the swelling has subsided, raise the wound dressing and if you see it lifted as if raised by heat or incision, then all is well. If not, reapply medication to the wound until your efforts are equalized, and the eyes aligned; then place a cotton ball soaked in oil on the area until the scab forms, afterward treat the wound with an ointment called "dyafenis" among others, until it is healed.
And be very careful with your efforts that the medicine does not escape from the eyes. If the dressing becomes thin afterward, and the hairs prick in the wound, restart medication on the area affected by the paper properly, as you did before; then treat it until it is healed: this is the method of a protective shield.
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to this, so should be your constraints; and do not put back on the right path one who is devoted to the study of this art.
Regarding the treatment of a fistula by fire-cautery
When treating a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and if your treatments do not help, then it is necessary to perform fire-cautery according to this method.
sir the choc. What you's f: J; a med.
After pressing the fistula if it is open, and treating the pus, and drying it out; and if it is closed, work on it, and press with a bowstring; after placing hot cautery on it properly, hold your hand to the affected area above the oil so that your hands do not go wild; place the cunture in the oil's fat, and let it rot.
If you come to the cautery up to the bone at first, that would be best. If not, restart the cautery one more time, and if necessary, leave it for three days; then apply a soft cotton ball soaked in butter, and use dry healing ointment until it is sound again, and after forty days pass when it has become sound, apply corrosive ague medicine until the bone is exposed; and treat according to what occurs in your manuscript.
And there is a method of treating a fistula that the ancients did not mention. Listen to this about a fistula, and follow its length; then insert a subtle catheter with the shape mentioned herein. And they apply the amount of a ounce; and hold your hand or whatever firmly, so that the patient does not move at all, until the liquid flows into its place; and one must put cotton moistened with this on the affected area: if correctly placed, it will heal like from a fistula, and be cured by miraculous means.
And if the fistula is healed by the caustic we have mentioned, it is good. If not, one must administer pus to the wound, and return the faster to its proper place in accordance with where it truly belongs.
Of clefts in lips. Many times, there occur cracks in the lips called "hairs," especially in children's lips.
When you treat these cracks as we have discussed in sections, and the treatment does not help, then apply a small scraping cautery according to this method:
And apply heated oil to those cracks until they are filled with heat; then clean the wound with lime until it is sound.

When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the eye, or palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has turned purulent and rotten and is old and becomes a fistula; you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not benefit: then you must apply a cautery according to the quantity of the funtile; after burning or puncturing the fistule, hold your hand until the iron cools from its heat, and thereafter; do so once or twice, after treating as we have said in treatments, until it is healed; and if treated thusly, it is good; but if not, you must expose the location and remove the corrupted bone according to what you find in your chapter.
The slight movement of the teeth.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines and this does not work, then place the head of the patient in his health; after scalding the cauterization as you come to shape that you put a ring on the tooth; and immediately put the cauterization hot, and hold your hand until the heat comes to the root of the tooth; afterwards unroll; after freeing my hand and begin again the cauterization according to your pleasure; after filling the mouth is cleaned with salt, and rinse an hour.
And so it is that the tooth which was moving becomes fixed, with softened gums being held steady and corrupted moisture dried up.
Of toothache pain
When toothache comes from cold or heat, and the medicines do not help, then it is necessary to perform cautery in two ways: beef fat cautery and fire cautery.
Cautery of butter is such that you take butter from a vessel, and the end into a spoon of iron or silver; then take cotton and wrap around the tip of a tent, and the hairs in butter swell, and place on the toothache quickly; do so often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that hair and cotton are cold-buttered, place it on the aching tooth, and place an iron hot enough for the heat to reach a closure over the tooth.
Cautery of fire assembled is such that you take a vessel made of iron or silver, and large enough so that the heat does not reach to the patient's mouth; then heat the cautery, after which its form will come, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the castery has cooled. Do this often because the pain will be relieved either on the same day or the next. And it is necessary for the patient to fill his mouth with good butter in the urgency of that cautery, and then rinse thoroughly; and that's the form of the cautery:
When scrofulous swellings are due to cold humors and do not respond to medicines, then apply the fire cautery as described hereafter. Make two openings for smoke to escape from the other side of the cauterization; heat the abscess once with the cautery, or twice if necessary until it reaches the edge of the abscess; if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to its size and leave thus for three days; cover with moistened cotton dipped in butter as long as there are burns. Afterward, treat the wound with ointments and bandages until it heals.
When moistors overcome the channels of the throat and particularly when it arises from cold complexion, then first empty the patient by using soluble medicines; afterwards apply cautery at the root of the throat, but be careful not to reach the throat itself nor burn deeply. Then make another cautery at the joint of the neck at the top of the spine as we have the form before; treat the wound as we have previously mentioned until it heals.
Of dislocation When all diseases of the pormon are caused by cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or sweating, and it is an early illness, there should be two cauterizations on either side above the nose; and another cauterization in between the nipples; and let the clavicle cauterization be as described by its former shape.
And if you see it, perform the "points" cauterization of which the form is previously described in the ear disease; and let the points extend to .xxx., or within that area. After treating the leu according to what has been said before, there should be other cauterizations at .iij. points as per this shape:
And thus are the fire cauteries lighter, for one makes three at once from it.
For the dislocation of the shoulder When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the disruption immediately. b.
And caulk the gourd until it is pierced to the bone, and the shape of the caulking would return with four caulks; and because it is made by the caulker with three prongs, so the shapes of caulking are these four caulks; and their nerves follow the subtlety of a tent and this is the form of the caulker with three prongs.
And at no time is it approached near the one nerve because there are eight caulks.
After placing the caulk for grinding with salt; after making the patient rest and not moving the limb for long periods until it is well-comforted.
When it is dislocated above, little happens initially, then make a fire cautery on the thick skin with a caulking needle, or many cauterizations by poking. For the joint is reflexed, and bone becomes moist and wounds heal in the patient.
The chest cautery
The old ones said that for pleurisy one must make root cauteries of aristology herbs, and in this way: take the longest possible root of an aristology herb, let it dry, and be as thick and long as your thumb; coat with oil, and hold over fire to cauterize. Make a cautery between the clavicle and collarbone, and two small cauteries slightly lower on the part below the jaw; and two cauteries between the fifth rib and sixth, declining slightly backward; one at mid-thigh, and another above the stomnaga, and one between the armpits, and two at each side of the fourth rib from the previous cautery; do not squeeze with your hand but perform openly as in smelling.
And some old ones say that no man should use fire cautery resembling a razor, placing it and heating between the ribs until reaching an abscess; then pain ensues as we have said in the liver abscess. However, in this kind of work there is doubt or immediate death for the patient, or fistula occurs which cannot be healed.
Of a mouse
When you treat the disease of a mouse that we have described in the division of treatments, and it does not profit; then they employ three methods of cautery which are all good.
There are several ways to do this. You make three or four cauteries in line with the length of the wound, following the pattern of the liver's caustery which we have said before; and do not press your hand all over each cautery, and let the patient be lying on their back.
And another way of a caustery is that you show the one with two nerves, as we have shown in shoulder dislocation; and move the head which is where the wound occurs on the left side, and let there be elevations from where you lift the head according to its size, following the width of the body, and the caustery should follow according to the breadth of the body.
After inflaming the two nerves so that the head is pierced from the other side, then apply the caustery, and thus there will be four elevations. And if you see it, cauterize the entire caustery on three nerves. After the healing process has been going for a long time, this method is also as effective as the previous ones mentioned before.
Of dropsy
Cauterization is not effective against dropsy, except for the method called "ascites." When you treat it according to the methods we have described in divisions and your treatment proves unsuccessnful, then it becomes necessary to make .iiij. cauterizations around the belly, one on the stomach, one over the liver, one over the spleen, two behind the back above the spine, and one near the area of urination; and let the cauterization be close to the source of swelling.
After leaving the cauterization open to allow drainage for long periods, do not cease treating the patient after the cauterization; and healing will hasten, and together with the two intentions, they shall have God's help.
The form of the fire cautery for the stomach is the scapula as we have shown before; and that for the back is oval-shaped, as it is placed here before.
Of swelling of wounds When wounds are swollen in someone who is hydrophobic, and are full of yellow pus, you must cauterize on the back between the ring finger and little finger; and lift your hand with the cautery towards the torso. And do not enter too deeply, thus limiting to the yellow pus, and make the cauteries according to this form:
After making two cuts on each leg at the point of the shin bone; and let there be one incision below the knee in front and another behind, within the leg; allow these incisions to heal by curing themselves; afterwards care for the other wounds as we have said.
From the membrane
When the swelling of the stomach comes from coldness and moisture, to the extent that the vital and digestive properties within the stomach and intestines are impaired, and cannot be treated by usual methods; and you see the patient suffering greatly with strong vitality, then make a large fire cautery on the stomach as previously mentioned or a cautery for the stomach, whereby the cautery circulates around it; along with four small cauteries encircling the belly, each subtilized to one fine cauterie.
If you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery over the wrist, and one on each finger, and two small cauteries near the upper part of the stomach as it is profitable when there is good assistance.
In the treatment of hemorrhoids.
When hemorrhoids are foundational or several at once, and they are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and are treated as we have described in divisions, but there is no benefit, so make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that which is all below the almucantarat point and a little toward triangulation, and one under the buttocks; two points.
If you think his stomach is cooled and the flesh does not cook, and one sees the face swell, then on the stomach make a large fire cautery as previously mentioned, and another on the liver, and another on the pancreas with all the cauldrons; leave the cautery burning for long periods. Afterward, treat the area until it is healthy.
From the gangrenous matter known as "theilum"
When you encounter the gangrenous matter called "theilum," use the fire cautery that appears like a scraper, and then set it all ablaze on top of where the theilum is found; let your hand and the cautery come to the birth of the vein from which the blood flows abundantly. Do this once or twice, as we have said; if there is much theilam, cauterize each part just like before mentioned; afterwards treat them with profitable ointments until they are healthy again; and if you use a large fire cautery on the hematoma, it will give greater help.
Of a wound poorly treated
When the patient cannot endure an incision or opening, we will explain herein how to treat a disease that cannot be healed except by fire-cautery.
When a patient has an abscess that is aged and rotten with putrefaction and moisture corrupted, you must first try to open it all over carefully, understanding how much the opening extends. After heating up the fire-cautery until it looks like a shaving, insert it into the fistula according to the quantity that has entered into the opening; continue with the cautery as long as the corrupted and putrid flesh is burned off, once or twice or thrice, depending on how much needs to be done. Be careful not to burn the nerves that are there, and avoid large blisters. If the fistula goes into the urinary tract or intestine, be wary of these openings; do not force it too far, remembering that they are not perianal. After healing the opening until it is healthy, if the materials have been drawn out for a long time, then know that the fistula has completely healed. If the materials have not been drawn out, understand that the fistula is inflamed and corrupted bone at its origin; thus we will explain further in this section of the treatise.
of kidney disease When pain from cold and swelling of the groin does not allow mating, then it is necessary to perform cautery on both sides of the area with the pointed caustic iron we have previously mentioned; if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, which will provide greater relief.
of and the painfuls cauterie the li muc, et lissoigne est cauterye ou li lea dousse cestors dole untile emic, oraside ilue les plus, et as it comes caustere esprend li line, soie oinçi eau. When the bladder is weak and cold from moisture, such that the patient cannot hold urine, then make a cautery on the part behind the bladwer where the hairs begin to grow, both to the right and left, each of them long as our finger; and you make one cautery along the back, or two if needed; bevelled according to the previously described form.
Of the joints When the joints are cold and moist, not allowing it to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted with late endings; and when they come, so it feels great pain: then one must do for him three cauteries around the armpit as we have said of the bladder, and one along the back; bevelled according to our previous description.
Of the thigh
When the viscous moisture descends to the thigh's girdle, and because of this it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh appears longer than the other when measured together; and one finds the leg doubled at departure, so you must cauterize the patient over the thigh's girdle with a circular cautery like those used for the stomach.
And if these cauldrons are not present, then use three large olive-wood cauldrons, and the cauldron should be as wide as all keys; and you must treat until it is healed.
of the pain in the hip When pain comes to the hip joint, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient should be cared for as we have said in the division, with a remedy that works; if the illness is old: then you must purge the sick person of large humors through foul pills or other good-smelling pills.
After the fire cautery; and its manner is according to two methods: that is, using hot medicines or a fire cauterization. Fire cauterization has many ways, among which one way is as follows: you perform triangular cauters on the hip joint three times with this shape, making sure there's good depth and size, and each cautery should have space between them that resembles an egg; they are olive-shaped. One time, a cauterization was made in the middle under the top of the hip, because it has four according to this form:
And if you see it with the fire cautery at the circle as we have previously mentioned in the shoulder joint dislocation; but do so in a way that the circle contains the entire shoulder, and all the bones of the arm are burned to ash.
And this is the way it's done in sciatica when the pain is located in the hip and does not reach to the thigh or leg; if it reaches the thigh and leg, two fire cauteries are made where the patient says the pain holds them, and one fire cautery above the ankle four fingers wide, a bit toward the left side; they should use a scraped bone for the caustic substance, and let it burn to ash; if the patient feels that the pain spreads up to two or almost three feet from the ground, then at the point where he senses the pain make three or four points with the fire cautery called "points".
And if it's necessary because the pain is more; and if you know that the pain is under the knee towards the thigh, then make a fire cautery either circular or cuticle-like, but take good care in all your caustic applications not to harm neither nerves nor large arteries, and cause no greater harm or contraction to the patient.
Et j'ai vu des personnes qui ont fait cautériser sur le pied douloureux à la cheville, et ils l'ont élagué si fort que toute la jambe a été détruite, ainsi que les os, et tout le pied percé et corrompu. Après un traitement du ventre dont il mourut.
And if the pain is in two parts together, do cauterization on both sides according to this manner. // And the wise ones speak of the cautery for the hip, and here follows the method, make a piece of iron that is as large as a small dactyl or slightly less, and it should be inserted between, so that from one gap to the next there is space equal to a fist; and they are two gaps apart and also straight, and have a well-made iron rod; and here follows the form:
And have it heated so that it is all red and steaming, then place it on the bad hip joint, and turn it over to the ribbed side; and cauterize once with two incisions made at one go and leave for three days; and then apply a poultice of butter, and let the wound remain exposed for long periods; after applying medicinal ointment until healed.
Albucasis says we use little of this cautery due to fear for its effects, and few are seen using it; yet it is a good cautery, which can be endured, and where it presses.
Of the double pain in one's back
When pain comes to the back by falling or percussion, or from excessive blood loss, or from similar signs of cold matter spreading; none of these conditions warrant cauterization, except for those resulting from infusion of cold substance.
After the patient has voided of foul pills or similar substances, place them on their back where they feel pain, marking three lines with signs, and in each line make five cauldrons or more according to its virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and let the cauldrons be made as those called "points"; and if you see, do three or four at the middle cauldron according to this form:
This disease often comes in small children, and the signs at the beginning are that they have a tight anus when they defecate, and pain; and you find on the last spine of the back and above the other spines.
When you see this and treat it, cauterize with a fire cautery according to this form.
If the caustic is needed for any part of the spine, it should be evenly applied. And if you see a need to burn around the spine with a hot iron, making 2 or 3 lines and keeping them close together. After that, treat until it's healed as we have said, being careful not to apply caustic in an area where nerves are present.
Pain in the joints
Joint pain is due to moistures that spread throughout the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, which doctors properly call "gout," and if it is caused by coldness and cannot be cured with medicines, then they are treated with caustics like this: make a mound of caustics around the joint of the foot, and let them form an olive-shaped caustic according to this method.
If there is need to hold the face above the chin, make a full caustic with the chant "no touch." And if pains come up to the knee and other joints, which happens many times, make a caustic on each of the three or four joints, or two from each part, at all olive cauldrons; and if more is needed, do so, but do not hold your hand away for as long as the hair growth desired has occurred.
If the pains descend to knees and backs, administer the caustic as we have described in this chapter. And if there are pains in the hands, make points around two lines of the fingertips; and if no pain remains in the joints, cauterize each joint and hair of the hand; and if pangs come to the edges or shoulders, causticize each part, and give good governance to the patient and provide appropriate medicines. For if you give them good governance and purge phlegm, they will be aided by God.
From the condition of the sore
When swelling comes in the elbows and they hang loosely as new, it is necessary when you see them to cleanse without using those tools for that day; use things that soothe the belly, so that the bowels descend from the belly; afterwards have him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to grip his arm until the swelling subsides, and reset the joints at your hips, and rub with a stick over the sore spot without touching bone under the elbow, and make any sign similar to three-quarters of a circle above the body; then apply this cauterization technique:
Then let it be white and wet with exudate. Then reset the bowels at their place; and have the patient wash his hand so they do not return backwards; work well on the legs of the sick person, and put a cushion and belt over the thighs, and another under the buttocks which he holds with his hands; then apply the cauterization over the sign with all your hand, and keep it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if not on the first try, repeat as many times as needed to reach the bcu; be careful that the swelling does not occur while doing the cauterization; do not burn it; and ensure by this means that the patient does not die or suffer other ills.
The cognez est le tis de quinze jors dix. Et cateres.
After forty days, when he wishes to rise, have him wear a well-made bandage and keep it for forty more days; let him rest well, not exerting much or overindulging in drinking and eating, nor shouting too loudly; after following this teaching, one is completely healthy. And I will now describe the treatment of tailor's bunion as per its chapter. Of stomach disorders
When stomach conditions appear in other areas and become noticeable, if you see that they no longer grow, then make one fire cautery according to its quantity, and it should be two-thirds of the length; after curing as we have discussed; and none of the ancients said to apply the caustic at three angles in this manner:
But first sign the place of insertion and make a line for the width above the incision, and another below it, and hold your hand over the entire cauliflower-shaped cautery. But the first cauteries are lighter and more mobile.
Of ancient pain in any limb When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or injury, and this pain lasts a long time, and the healing of medicine does not help, then it should be treated with a caustic called "poins" using cautery according to the length of the limb and its size, weakness, virtue, location of torsions, and pain. If it is suitable for the first caustic, that's good; if not, another caustic should be applied above it, as the custom dictates that it should move within the limb nearest to it, so you must apply cauteries until the patient is healed.
Of surgery
Surgery is often aided by fire for great relief, especially diseases arising from the putrefaction of moisture and melancholy. Can you cauterize it with caution if the disease is at its onset and has been treated according to what we have said in the division, without hesitation or delay, and doubting that corruption might harm the entire patient? Then make 5 fire applications: 1 above the forehead near the root of hair growth, another towards the front near the end of eyebrows; two on either side of the horns, one behind near the temple area. Leave your hand to let the cauterizing process reach up to the bone, and until scabs come out so that vapors from large humors can escape; then cauterize according to what is present.
If the surgical incisions are all over, and then do not touch them with caustication of stone or cauterizations, and .ii. ii.; se tu ne li cauteres su les poinz d’aidement de la gis.i; et que il nen les sores sus lou tesirements sur le meselerie; et i.crescentement, si estremont les ait cautere sus l'onque ou li ne cauteres sus lou poinz quatilie, puissele; se tu ie ; ei.
And know that the more I do with cautery, the greater the benefit to him; and understand that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery as healthy ones do, because the body is already completely corrupted. It is necessary for the cautery to be large or small depending on the members and joints, according to what you will find in treatments of metals. After curing the wound with wheat flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it heals.
Inflammation
When inflammamen comes in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, and it is not yet healed, then you do cautery on the limb according to its size; and let the cautery be somewhat translucent so that one can see its depth. Then treat with oil until it heals. Sometimes a cautery is done on the hand, foot, or back at the nerve exit where the member moves, and thus if there is bone inflammation, you must do this; but never meddle unless you know the limbs and the exits of moving nerves.
Of silvering
When the disease called "albaras," which is chronic, and medical remedies are of no use, then you should cauterize with a cautery slightly inward according to the quantity needed for moderation until the bleeding stops and changes color; then cleanse it with flour paste and lentil juice mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, along with congee from colon and heron blood, one part each of all these substances combined together, bandaged tightly under a cloth, and kept in place until healed.
The treatment for syphilis by cauterization
When cancer begins to appear, and you see it starting, if you cauterize with the cautery that appears as a circle around the entire tumor; and in any case, healthy people say that cauterization is also done at the center of the tumor; however, I do not think this is good, for I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen it happen before; and more preferably, it is to be cauterized around, with the "circular" caustic we have said about many caustics.
From the swelling that cannot die out
When some have an illness called "adubelati," which takes too long to die or because of the excess it causes or due to the weak state (that is, being very old) and having little blood or time; then you should hasten its demise: so cauterize around with many small caustics by pricking; after this leave it as such. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see it pierced throughout the cautery, heat the cautery with this mold:
And place your hand in the midst of this disease called "adubelati" as long as the caustic has pierced its core, and choose such caustics that the patient feels forwardly somewhat so that the course of the poison is alleviated. After the cure until it is completely healed perfectly.
The cure with fire by iron
There are several diseases known as "corrodens," which is nothing more than a mass on the limb, because it consumes the limbs just like dry wood catches fire. If you see this disease in place that can endure cauterization with both fire and searing, then apply small and large caustics according to what suits the location or where the disease is; after cauterizing all parts until you remove all corruption, ensuring nothing remains of it, so that everything that is corrupted becomes osteoarthritis. Then leave it for three days, and put oil-soaked bandages on the causticized areas until the fire scars are healed, and all the corruption gone. After this treatment with medicinal balms containing charcoal; and if after three days no health returns, that is good; but if not, continue cauterizing what remains of the corrupted limbs. This mass has never been treated in place by the ague medicine before cauterization with fire; however, cauterization with fire always provides greater help, and I have already described the treatment with ague medicine after division: take as much as you need.
From the pus which comes to the wounds
que riz:
If they are turned towards the back of their body, and this often occurs in hands and feet; then it is necessary that you apply a hot water caustic: take a vessel made of tin or iron, or a spatula of lead, and place it on the nail and the bone beneath, which means for warts; put the vessel so that it covers completely, then put some hot water in it, hold your hand firmly, and press back as you turn until the edge of the vessel reaches the root of the nail, allowing the hot water to find a deep pathway up to the root; allow the patient to endure the sting of the hot water for an hour. Then leave them like this, and they will loosen all their roots. In this way do one after another until you remove all those that are in the body, then treat with ointments containing charcoal.
For curing of tremors
For those who shake with cold fever or other illnesses, it is necessary to make .ii. cauterizations on the spine; and .i. cauterizations between each vertein the back of the spine; and .iv. cauteries over the abdom. li vertuinement, and seiz cauterization ; and other maladies de la santez of pains du maladez-ci estainté d’autre: prenestrivenie ou dulacauceres; et aigrescuez.
From pus-filled sores
At no time are they visible from behind the bathing body, or pus-filled sores that come from large corrupt substances. If at first when they appear one should perform cauterization on each head of the pustule: a subtle cauterization with wood of myrtle, with its tip held in fire, or long root of aristolojo, or a lenticular cauterization. And not every time are cauterizations performed at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, and they cannot grow any further forward, but is broken off their excess from which they come, and become healthy; however, it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
When the artery is severed Many times great blood flow occurs from the artery that is cut at the wound which extends to the edges, or in incision of the abscess, or on burning of a limb, and similar things; and it is very painful to stop the bleeding.
And in any case when it occurs to someone, quickly place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and strain firmly until the blood is calmed beneath your finger, and no more flows out; then apply olive oil cautery, small or large ones as needed, until they are all red-hot; then take (apply) either a large one or a small one depending on the wound and its location where the artery runs, and place the cautery on the vein where you hold your finger, and keep it there until the bleeding stops.
And if it starts to bubble when you lift your finger from the vein, and the cautery has cooled down, quickly take another of the cauteries that are heated in the fire.
And continue to do the same one after another until the wound is closed; and be careful not to burn the nerve near it, and that no other illness comes upon the patient; know that when blood flows from an artery, you cannot properly close it by yourself unless it is through one of the four ways we have mentioned: either by cauterization, or by extraction if it has not been treated, or by a strong pull of thread, or by medicines applied to which have the power to stop bleeding; and be tied and strained together.
He who will administer tight bandaging or applying burning things to it, or similar matters if there is no benefit from them.
And if this happens to someone and they have no specific remedy or medicine at hand, then put their index finger on the vein wound as we have said, and stretch it well until properly closed over the wound and vein; do not move it, but apply cold water often enough that the blood is cooled and congealed and closed; and make small incisions there where you need to cauterize and use medicines.
Here we have told you in the first chapter all diseases in which it is necessary to use fire caustery or burning medicines, and blisters, causes, effusions, and forms of cauterizations; and I have included that chapter on head-to-feet, and I will proceed with this chapter by the same method so one may find more easily what they seek.
And so as I begin this, it is necessary for you, my dear student, to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than the first of fire cauterizations, and therefore one must exercise greater care.
In this work of the treatise occurs often blood evacuation when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and treating wounds, and extracting arrows, and incision into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and it comes to death for some.
And I advise you not to undertake folly. For many ways of people come in cures: those who have become so accustomed to their illness that they die easily due to the severance from their illness and the greatness of its malice; and for these, one should have fear. And among these are those who give you their consent and say: "Wait, I am cured"; but the illness is despicable. You should not consent to those coming to you with this manner; rather, place greater trust in your honor than in your covetousness, and do not foolishly act on what you are certain of and can take and have lost; use prognostics and indications in the cures of your sick people so that health may be converted; and it will aid you to achieve good reputation, glory, and memory.
Very precious thread, Our Lord gives you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to expire from the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or I have ordered this treatise by sections, as in the case of the cautery chapter that I have discussed from head to toe so that you may find it more easily what you will need.
At the top full of water
by ; and what;s.
In the treatment of this disease found only in children, and I have seen it swiftly bring death; therefore, I believe it is worth focusing more on specific remedies.
And I saw a child whose head was swollen with water, and the skull grew larger each day until it could no longer be supported; the moisture accumulated to such an extent that he died. This moisture is gathered beneath the bone above the sphenoide, between the skin and the bone; thus in treatments like this where the moisture lies between the skin and the bone, abscesses are small, so one splits a fissure wide within the head, as long as twice as much as before.
If the moisture is more pronounced, and the abscesses are larger, then make two cuts in a cross-shaped manner according to this form:
And if the moisture is below the bone, and the signs you see are openings at the corners of each part, and the sharp sound rings loud when pressed by your hand inside, and it has not been reset: then it must be split into three fissures as follows.
After the incision drainage is complete. Then strain the wound with bandages and powders, and apply wine and oil; leave in this manner until the fifth day; then release it, and treat the wound with dressings and ointments, allowing even pressure on the head, and allow the patient to eat dry meat with a bit of moisture until the limb is comforted and healed.
And another method of incision is to observe whether the size of the abscess and the direction of fluid are consistent, for they never appear in front or behind, nor on the right nor left side.
Then indeed make the incision where there is an abscess, and fill with water as you are able; and be careful not to cut an artery; and let blood flow out so that the patient does not die from loss of blood or evacuation of moisture.
To reshape it
When a disease called "catarrh" affects the eyes or the groin, and the illness has been long-standing, and medicinal treatment does not help, then the final remedy is cauterization with what will burn off the three vessels.
Then it is necessary that when you see the dislocation, have the patient raise his head; then rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then gently pull the neck on both sides by one cloth; then look where the vein pulses, and the eyebrows of each side are after the ears, but they lie close together; then sign the eyelashes individually, then cover each one with a strip of wool measuring two fingers wide until it reaches the bone, and wrap it as tightly as possible.
And if you see this, place the wool strip below the artery and cover it from above, cutting as two fingers across its width.
And when the vein is covered, have him jump continuously to his full height.
If the artery does not open by touching, it is necessary to measure three finger's width of space and sew up to the bone; then what is required in terms of blood loss is five pints (or roughly), with a chance for slightly more or less depending on what the patient can endure and the replenishment of the artery. Afterward, examine the wound: if it does not leave behind any spongy residue nor do abscesses form, then suture the wound and bandage it, applying ointment until healed.
To remove a splinter
When an old splinter causes catarrh, due to the moisture of tears and heat in temples and a long-standing swelling outside the forehead, and it is not helped by various remedies of medical treatment, then we extract the arteries of the temples and perform cauterization as we have described.
And the manner of extracting them is that the patient makes recesses in his temples, and listens to the artery which opens at the temple, for it opens well by its pulsation, and heals quickly like some people who are too cold; and if it has healed, then the patient strains their neck with a linen cloth, then rubs the area with rough cloth, and applies hot water until the artery appears distinctly; then take the spatula of which here is its form:
Then lightly scrape the skin as far as you find the artery, then tie it at the cut ends, and bandage well with towels that are below each part; and if the artery is fine, turn it on the tip of a pin, then cup that part according to the quantity of two eyes. For if it's not cupped, it will not heal completely in all.
And treat the blood of the .vj. cuts until .iij.; and if the artery is large, it must be tied in two strong strands of double silk thread so that decay does not come before the suturing of the wound, and bleeding ceases; then cup the excessive tissue between the .ii. ligatures at the same hour, and then, if you see, seal with the fire cautery until to the bone as long as the eyes are cupped; and it's the mending work, provided that the patient does not have fever and is of hot complexion.
For cauldrons are aid to finish the moisture: for this is greater assistance than the moisture itself. In the matter of extracting arteries, one should fill oneself with much cotton and place it well-made bandages; and when they are loosened, treat them with dry medicines that produce heat, and with dressings, until it is healed; and if there is a cut in the artery as deep as you work upon, hurry to apply cautery, or fill your hand with vitriol and strain it so the wound does not get infected; and if this is not present, put cold water on the area until it freezes, then dry it out completely until the cut ceases, and restrain as needed; and that which moves easily in the extraction of an artery should be cauterized with a sharp part of the cautery, but the sharpness well blunted to protect longer from heat. For when inflammations are too tightly bound, it holds less heat. And it must have between the two knives a certain space, and then when you hold them fast, take care of both sides; make the vein equal on both sides, and be distanced from both edges because it is not suitable everywhere for this fire cautery in all cases; this is the form of the fire cautery.
Tears
When tears descend from the eyes that are under the forehead furrows, and medicine does not help in this case where one acts upon it; and you see the sick person's face turn red like with fury, and their forehead tremble as if frightened; and oily secretions cause the hair to become matted and damp, requiring these treatments.
And they called the old one "contusion cure", and you should do this for the patient who has this illness with hair on his forehead, then make three incisions or evenly according to the length of the forehead; and let one incision be as two fingers all along downwards until the eyebrow, and the other two half-finger widths above the temples, and avoid cutting arteries that are on either side near the temples; and move your hand away from the continuation of the two jawbones, and each cut should be three fingers' breadth apart.
And for the incision that is from the temple to the second incision; and scrape all the core that lies between the two incisions on the entire skull above the bone, then apply a portion of the ointment from the middle incision to the other second one, and then extract this ointment.
If inserted into the first opening is the instrument called "culterelle," and it is very sharp on one side, while on the other side it is smooth, not cutting. And insert the knife-like tool facing towards the chest at its edge, with the smooth side against the bone and inserted until it reaches the middle incision. Then cover all the vessels that come from the head to the eyes as long as the incision is continuous up to the opening of the throat, and then proceed in the middle incision to the other exit; then extract blood equally, and express the cavity for the collected blood; then place a tent made of old cotton in each incision, and cover with moistened linen cloths soaked in wine and oil and honey, ensuring that no abscesses form; and after three days remove the ligature, and treat generously with an abundance of fresh water tea, then apply a basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, along with other remedies used for wounds until healed.
Upon examining the eyes
When any come from acute catarrh frequently, and you see the eyes swollen and small, and impairing vision, and burning sensations; and the hair falls out, and headache intensifies, and patients sneeze; thus you understand from these occurrences that those matters and such catarrhs do not come from one cause, but rather multiple veins, and this miasm is what causes it.
And that you command the patient to raise his forehead, then make a large incision in it, with one end wide; and begin from the incision on the left temple to the right temple, cutting until reaching the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples when they move during eating; and once the bacteria are cleared, extract all blood using a sponge, then insert cotton wool between the two sides of the incision, and wrap with linen cloth soaked in wine and oil, and prevent it from becoming infected; if healed, when new tissue begins to form, cleanse as necessary, which is how you treat open wounds.
In this way: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of cinnamon to make a plaster; and apply it to these wounds to promote healing throughout.
From stopping up of the ears
Everything that flows from the ears is one of four things: grains, beast, stone from mine or similar substance; seed, such as peas, beans, lentils; or something effused like water and easily flowing.
When it flows from the ear in stone or other manner that does not fit with the ear, and does not grow within the ear, place the ear to the sun. If you see the stone, then distil some violet oil or sesame seed oil; and if there is a condition of crusting, cleanse the nostrils when sneezing occurs, and put cloth pieces or wool around the ear; and elevate the ear upwards. Often this treatment brings relief; and if it does not bring relief, then delicate extraction with tweezeburns is done in such a way:
If it jumps out through the pinceries, that's good; if not, perform delicate extraction with a small doubled needle; and if it does not come out this way, make an ear wax plug and pour in the head of the plug or tiny hole in the ear strongly, then stuff around the plug with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter with the plug; then treat firmly, as often comes forth as we have said; and if it does not come out in such a manner, take some glue to which you attach feathers, and use any precise instrument that may be suitable for this purpose, and place a small amount of cotton around; then press the glue onto the wound or whatever thing it is, and treat firmpressly. And if it does not come out from any of the things we have said, quickly cut open the ear as soon as pus appears and spasms occur, then the method of cutting is to first elevate the patient's head on a pillow, and draw out blood according to the measure of its virtue, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the base of the ear near fat or whatever it may be; and let the incision be as round as a crescent moon until you reach the bone, then treat according to your ability, and suck hastily into your mouth; and cure until healed. And if it is done in the form so that you do not come forth from it be a fendue de saut ou il vient quis le pendre; et ecutereux de les veigne l’oreille duil ne s’on l’os.
And make an incision in that grain of wheat. But do not attempt this when you think the grains are moist due to earwax, until you have made many attempts; then extract with fine tweezers and a sucker, as we have said, so that the extractions be aligned.
Then if the water indeed enters the ear, it requires the patient to sneeze initially and fill the ear with old cotton. Place your finger on that same ear where the water is. If it comes out forcefully, it's good; if not, take many pieces according to the length of your mustache and make them light, then warm them up a bit by fire; and put the patient in front of one or two small holes in their ear, and pull on another piece from the other side, and cut into another stone placed above the stone that is in the ear; and continue cutting stones from stone until all water has flowed out, so it comes out fully; and if you see this, take a reed, and put one end of it in the ear, and heat the other end with fire until the thinner reed burns; then make another set of reeds as we have said on stones.
In extracting the beastie, if it is of small stature like a flea or similar thing, treat as we have said on division; but if it is large enough to feel with your hand, make an extraction with fine tweezamoins; and it's easier to remove what is in the ear.
In the removal of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the section on distillations and their treatment, if the remedy does not work, then examine the ear under sunlight; if there are no visible worms, use subtle forceps, and if they do not appear, take the bone that is formed:
And it is narrowed from the top and widened at the bottom. Insert the more subtle chief into the ear according to the quantity of pain experienced by the patient, then follow form completely throughout the bone; do this often until all the worms come out. If they do not emerge, stuff around the bone as I have said in the section on stones; and if they still do not exit as we have described, administer distillations that the ancients have tested in the surgical removal of worms, and you will find them to treat with distillations. Apply your oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument as seen:
It is made of silver or thin copper from the top and has holes at the bottom for distilling, and over to press down the distillation with a well-made bronze instrument; if you see a sponge around the tip immediately wrap it in cotton; then pour your oil or juice into the bone, and whatever of your medicines into the ear, and let the cauliflower be in the ear; then insert the sponge all over the cotton, and press firmly until the oil has distilled or dripped from the ear; and it will smell to the patient, and the distillations are made on fire as we distill them into the ear. Keep that they do not too cold, for your medicines would be so bad:
From the blocking of the ears
No child is born without any perception in their ears; and the same thing happens to people through wound healing or a foreign object lodged inside the ear, and these obstructions always come from the front of the ear, so that one cannot see them; and never do they cause complete loss of sight.
However, if it cannot be seen coming from the front, there is good healing in various ways, and when one sees that you must place the affected ear to the sun; and look inside. If you see an apparent obstruction, then work on all of this membrane which is the shape:
the s.
If the inflammations are full in the ear, take a subtle and light rasor and warm it slightly by fire, then place it on the body of the ear. If you feel the inflammation causing the patient to have fear at hearing, carefully puncture it, but be sure not to damage the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the size of the opening, and wool in the Egyptian ointment.
Do nothing for any day until the wound is healed, then take a tent and put in wool soaked with rose water, and powder over it with vitriol paste; and if you see the ear swelling, make sure to replace the tent and move another one made of molded rosette oil and wax until the swelling is gone; then treat it until it is sound.
And if bleeding occurs, soak a sponge and wrap it with cold water cloth, and place it on the ear, and apply other treatments that remove the bleeding by using distillations.
From the collection of papers
This althelus that comes in papers from the roots when they are moist and dry, it is necessary to spread them with tongs and tweezebrushes, and the coat of a spatula at its root ends; then place the vitriol powder on top.
And if they are not removed, then the incision with a fine lenticular caustic is made, and after the incision is cleaned, sometimes it needs to be done again; as nothing remains from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots dry up and do not return.
the following: a vowe them. The same : p. t, even of fact.
Many times come in papers from the eyes things that seem frozen in their form and hardness, and for this reason this disease is called "grandine", consisting of a large amount of moisture on the paper above and below; the treatments are as follows: take care if grandine moves to one side or another, it's an easy thing to know; then make them wide apart, then lightly scrape each part, then use pincers, and cover. If you do not pierce the paper too much without cauterizing a bit of it, nothing will harm the patient; if the fissure is large, gather it with stitches, and treat until it heals; if it's small, do not force it, because ointments will soften it quickly and cause swelling.
And if grandine descends into the depths of the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper over and use pincirs to grip and press on both sides; and if the paper is moved by incision, it causes no harm; and when grandine is cured, take the old water-soaked oil, and treat the place until the patient heals.
Oil of anointed oil to the afflicted area for relief from discomfort and inflammation reduction.
It is called an ointment, made with threads soaked in paper and placed over the wound; it happens more often among children than adults, causing great distress to their eyes, leading them to become catarrhal by mornings, and unable to look at sunlight due to tears rushing to their eyes; thus they lie on their faces downwards, sleeping, with damp paper over their moist eyelids that the ointment covers and changes in appearance. And when you press its location with your fingers and feel exinach between them.
The way to treat it is for the patient to place his head in your hand; then take a linen cloth and make a tent-like circle according to the amount of exinach from each part, then put it on top; press with both hands on either side so that the exinamenh gathers inside the circle; then insert a sharp spatula into the moist membrane making a cut as wide as the vein incision made earlier, and not larger than the wound made in the vein area; keep cutting until you reach the exinach; and various arrangements lead to exinach coming from the fissure, depending on the shape of a piece of white fat.
Retrieve with your hand between both palms, and turn your hand to the right or left as long as it is scattered; and guard that you do not approach the fissure, until it reaches all the way up to the oil, which you do not cross it.
And if the nerves do not exit at the beginning of the tear, gently widen the tear until it appears; then extract as we have said, and moisten with linen cloths in wine vinegar, and place over the area, and bandage securely.
And for such individuals who crush seeds and place upon to corrupt the moisture that remains. Then treat until it is healed. And if an abscess comes at the site, treat with plasters soothing until it is healed.
Of hair from papers
When in papers hairs appear misplaced from their nature and are infected, causing harm to the eyes, bringing about ways of diseases such as accustomed tears, softening of the papers, and pus formation, until it causes destruction of the eye; and there is treatment according to four methods: by cautery with fire alone or by ague medicine as per what precedes in the chapter on cautery, and is done either by incision and suture or by needles, as I will describe.
It is necessary that you place the head of the afflicted in your left hand, then turn the paper over to your left hand; if it turns well, it is good; if not, use a needle on each thread at once; and do this either near the edge of the paper or where the hairs are placed near these hairs, and pull one thread through all the paper, turning it smoothly with your fingers; then cut into the area below the paper, below the displaced hairs, throughout the entire swolpertum covering, from the large temple to the small; then extract a filament, and place under the paper a small tent of cotton and linen cloth, then gently press on the paper with an envelope-like figure as if it were a marten's pouch, making sure that the shape matches the amount you see elevated in the paper from all sides.
It istecosture s’olle .i. Se vient li moutrescuers d’esle evez ce que licescours se tire de les cuivre tout le rives costrel, puis la pristislesse cure à tous autres sensce a tu escrement desuex et c lues s jusques.
and if by another method: and it is that you shape the paper into a form similar to a firesteed's bellows as we have explained, three-quarters of an inch according to the following shape:
then cover that which surrounds with small forces equally according to the shape shown here.
And if you are unable to hold the pincers, and the thing is not equal, take a needle with one thread, and put it into the figure; then pass another thread near the large edge, and the second thread near the small one, and evenly align both threads; then lift your hand equally, and lift all the skin over which you have marked as we explained. Then join the two edges of the wound with a stitch, and cure it until it is healthy; if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and other soothing ointment.
And at no time does the hair of the paper become discolored: if it is necessary to use what we have said about incision; but the suturing on both sides is more artificial.
The treatment of wounds is as follows: and you shall turn the paper and fold it inward according to what I have said, then make .ij. stitches with a needle, and .ij. ligatures as long as the width of the puncture; and wrap around the heads of two parts where you hold the threads; then carefully join each part following the appearance above the paper at the hole, and tie off the .ij. stitches on each side; leave it thus for a certain number of days, and the tissue that was tied will die, shrink, and contract until it heals by itself.
If it is delayed and the tissue becomes stronger, then treat until it heals properly; and if the wound has scabbed over, and no hair can grow where the paper was; and this is how you make .ij. stitchcuits in this manner according to these dimensions of length and width:
Procedures are such that you insert a fine needle, and then tie one end with a thin silk thread; then bring together the heads and carefully join both ends subtly; ensuring the length of the threads is about a palm in length; then arrange in sequence another short, delicate silk filament as a guide, and pierce through the head along this filament; place the patient's head on your knees, so that the procedure can be clearly seen, for it involves subtle and minute operations; insert the needle through all the way to its root next to the natural hair, and quickly cut with paper as you comb over the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the base, and place into the sequence any other hairs that may be there - one or two or three or more; then remove your hand until only the hair sticks out on the paper along with the natural hair.
And if the base is treated and hairs do not come out with it, comb through the base in reverse following all the filaments you have arranged, until they stand upright for clear vision; then comb through again and remove both the oil and leave two or three days, until new growth occurs on its original spot and scales appear thereon; and if the hairs are small, pair them with long natural whiskers, elevate it alongside the one you let remain, until they have moved away and then lift it.
Proceed to be smoothly in oil sille unguen les dites le hairs soisle, et tu place t'est ouli anointment with a la poil and remove all the poils li ointes they on both them from the scalp : deo let both les petits.
When this illness called "aleacrati" or the swelling comes to the eye, it has two ways: one natural and the other unnatural. And it happens by sudden wounds, cuts or cauterization, and similar things.
And the method of treatment is to split that suture, and separate the lips of it, and insert linen threads inside, and tie them until they are clean; and you should not use anything in its care that dries and constricts. For if you do this, the illness returns worse than before; but with things softening, such as fenugreek; and rose water or boiled lentil seed and oils infused with oil of sweet almond, apply them to a linen tent, and treat it like that.
And the essence of your care is to ensure that it does not re-form as it was before; and these treatments we have mentioned are only remedies for this disease, preventing it from returning in its previous form.
of the clot that arises within the oil
This disease called "axacrati," is both natural and accidental in origin. The accident arises from wounds, cuts, cauterization, and similar things; the process of treatment involves you taking an awl that has a double thread, inserting the needle into the clot, piercing it with the left corner to the right so that the threads reach two corners of the clot. Then stretch the clot across the entire needle, and cover it with a cloth as wide as a spatula.
And if the appearance of the paper returns as it should be, that's good; if not, take a razor and place it in the tear, then turn the paper, making two folds within the paper; ensure the corners of the incision you made are at the corners of these new tears. Let them join so that when assembled, they resemble a letter with one "j" dot above (as per medieval notation); then remove that clot, according to its size and distance from the original tear as it's stretched by the paper, and bring together the two separated parts using a woolen thread; then care for it as we have mentioned before using mollifying medicines and bandages until healed.
If the illness comes from a cut or stitch or cautery, it is necessary to make a clean incision above the hairline of the papers, and according to what has been said before; then between the two sides of a tent, as I have stated; and one must perform the procedure according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in shape, and wise masters devise devices with all possible means to return the figure to its natural form; and also the patients themselves, according to what incision and applications are required in various dispositions.
The binding of the paper
When this binding occurs between two pieces of paper in such a way that the top part is glued with the fat of oil, and it cannot move or perform its natural functions, therefore one must then insert the tip of a razor undernelete; and stretch with pincers until you scrape off what is adhered to the subtle cautery, which does not become too hot nor too sharp, so that the patient can bear the heat of the cautery without being scalded or burned by it; and make the incision in such a way that you carefully scrape off the glued area, gently, so that the paper may return to its natural form; and is clean, and do not expose it ever in salt water, but let fresh water and woolen cloth. Then put between the papers and oil linen of flaxed with, then wet it until healed enough, as long.
From the nail of the foot
It is said that the nail has two kinds: one nervous and similar to hard pus, and another which is not nervous but resembles frozen moisture; when touched with iron and heated on the tongs, it does not move. Both types begin towards the great toe, growing slowly until they cover all sight, light, and movement of the foot.
The manner of the incision is that the patient places his head in the bowl, then he holds your fingers; take out the paper to your hand, and then cut the nail with tweezamoors. Then take a needle and insert a horse's hair or mule or oxen's, or strong thread; double the tip of the needle slightly and pierce it through the nail, and stretch it upwards, and scrape off all the hair on the edge of the nail that cuts and stretches it out. Then clip the remaining in the root with a subtlety and small forces, and let nature leave the natural or edge, so that by incision does not leak blood; and anytime:
And keep the spatula from touching and breaking the flesh towel, and that the prune is not pierced; and after the incision pour in some boiled seal fat into it, and with a chain made of litargire, leave until the following day; then treat what needs to be cured until it is healthy.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot insert a needle, and the hooks do not enter, this appearance of a fingernail has been treated with many medicines; they arise as I described in the division, and if you see them covered, work on the oil of the malady, and use the light spatula slightly according to this method:
Remove the nail very carefully, and if you see that it does not diminish but rather advances quickly, distill from your mouth into the oil chains made of litargire and red wool with boiled seal fat, and strew the oil until the following day; then continue the other treatment according to this same work, until it is fully cured.
If nothing is against you in this regard as with a hot abscess, then drain the pus and first treat the hot abscess until it is healthy, then resume the work as before, until it is healthy.
And if the appearance of flesh on the shin bothers you greatly in this regard by causing great harm, stop at an early stage and cut off part but not all, so that tears do not form; then distill into the oil a red collar made from litharge.
of catarrh that arises over the pupil
Some individuals experience redness in their eyes frequently, and cover the prenail and hold steady over the paper and turn it away from light, resembling a bold rose; the procedures involve the patient placing their head on a pillow, then working with the eyelids, and carefully examining all around for any abnormalities that may be present, supporting them with strength; firstly addressing the redness, thoroughly shaving down to the end as instructed in the nail incision and minor force techniques previously mentioned.
When the incision is complete and you clean out all debris, apply oil of seal or distill red wormwood extract along with similar corrosive medicines, and cover with cotton soaked in egg white if necessary to ensure a hot sting; if there's no sign of heat afterwards, and the patient feels numbness, suspect a hidden abscess, leave the oil and treat with soothing remedcuents for burned sores. Then return to your usual procedure as long as it is healing, thus achieving cleansed oil in the affected area through this method.
However, it is necessary to balance the treatment for each natural weakness of sight; and injuries from accidents in surgical procedures with iron tools; do not put your hand into any of these treatments until you see that this member is healed.
From the veins of the eyes
Red veins that are covered over the eye, and they obstruct vision and strain the eyes daily. Therefore, it is necessary for the first time you look at the affected eye in which this is found, as well as other maladies besides redness; then the treatment should be done thusly: instruct the patient to place their head on your hand, then gently compress those veins along the entire orbit according to your wisdom, and let them be twice as subtle following this method:
And there should be two veins compressed per degree in one direction following this method:
Then you apply those forces to the veins subtly, and squeeze out blood hour after hour until you see that you can remove them from the bone; and guard so that you do not bleed at the tips of the stumps, and perform this operation at midday before the sun, and be very diligent in your work such that you only touch those veins; and when you have done this, distil it into an oil mixture red and green to corrupt what is lodged in the bone.
And if you cannot extract all of it in that hour, then apply a poultice on the bone with substances soothing to eye pain, and leave it for several days until the pain is alleviated and certainty about abscesses, then resume according to this method repeatedly until it is sound; and here are the forms of forces:
For the boil in the bone.
When the wound is called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and by using hot medicinal ague as previously mentioned, if it is not healed, then employ a method in which you cut above the abscess where it must die, and draw out all the moisture that remains until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see corruption and blackness, then use all the instrument as described here; it is called "aspre chief," made of iron with a pointed end resembling a file in this shape.
And place it on the exposed bone, then twist with both hands and press slightly until you know that the corruption is removed; do this as many times as necessary before replenishing the wound area with drying medicines.
If the ulcer is hard and hair grows on it, and the body of the bowel is hardened, remaining so for 40 days without healing or forming an abscess, and if there has been no discharge, knowing that it is healthy; if not, then the only other remedy than reopening the fistula at its neck according to this method: And take a piece of bone exposed twice by iron, and with medicinal acids, and when it is uncovered, take a drill according to this form, making the head of the iron have three angles, and let the shaft be tapered up to the top as you see here.
Then place it on the bone near the temple, and keep your hand away one pace from the hole, then turn the drill completely as it penetrates the bcuil and you can feel by how much the patient moves if they hold their hand over their nose; and then replenish the socket with dry medicines as I have instructed, and when hair grows and the ulcer hardens, the matter goes to the nose; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
From the exit of the nostril
When all the joints are fully opened and there is no disturbance to the nerves or reduction, it is necessary to bind the patient; then cleanse them, then apply blisters or cauterize without causing pain for draining, then place a poultice made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolla on top; then strain the pus, and cover with bandages and linens; and arrange the linens so that they are sufficiently soft, folded into quarters four times each, placing one over another according to how much is needed by the joint; then stretch using a hard board for support, repeating blisters without causing pain for draining; then remove blisters leaving pus strained day and night, if the linen becomes softer greatly, it must be removed completely. If you see the pus return after a day and night, that's good, otherwise restart with bandages and poultice and linens until healed.
The disruption of the sutured wound
the twist des la ront le plas and les boneset ues:
And if the eyes give a great appearance, pierce the subtle spatulate that comes at once from the edge of the oil, and it flows with white mucus which descends into the eyelids, and enters almost immediately; then extract until they are straightened.
Of the bow of the eye
This disease called "alcunati" is not just water but appears like it in the eye, resembling running water, though it's not; its characteristic appearance for treatment involves seating the patient on a specially prepared and straightened seat, then grasping their head between your hands. As you see the bow coming towards your eyes, keep them wide open until it is fully visible. Then securely fasten it in place so that it does not fall out or become misaligned; observe as usual how the patient sees things, which should be similar to before. If they can't maintain their gaze (sustain), know this means a bow and you must apply treatment again as previously described; seating the patient, then using a fine spatula along the corneal layer until the bow is fully released.
From the waters of oil
We have the appearances of waters in the division, and what is needed to pierce; thus in work according to healthiness. It should be done that you seat the sickly between your crossed hands, away from light because of the sun, and clothe them with clean oil and tightly bind it; then put the paper containing oil on your left hand if their eyes are also left-sided or on your right hand if their eyes are right-sided; then take in your right hand, if their eyes are left-sided, an instrument called "almagdal", or with your left hand if they are right-sided; then put the tip of the instrument next to the crown by a small distance as much as a hair on that part of oil near the lesser outer temple, then insert the almgaldal instrument vigoraturally and rotate your hand until it pierces through the paper of oil, and feel that the almagdal is emptying into the thing. And it should be that the path of the almagdal instrument is to the full extent of the space from the prunele up to its end near the nape; this is the crown of the oil; if you see the bone on the paper for the translucence of the corneal cloth, then bring the instrument to it or where the water is, and press out from below after another way. If their waters are now flowing, you will see the sickly in front of you and the instrument inside its oil.
them.
And if an instrument cannot enter the oil due to its hardness, for there are men who have very hard eyes, it is necessary that you use the tool called "alberit," of which here is the form:
And indeed pierce the conjunctiva just slightly, not too deeply, but make it quite fine, then apply the ointment as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient a suitable bed in which he can lie on his back in darkness; and be free from all movement, feed him lightly, do not move his head to the right or left, and keep it immobilized according to its position until the third day; then release him into that dark house again, check his vision, let him see various things, and then reconnect the ligament until the seventh day; and you must not perform this during the hour of treatment or immediately after incision now, but rather wait for it because the swelling rises quickly.
If abscesses are present, on the seventh day you should release the oil and apply the soothing ointment for abscesses; and when it is calmed, cover its face with a bandage each day, and keep it in that dark house. And then gradually leave the dark house every day, and let him resume his usual activities; and know that no students should interfere in this case.
A man came to us from the Yrach who told us that in our land a strange occurrence took place where water would flow, but I have never seen it in our territory nor read of it in ancient books; and perhaps this is a new discovery.
These are the forms that resemble Almagda, because those who do not know them see them thus; and they are indeed akin to rain.
And let the head of these beings have a similar subtlety, and their bodies in three corners with water.
From the chariot over the nose
At no time do chariots with various attachments arise or near the nose; and some appear like scorpions at the tip of fingers; and if there are such with a veil of wild color, and those below bone color. In these cases where the chariot is below without a veil, it should be made for the patient to sit between your hands toward the sun; and work its nostrils, and pour ointment on that part of the chariot, then remove any hairs or filaments; next cover what you can hold with a very fine gauze over one side until you know that entire cartilage is bone.
And if there remains any part that cannot be covered, work all the subtle points lightly, such that nothing is left; and if it forms a bump or abscess as it should, then treat it accordingly; and if they are malignant abscesscups, haste to cauterize until it is fully healed and all cartilage parts are turned to bone, then pour oil or vinegar or wine.
If the work is not done, and moisture reaches up to the palate, believe that it is safe; and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is decay in the bone above, thus the tendons do not come loose for cutting: then you must tie a linen thread somewhat thick, and let us both hold its ends with our hands, leaving between each of us a length of about two fingers; place the patient's head under control with the thread at their neck as best they can, and draw gently until it comes out through the mouth; many times this is done for children in schools, and it is an easy thing for those who are willing to do so; then hold one side of the head that comes from the neck with one hand, and the other side coming from the mouth with the other hand, and watch each carefully as we are holding onto the thread. Do this until you know that our threads have dissolved that decay, then pull out the thread, squeezo
And make it of silver or brass, like an open lantern, as with a panhandle, and guide in the same manner; and if you see, then create a closed handle for the purpose of expelling from the head; and have one handle on the head to hold when heating oil or any liquid.
I; And it'fat;
Many times arises in the head of the neck a disease called "telul", which grows and becomes large until it is visible to the eye; therefore, one must begin by cutting out entirely, then apply hot caustic or burning medicine; if not treated promptly as it grows, be aware if it's hard, discolored, with poor sensation: do not treat with iron as it is an incurable boil, for when cut once, great harm comes to the patient; and if the boil is from a sensitive touch, without discoloration, and you see that one can cover it entirely, then relieve the patient of fear and anxiety while treating drying and tightening matters.
When the neck is cut and caused by this,
When a continuation of solutions comes in one of these cartilaginous structures, it is not effective in any person. Therefore, when this happens to you should do as follows: if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then sew up both sides are torn; and if so that you bind the edges together, and cure until they heal, then suture the two sides; and paste poudre of dragon's blood and powdered, and incense a resin, and sprinkle it with frankincense with frank ashes or another from another ash.
The method of suturing is such that you assemble the stitches: either with needles, as we have said in the abdominal wound treatment; or with thread, as I have instructed you before.
For abscesses on the lips
For abscesses on the lips that occur hard like grains of barley, small and larger; then it is necessary to turn the lips over, make incisions above each one, take with forceps and tie into sections; afterwards apply vinegar after lithontriptor incision until bleeding stops; then soothe with a salve, and treat the wound area until healed.
From the gum of teeth
Often there is swelling above the gums, which the ancients called 'albulus'; it must be held with forceps, cut to its root and allow blood or pus to flow out; then apply vitriol paste or other powders that are restraining and drying. If the abscess returns after incision, sometimes requiring a second enucleation and cauterization; if it does not return after cautionery, these are methods for treating ulcers.
From scurves
At times they are assembled in the head of the gums, within the mouth between the gums, unsightly and sharp scales; at no time are teeth black and yellowish-green and pungent until corruption comes to the gum, and teeth become foul-smelling. It is necessary that you make the patient sit with their head in your hand, and his eyes in your holy place, and remove any teeth or scales found, as long as nothing remains; thus treat discoloration and greening, yellowing, and other afflictangs until they are healed; if what was removed at first treatment is still present, it's good; otherwise, begin anew on the second day and then every third day until everything is gone; know that teeth require various forms of dressings to heal, according to how the work shows, because those who fail to extract gums have different shapes than those extracted between them; these shapes and others should be prepared with you.
It is necessary when treating the tooth's pain that you delay with the drilling as long as possible, because it should not be done at all; for it's a substance very deep until there is no excuse for extraction. Quant cest par tout la ou dolent qui le est, tant que sont li, pour a pain de s les sainte certain, soi du toile nus soit: dent; the pries andre, or. Then, ceu que tes, dou, itm.
After the tooth is extracted straight without breaking, and if it does not come out easily, take any of these substances and pour them inside on each side gently, then move it as you did initially. And if the nerve is pierced and mixed, one must fill it with cloths at the points where they are loose; and carefully widening with pincers so that it does not break upon extraction; and it requires working very diligently around the gum to dislodge the tooth.
And take care that you do not break it, leaving a part behind, and causing the patient greater pain due to the root's mischief. Be careful not to act as ignorant surgeons do, who, in their haste and boldness, break the cartilage every time without implementing what we have discussed; they often bring about great illness for the roots that remain or for the cartilage that is broken, as we have often seen. And when a tooth is extracted, cleanse the area with wine or vinegar and salt; and if bleeding occurs there, which often happens, apply leech salve; and if it does not suffice, cauterize.
The forms of the substances that numb the nerves first are those with sharp points and large knobs, which do not double when you extract the tooth; these are the ingredients:
And let them have large limbs that do not bend at the joints, and be made of well-forged iron, and equipped with teeth to hold together.
From the root of the teeth When the root of the tooth is out of place, you must put cotton-wool greased with butter on it for one or two days until the bone softens, then apply the tweezebacks called "algefri", which make the head look like a surgeon's knife; and they should be made similarly to a file.
; çamma; they. We's, com; in t.
And be careful and firm so it does not break, if the root jumps out when struck like this, that's good; if not, then assist with all means possible, which are how they come about later on.
And if one uses the instrument with two prongs, this is where the form comes from:
and other tools placed in front of dense materials, and that instrument which looks like large pliers, from which comes the form:
And this is the manner that it cannot be broken, and know there are many such instruments of iron; likewise other instruments which are not counted among them; and the wise masters subtilly find by themselves their instrument according to their works and what the disease shows, because there are some diseases where the ancients did not teach any instrument due to the variety of parts; nor does it break a horse's carriage or other bones, but rather it searches for the instruments which I have told you about, and assists with movements, here is the form: Let them be large and well-suited to hold the bone, so it does not escape but can be held and removed; then restore the bone in place with appropriate medicines for this case, and if there is decay within the bone, and it is small, all of this instrument is required.
When the teeth appear not in their natural position and the shape is unsightly, especially in young women, it must be known whether the nerves are behind the tooth and it's not on its rightful spot; and it cannot be filed or sharpened. Therefore, grind it; and if there is decay with the tooth, take this instrument as shown below, which resembles a small beak, made of iron narrow at both ends:
And the wax softens little by little due to the hardness of the teeth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that it can be filed, then grind with a portion as is its shape.
And it is like the grinding of needles; and gently grind the tooth little by little, so that it does not move until it becomes sharp; then in the end smooth out any roughness completely, and if it is too sharp and cuts the tongue, then grind the sharp edge until it is even, so that it neither cuts the tongue nor corrupts speech.
When a tooth chips or breaks: take some wax of aloes, and melt it well in boiling water; when it is liquid, pour it into the hole and press the broken part against it until it sets, so that no food will enter. Then you can grind down the protruding edge as mentioned above.
When teeth are loose due to impact or falling out and the patient cannot press down on what they chew without salivating, and you have treated them with restraining medicines which do not work; then it is necessary to bind them with a gold wire, for silver wires turn green and corrode, but gold does not change. The wire should be of medium size according to the space between the teeth; if you see that they are leaning towards each other, take the wire and wrap it double around both healthy teeth, then place the points between the teeth as many as there are, until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side. Then resume coverage up to where you began, and gently pull with a subtle motion so that they do not move; make sure your force is at the root of the loose tooth so it cannot escape. Afterward, cut the points from the wire using pliers, then rejoin them between the healthamte teeth, placing it in such a way that it does not touch the tongue. Leave the area tight as long as possible until it stays; if they become loose or break off, tie with another wire; this will remain and work throughout its duration, restoring the shape of the teeth and alignment after healing:
And when a tooth falls out and is reset repeatedly as we have said; it should only be done by someone who is wise and patient, ensuring that the shape resembles an animal's tusk and placing it where there is a deficiency, then binding as previously described, which will remain effective for a long time.
heal; ici et soet:
At no time is this dislocation which comes from below the tongue or nature, as we do so; or by accident of a burned wound; and the treatments are such that you work on the mouth with the patient's pain, and have his head in your hand, and lift the tongue; then cut the nerve-linking ligament wide, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or softening, and it is of burned wound, so you tie the ends with a string; and ensure that the tear is not too wide for the artery underne
And if you see that it is colored or black or hardened, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch, for it is cancer; and if it appears to be swollen near a vein, and there is moisture, so drain with a string, and bandage it subtly with a gauze pad, and release from both sides; and if it remains unchanged after your treatment, then place vitriol paste until it becomes non-threatening, then return to your treatment as long as you manage all of it; then raise an irrigation of soothing and cool water, and care for other treatments until it is healed.
let the patient est lest et cite et s lee ou lien it tolte et est oint eil or irt a tu tien and d are vitriet; then, be nail te untie fete. It is en chole est of de prist vrai at so the treat, et l’est, or hento: let the pli cure:
At no time does a throat swelling known as "godath" appear, and they are properly called the two almonds, and when you treat them, as we have said in the division, if they are not healed, take care: if it is an abscess small of slight color and softness, do not touch it with iron. And if they are red and the root is large, do not touch them with iron either, for blood discharge; but let them remain until they fall off, then you will split them when they break on their own; and if they are white in color and the roots are subtle, prepare the instrument properly to cut, but first ensure that the abscess rests calmly and is soothed. Then make the patient sit with his chin towards the sun, with eyes open and mouth agape, and he works with a stick between his hands holding the tongue out from all sides of the instrument; it should be made of silver or fine steel like knife blades.
Press the tongue with all of this instrument and observe the abscess, take the needle and insert it into the almonds, pulling as much as you can; then tie everything together above using a cord on the instrument, which has the form of a strong force; however, its head is curved, one end being higher than the other, and they are very sharp, made either from iron or silver.
Herein form, soie on that, heup, lessepses de woulons endrement et s; and a it is le instrument, the c of them beaus la. And when they are all tu ce quat to l’est in this est qui sait and cope as you, and d istur?
And be sharp on one side and dull on the other, and when you have caught up one of the roots, then catch up the other in the same manner, and after making an incision rinse the patient's mouth with warm water, vinegar and saltwater; if blood flows from wounds, then rinse their mouth with hot water or scrapes of pomegranate peels that have been boiled, or leaves of myrtle, and similar things until there is no longer bleeding; then treat them as long as they are healthy; and never do other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two roots, so remove these accordingly like the two roots simultaneously.
And I treated a woman for an abscess within her throat, which was of small size; and it had grown so large that the entire throat was blocked, preventing her from breathing through any passages, and she could not eat or drink, and would have died if she remained thus in one day or two. The abscesses were so swoln up they had broken out through both openings of the necks. So I immediately acted and pierced it with a needle, then pulled the pus, pulling out quite a lot; then reinserted another needle into the other opening, pressing on her mouth and squeezing her tongue; after that, I inserted a needle in these abscesses and sucked up part of it, and did not extract much more than just blood from it; thus was cleared the pathway of her throat, and she began to drink water and then wine, continuously working on removing this abscess for long periods; but the abscess would always grow back again, refilling the space that I had emptied until it became very large. Then I deceived it and cauterized inside her throat: thus, it stopped growing. And so I left these parts, and only God knew what happened to her after me.
the abscesses of his body part as much water and had for ever and out from pus of his she grew them, then with c very much that in too long. Et after may be done it so I did the throat a thou s is not left and dry needle it be to her out the back the same:
When they are re-inserted into the eye and it is fallen out of place, become elongated, then be called "perpendicular"; and if it becomes large and round, call it an eyeball. If after being cut as we have said in the division, the healing does not work and you see that the abscess has calmed down, and is subtle, then it must be excised; and those which are rounded and not elongated, and are red or flesh-colored or black, then an incision should be made on them. For there is great danger to the patient. Therefore, when you see it according to the manner I have described, regarding its position and length, seat the patient in front of the sun, press their tongue with the instrument we previously mentioned, then insert a needle into the eyeball, and remove from below, and excise at .i. of the .ij. strands that I have said in the incision of the .ij. almonds. And it must be ensured not to excape more than the natural boundary; for if you escape beyond this, it causes harm to the voice and speech; and after the excision, proceed as we have described with the incision of the .ij. almondcups. And use caution in cauterizing due to fear of the patient, then use a device to distract their mind from that sensation. The nature of this cautery is clear water. Ensure that the patient places his head in your hand, and then presses the tongue with the instrument previously mentioned for the cautery kit, and confine with clear lively salts; and apply the pressure as indicated by the form:
When the head has a hair or an object with the medicine, similar to a spoon handle, and you place the instrument over the entire medicine on the eyeball; have the patient lie down on their side so that they salivate and mucus flows from their mouth containing the medicine without entering the throat or esophaghren; then hold your hand over the entire medicine and press it against the eyeball, applying a quantity equal to half an hour's worth of watches until you see it become clear and the biting sensation from the medicine subsides. If you notice this, take cotton and wrap it around any instruments, moisten the cotton with the medicine, and place all the cotton over the incision on the eyeball until the cotton becomes red; repeat this frequently until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry, and after 4 or 5 days. And if you need to reapply the medical cautery, do so, and after the cauterization use a clean cloth dipped in butter around the eyeball, and cleanse what has been around with the medicine; rinse with cold water and perform gargles until it is healed.
This treatment is more effective through incision rather than the cautery; if it's treated with fumigation in this manner, take calamint and yellowwort and origanum and rue and camomile and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of these into a pot, add water to ease boiling; and the pots be well sealed with strong clay, and within the pot have an instrument fitted according to this method: And be it of silver or copper, and let one of the heads be inserted into the mouth of the patient while the vapors rise through the tube until the vein is congested; often restart this process until the vein dries out, and ensure that you do not perform at the onset of a hot abscess for many things may occur; and never do so only during the decline of a hot abspect. And if such an instrument is not present, take a tube and place within it a lead ball to prevent excessive heat in the mouth; because the lead ball does not obstruct the vapor from affecting the mouth, and this is a good cure together with health.
and many times one pierce the throat or spine of fish bone, or anything else; so it must you see what you can then press your tongue to all the instrument to the sun; and let the thing moves not and is put in the throat, so that he swallows with vomit out.
And let the mouth be raised to the throat so that it may more easily enter into the gorge, and keep the head lifted high; and watch that you do not touch the epiglottis, so that nothing does not hinder its movement, nor push in the bone within; move as if the patient inserts the instrument, because it should be moved where things are easier; blow through, or shepherd equally along the entire instrument until it is clear.
Of throat swelling
Medicine for swelling of the throat, as I have said in the division, by the cure with medicines; and if it does not improve at all, then look into the throat of the patient under sunlight, then press the tongue with the instrument that I told you about. And if you see swelling, treat it with a small lancet or delicate pincers as much as needed. And if this is insufficient, take a glass vial and blow into the throat of the patient, and do so frequently. And if the patient's mouth turns green for all day, then fill up an earthenware cup with cold water, have them drink it through their mouth, and swallow it slowly; and as soon as the swelling feels the water, it subsides.
If it does not come out as we have said, then fumigate the patient with vinegar using the instrument mentioned in the eye fumigation; do this many times, for it will yield without tiring. The method of fumigation is that you take a pot filled with coal and cover it with a cloth pierced in the middle, and therein place the head of the instrument; then pour your fumigation and have the patient put their forehead to the mouth of the vessel, close their lips so smoke does not escape but enters through the nose; this sinus will yield now, and if it still does not come out, restart the fumigate repeatedly. The patient must endure thirst, and consume unsanitary foods and ale, but should not drink water; eventually, they will need to be relieved by this method of treatment.
The form of the instrument used to treat the sinus is similar to pincers bent for entering the throat; it resembles an apothecary's spoon and has a rough surface like limestone, so that whatever it takes in cannot become satiated. Here is its design:
The form of this instrument used to treat sinuses; it is similar to the throat resembles an apothecary's spoon and has a rough surface for enters like limestone, so whatever that takes in cannot satiated. Its design:
There are many kinds of abscesses, as remembrance comes to us from one and another in this book, and they are diverse by perforation and cutting; and it is in two ways of the same kind itself, and because it holds moisture. And the second way is for the heads or locations within the body. For abscesses on the head are different than those at the base, and abscesses on a limb bone are different than those that occur in joints, and each has its own judgment in work.
If to an abscess one must not perforate until it is fully healed according to its completion; and if of such that one must perforate when they are ripe, and do not die fully according to their completion, as with an abscess near joints. For when abscesses occur near jointamoign, and left alone until they become gangrenous around it, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint may be corrupted, causing contraction in that limb member. Or if the abscess is near the principal limb, and if you delay perforation until fully healed, it will harm the principal limb; or if near the base, one should perforate as soon as possible once dead; and do not perforate an abscess before digestion is completed, except for those near the base, which may become gangrenous throughout, form a fistula within, and cannot heal in great duration.
And anoint andres leu perforation ou ce ne puet leapeme est douces la apere les leaument lede, semblanz lee depite the apocre l'amon; et li a leue oralz nulte: un peu de cest lor euf. Eve asme si tu les pois que ce amputes d’apet en la perforation ne doit armet, est lair seiz, et aument s.
In cases where they bulge, according to that part of the body. And when abscesses are in place filled with decayed flesh, allow the puncture to remain until digestion is complete, as we have said. For if you pierce it prematurely, the poison spreads throughout its veins and fills it with copious filth; and occasionally they become hardened at their orifices. And for any abscess that protrudes according to the width of the body, as much as the member requires. It is necessary to treat small abscesse
For those without a head, as with superficial abscesses, it is necessary to puncture them directly; and if the abscesses are large and have formed a significant swelling, puncture it but not remove all of the swelling at once, but puncture one part; then leave the abscess until the next day, then do nothing further. Repeat this process gradually more and more each time, until the entire swelling is gone; especially if the patient is weak in virtue or a woman carrying children, or small infants, or elderly men growing frail. Because occasionally with the release of the abscess, it may cause the patient's death, so you should not risk it. Therefore exercise caution when treating this procedure and once you have located your abscess, cleanse the wound and check if the incision from the abscess is small; and if it is a simple sore, dress it with old linen or cotton; and if there are large abscesses with many openings, make sure to tie each one so that they come together; and if you have excised part of the skin around the abscess, fill it with old linen or cloth fibers without moisture, and bandage until the next day; then untie and apply ointment as long as it is healed.
s cont ce plet.
And it is necessary to know universally for the treatment of abscesses; now I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
Of pus-filled sores
Or of small abscesses that are like the backside of a female rabbit, and there are many such forms; some are fatty with moisture just like hairs; and others hardened on cutting, without any doubt when they pierce as arrows do. And the treatments for these wounds involve using all instruments called "entromissors," through which healing occurs afterwards, whatever it contains. If it contains moisture, then it drips down from above its length. And once the moisture is drained out, scrape without leaving any hair that holds the moisture, as it returns again if left alone; next dip a swab in Egyptian ointment if available; otherwise in water and soap, and place on the wound until the following day; then use this method continuously for each night. And afterward, resume the process with the cotton swabs, just as before, the second day, the third day, until you are sure it does not linger through the night; then apply healing ointment suitable to its need until fully healed. If there is a greasy pus, treat according to this manner and lengthwise; insert scrapers into all parts, and place your entire treatment regimen on the shirt or cloth where it lies; and if the arrowhead strikes again as I have told you afterward. And in the same way do for an abscess that is hardened like a knife, and cut out its lining, so as previously instructed.
And the tunnels of a pus-filled abscess and moist, it is easier, for they have little blood. And if any of these abscesses or heads do not have moisture, and from those come some that I healed at an old woman's head; and found the abscess hard like a stone, rough and scaly, and could not break open; and had anyone struck it, they would have made as good a wound as from a stone. In other abscesses coming or heads, where those come from children's heads and ear root bases, the opening should be done daily at the most convenient time for them to drain pus; and treat them as needed.
Of scrofulas (tuberculous swellings of lymeboards)
Many times these abscesses occur in the neck, and under the glands, and on the armpits, and some other place or body parts; and they are large, and intertwine with each other. Each scrofula, and each is properly within its own part, as if the head, as we have said; and the forms of these scrofuls. There are many. Some contain moisture, and some malicious who do not want to obey healthy. In the one that looks good condition at toucher, and is not ache on neck arteries, and does not red or veins nor conduit it too much; and not deep; then cut by above, so that should you have no nerves as needed, and neither in of painful, as some. So if needles, but do not pierce the same; and the blood be all sanz to remove is very little and let them not leave; and touch.
And if you open a vein or an artery and it does not allow you to work there, then apply a vitriol paste to the wound or certain powders that remain in the blood, and tighten the wound; let it heal as long as the abscess is soothed and softened, and begins to rot. And when the blood has stopped flowing, return to your task until completed; then follow your proper course if there are no small scrofulous sores, which you cleanse and cure. And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, do not cut out that scrofula from its root, but tie it off with a strong double thread, and let it hang without harm; then dress the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment.
And if you cut out the entire scrofula, then gather its two sides of the wound and hold them together until no excess remains due to its size. If it is necessary for you to open up to the root of it, draw out any pus as we have said before; those scrofulas that contain excess, pierce where they are most swollen; then treat with ointment and similar things so that whatever has been retained by corruption begins to rot; and when the ward is well cleansed, cure it with fragrant oil until it becomes healthy.
And if you need to apply as needed for heals, but pus infection or inflammation, then wash oil again. Et si lesenence so long and where has been bled ointment and corruption; and the tarnish and swelling becomes it offensive after s until is gone by asewisent when needed for as much worms the unctamit with salve until of, and heals then oil until.
The ancients spoke and wrote of throat surgery; but I have never seen such a thing in our land, and this is the record of their words.
For those with epiglottitis, it is necessary to make an incision in the throat called "epiglotte"; and one does not help by doing so because all blood vessels and the main vein of the ailing are affected where abscesses heat up in the mouth or in the throat or in two fists. When the disease is in the channel of the main vein, it is necessary to cope with the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
Therefore, when we wish to split the epiglottis, let us cut above three circles or four-one small slit across, between the two circles or through the quantity of the slit in the jawbone, not into the throat.
And if those eyes are close to the cutting of the epiglottis, there is no harm, and the vessels are long-lasting within.
And if the master is fearful, it must be extended with leather from the neck to the full extent, then cut away the flesh as much as possible until reaching the vein; and avoid blood vessels, if you see anything, and then cauterize the abscess, as we have said.
It is shown by the severing of the phlegmatic humor that jumps from its place and through the rupture in the vocal cord due to lack.
And leaves an open wound exposed a while.
And when the hour of doubt about strangulation has passed, bring together the two lips of the wound at its opening, and sew them with thread that adheres to tissue; then apply remedies which cause flesh to grow until it is sound again.
Until you completely clear out the throat, and the patient is judged close to death, and there's no remedy available. Then you should cut the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe through their mouth, and they breathe through the wound, thus preventing death.
And they command that the nostrils be left open until the effects of the disease have passed, which usually takes three or four days. :s and le estlzela car. If you see con t.
And I will tell you what I have seen. I saw a maiden received a knife and stuck it in her throat, cutting off part of the tongue.
Et I went called to cure him, and I found him just as lifeless.
I discovered the wound and found blood that had come from it, and clearly, it had not eaten vein or carried food other than throat fluid, and the wind came forth through the wound.
I hurried and sewed up the wound and healed it until it was cleaned.
t. The xtruer.
Thus I tell you, in treating the epiglottis there is no fear at all.
Of the large throat
These abscesses are called "throat hernia", and they are large abscesses the color of jet, and occur often in women;
to lesmplee them from so younazed le t.
The accident occurs in two ways: one seems like swelling of our flesh, and the other appears as an abscess that comes from our artery. And there is fear, and it does not become necessary to work with force unless in that which is small, and testing and seeking all the implicated. If you find it as with one of our flesh, and not attached to any vein, then cover (it), just like we bandage ourselves, and treat the entire headpiece, if there is any. And search thoroughly, and treat as it should be, until it is perfectly healed.
And thus we.
Many ways there are of us, and all the similarities I will tell you now.
And now let me explain all the differences between ours and their dislocation.
I say that it is fever and heat-stricken until the inflammation has passed, and the putrefaction is complete; then rests both fever and heat.
With ours there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a sore, which is its own sac and according to the color of the body, and begins like glasswort, and becomes swollen.
and there are two appearances or flaking, or wetness, with much of the colors as I have described in the classification.
It is necessary when you come to the treatment of ours that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments called "intermixtures," according to what their form will be or procedure, which is afterward.
And the manner of inquiring about abscesses in our body is that you grab or use more moisture where you find it in the abscess, and turn your two fingers slowly, as long as you know that the pus has felt its head, then when it's according to the size of the abscess.
Then extract the entorse, and be careful in doing so that there is no more force.
If moisture runs from the vein, then see what colour it has, do as I have said about other abscesses;
And if after the interposition there is no moisture, knowing it is fatty, then rub accordingly with a cross motion, and grasp as pinchers, and lightly scrape off each side, while preserving the coat where it lies that you treat it cleanly with vinegar from within.
And if you cannot make it clean, then cut into pieces so that nothing remains inside.
For if anything remains, it returns to us many times;
If it lingers a bit and the wound is grieved, apply some poultice of corrosive acid powders to the wound, bind the wound, and place soothing substances against abscesses, then treat with other remedies until healed.
If it is great, close the two edges of the wound and treat with what generates heat.
And if it is contrary or something else, haste and apply the powder of vitriol to it, leave for two days or three until the wound heals, then let it rest from bleeding; afterwards return to what was delayed earlier.
Look at the forms of entangled extremities, and there are three ways to manage them: large, medium, and small; and there are three quarters called "albaret", one which is called "breb", and there are again three methods: large, medium, and small for examining abscesses in the anus.
and are as needles used in enchantments, made of citrine or iron or silver, with yellow ones being the most effective, while those that are blackish-brown are best for investigating anal abscesses.
and there are three methods: large, medium, and small, depending on the amount of width in the openings.
The shapes of boils are of many similarities, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and those with two heads in three different ways.
And those with three heads and are in three different ways; and those with two heads but only one head at a time, and they too come in three varieties; all these must be treated as found.
The head of these that are cut is sharp, and some that do not just cut but scrape the skin, so as to avoid cutting the vein or nerve.
And of these dislocations are the alchemists placed in their proper position, so that the patient does not suffer at the onset of abscesses.
And there are three ways: large, small and how to see if you find.
And it is not used elsewhere but where there are legs, arms, thighs, elbows, and similar joints.
And never is used any instrument small, similar to scarifications of fistulas, according to this method, which stops bleeding:
And is les scespecez de fassaint, and formant of poignent; nus d'un est blesse en tient.
At no time do men's breasts swell when they begin to be corrupted, until they appear like women's breasts.
and remain ugly and swolebreast-like; and if it is to be treated by the following form of this line B. until G: then scrape the fat, and dress the wound with medicinal salve of larch, then join the two edges of the wound with stitches, and heal it until it is mended.
When the limb falls on its side and becomes numbed due to its size, as it often happens in women, causing pain in two ribs above, by means of two similar cuts. of which one is held to the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line B up to line G; Then scrape the skin between the two edges, and remove the fat, and prepare what we have mentioned of stitching and powders, and that which is necessary for the healing, until it becomes clean.
And if it is not sanitary, or the incision is not completely made because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood flow issues, then you must fill the wound with cotton cloth soaked in a corrosive ointment. And leave it to heal until the remainder and fat are consumed, then cleanse until sanitary.
Incisions in the elbows of abscesses.
These boils that arise from under the bones are hard scrofula cases containing moisture.
Those that contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line b to line g: And when all the bow that is in the abscess has been emptied, fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and apply healing ointment as much as needed for it to be healthy.
And if the abscesses resemble those of scrofula, cut as we have described for treating scrofulous sores, and if the wound opens up again, treat it with fire cautery as we have previously described.
From bleeding from the artery
When the vein is ruptured, and the skin over it swells up, this often leads to abscesses, as well as bleeding of the vein and abscesses.
And if the hernia is near it because of the artery, there are large abscesses within. And when you feel it in your knees, then you sense a strain; and when it's due to the vein, there are sudden disappearances of bruises.
ndroit It is necessary to remove the iron poultice, and those who are in shock must also be relieved of it, and for those with a swollen artery above the long skin layer.
It is necessary to remove the iron poultice, and those who are in shock must also be relieved of it, and for those with a swollen artery above the long skin layer. then work on the tonsils, and gently free the artery from bandages until it is revealed.
then insert a needle under it and puncture all the way to the opposite side, and constrict the artery with a double thread in two layers, as I have shown you in extracting the two arteries that are in the temples.
Then straighten the joint that is between the two ligaments of an interarticular so long as the blood flow continues to it, and let the abscess be drained.
Then treat the wound from a bowshot until the ligament heals. Then apply a suitable ointment to the area until it heals.
And if the abscess is too large for the vein, it is necessary to take hold of the abscess with your hand as much as you can grasp of its skin. Then draw out the arrow from beneath where you hold with your hand and pierce it, and make it have a double thread so that you can pull from the other side; Then bind the abscess as I've told you or tie it with one of the two threads by the armpits;
If you suspect that the child is not well, if you replace it with another needle at all, remove one of the threads from all the abscess and incise where the first needle was placed, then hold the threads in four lengths.
Then drain the abscess until all excess has gone, then cut away the swelling at its root and leave what remains attached.
Then place a cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then treat with bandages and poultices until it is healthy again.
From abscesses of veins
Also, as abscesses come in arteries and veins, they arise on the nerves when struck or from too much work, and similar things.
And this often happens with shoulders and elbangs where there are joints, and it is .i. grief abscesses, the color appears like that of a sick body, and in various forms causes pain.
the w they iste or:
And it is immobile in all parts, and does not move forward or backward, neither up nor down. The one with the joint should never be bound by iron, for there might be muscle contraction;
And he who is at the head or forehead creates a wound in the scalp. If the abscess is small, use forceps to hold it by its root;

From large hanging mouths Never occurs in other parts of the body but only there, and it is a disease called "fungus" due to its resemblance, with subtle roots and large heads; and within them are both small and very large ones.
and I saw a home that had two bellies that were more like fungi than anything else, with no differences, white in color, having fine roots, splitting openly, and containing moisture within.
the following them:d.ere. The dictionary is said it self.
If the skin over a swelling is wide, and be present with the fire cautery. For in cutting too often great blood loss occurs, and if it does not stop itself, then promptly use the cauterizing instrument.
And if you see the patient anxious and fearful of the incision with iron, take a well-made thread, and bind it to his arm as we have said, and leave it on for two days.
and then the restraint, and continue to keep the thread of linen on until it heals through it, and if there is no more pain; and if the roots are large, be careful with iron around his stomach as well, but you properly cover most of it.
Then cauterize so it does not reoccur; then treat the wound and ensure you do not cover the inflamed area that is of a sickly color, poor feeling, and lacking in vision.
For it is an advanced syphilis sore, and I shall come for the treatment of this gonorrhea hereafter.
When the foot becomes lame like that
If the appearance of a hernia comes from a wound or fissure on the face and is found in certain areas of the abdomen, as it occurs in other regions, or blood flows from veins or arteries according to what lies before, or swelling.
And if it is from the fissure of the face and by the hernia outlet, then its appearance resembles that of normal skin, feels light without pain, and has various openings. And if it is from the intestinal outlet, then it varies more, and when you press on its sides, they bulge, and then return, and sometimes it becomes tense, significantly enlarging at the opening of the bathroom and causing severe pain with hard work.
If it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and when you press it well with your hand, do not constrain too much; if it is for blood, then it opens by these signs of large and hard abscesses, and they are embedded according to a quantity.
And if it is for swelling, then it is sensitive to touching, and the treatment should be such that you observe whether its appearance suggests blood from an artery, vein, or swelling. If it is necessary to let the treatment remain. For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and vein.
And if the appearance is for the intestines or bowels, it is proper to instruct the patient to wash his hands, and they should be extended straight up, then tie a bandage all around the belly. Then command him to lie supine between your hands, Then go around the area that you have marked with all the liniment, Then extend the bandage over the abscess above all along its length.
Then work the bandage over the incision and apply your medicinal plasters, and close up the intestines. If you find it caught on the ligament, then dislocate it, and place the intestines back into their proper position within the abdomen.
If you find swelling, grasp the sinew, and cut away any excess tissue.
If the artery is against you or bleeds, and it swells greatly, then return to your work, take two needles, and tie two thread ends on them, and insert these needles where you made a cross when you performed incisions.
. When you find a wound that is subtle and piercing, then treat it as necessary, and heal the abscess as we have said.
When you find a wound that is subtle and piercing, then treat it as necessary, and heal the abscess as we have said. And extract any blood or pus that you find, then treat the wound as necessary, and bind it up.
On abscesses
by any tegne cht; and then prud; If all ests: bon; aie, the ou ce cest it isntust that? sjxception.
Et the operations, when in place or can be removed as we have said, are to purge the patient of black bile once; then make a bandage if there is apparent repletion, and prepare the site with an even level for the operation; then pour on your unguents or cancer oil, and cover all hair and bone parts without leaving anything behind; let it heal completely, and press firmly to extract blood onto your hand or something else, and if bleeding occurs contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize until the wound is closed; then perform another treatment until it is healthy.
Dropsy (edema) Eclites. Place your hands under the patient's armpits, and have the assistant press the abdomen towards the lower part of the belly, then take a spatula with pointed ends as follows: And it should be sharp at two points, but not so that it can reach the intestines when inserted.
Then check if dropsy has started towards the intestines: If necessary, make an incision above the elbow with three straight cuts from top to bottom; and if dropsy is due to liver disease, make the incisions on the left side of the bend with three cuts; and if it's a tumor, make them on the right side, ensuring that fluids do not flow towards a weak area where they lie.
Then cut through the skin with your instrument and tie it off, then hold your hand steady while scraping as much of the spatula between the skin and fat similar to peeling a nail or so; then puncture until you reach the eighth vein, this is where the blood gathers, and then drain it out using this instrument which has the following shape: And it's like a silver needle that's subtle, made of iron or brass, with one small hole in front; and on its side there are 3 holes; and on each side, 2 more holes, and another one at the bottom. The head is shaped as if a quill, and this is how authors carve a feather:
At the head above is the alveolus, so when there is expansion to the liquid, they descend onto the instrument; drain the majority or third part, for if you drain more than necessary at that time, by chance it may cause death in the patient due to resolution of their spirit from the weapon, where he vomits blood, or approaches death.
But drain according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the conditions of the patient's spirit mean, and his hairs; then touch the instrument and hold back the liquid, which is now retained by the opening that I have spoken about through a small pouch above it; then resume the procedure with the instrument on the following day, if you see the patient suffering from this.
Do this every day, and be careful not to touch it until some liquid remains but only a little bit of fluid. And if you doubt about the patient, and leave out too much fluid, then the cure of burial or hot sand, and by sweating excessively or bathing in sunlight, and being drunk; and the cure with drying medicines until he is sane again, and cauterize above the stomach and liver and spleen after extracting the liquid as I have said before.
From the blockage of the penis Never are children born who do not have any foreskin on the penis, or if it is small, or it does not exist in its proper place. If necessary, within a short time, let it be pierced with a very fine instrument according to this method: then insert a thin clamp made of lead and tie it thus for three or four days; when it needs to urinate, untie the opening, allow urine flow, and then reattach; sometimes there is no need because the urine that comes out does not close the passage. For those whose foreskin is small, they can be treated with the lead clamp as we have mentioned, and it will grow. Those who do not naturally have a foreskin in its proper place are circumcised because no child is born with the foreskin at the top of the penis; hence, they cannot urinate until their foreskin is lifted up; and they cannot impregnate because matter cannot reach the testicles, which is an unfortunate illness.
The manner of the procedure is such that the patient lies on their back with elevated head and legs like the body of a pen, so that the kidneys collect urine as they should; and watch for blood flow which often occurs, and if it happens, apply a ligature to stop bleeding, then treat the wound until healed.
Pustules on the genital area Many times these abscesses come in the genital area, and they have a displeasing appearance; there are both malignant and non-malignant ones; thus it is necessary that you pick them out with a fine needle, then cleanse and bandage all of them, afterwards apply cotton ball soaked in Egyptian ointment to the area until healed. If the gonorrhoea is ill-natured, of foul color and oozing pus, it must be treated with fire cautery. When you have cut it off, if the gonorrhoea is in the head of a testicle, and part within the hair and part outside, you must remove the gonorrhoea that is inside first; and when it is closed up, treat the external portion. For when you treat them together, it is not certain that the head of the testicle is pierced, and blackness and decay occur in its place and socket; therefore it is necessary to address all those parts that are blackened and corrupted, then on the plaque with honey and ground wheat made from pomegranate peels and leeks, and treat them with other remed cuisine until they are healed.
If the flow of blood persists, treat with lunar cautery in this manner: The cauterization assists in two ways together: for the flow of blood and corruption. And if the head of the testicle is corrupted and retracted, it must be that you tie or guide a plumb line to the testicle, and let urine flow from the patient; and when the hairs atop the testicle become white due to these conditions in uncircumcised men where it occurs as a wound or abscess, then it is necessary to scrape with an instrument heated to such extent that the ligatures are loosened and the head of the testicle freed from all parts.
The cthat it tichs le estis verge drench and ce les s testicle; siqu’et es. Lun la plur, il l’en lunette of the eie in toilet le choses de moient ansi que tu escorner et li almet the chieflye a n’al. Si qu’il estriestrieux de la lessei lune ce testicle; et ieue telle iust that il ne c si plues, puis ils est par s, and d testiset an le tein escorps itesque le verie of the chiern desile. 1, l’lura chief de la m eie le cervide li gist.
Of circumcision
Circumcision is not necessarily a continuation of other wounds; nevertheless, when we perform this work by our own will, especially in children, it is necessary that we make the best and easiest to heal work.
I say that the ancients did not mention the circumcision of their children, for they do not use it in their laws, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
For I have wanted the majority of masters and advisors who performed circumcision before one year old, and with strength, and at all times; there was a rule because it had two parts, and by chance a cover could be put over one part while leaving the other exposed.
So it is regained and the pain doubles, and in the healing which is half done, the tip of the limb is not assured; and in the trimming of the nail by chance it escapes from iron, and worms appear on the wound, and many times they arise thus there being no need for further healing and I have witnessed this.
In the healing process using force, throughout all parts of the wound I have found the goodness of experimentation, as forces trim evenly both above and below.
Because when you press your hand, trimming evenly throughout the wound; but ensure the thread is well straightened around the skin. The way with the first treatment should be such that it makes a child think if he understands, that you're just tying the thread around the shaft and then making him lie in all possible positions. Then you make it stand upright with your hands, and it regains strength in your hands or below your feet so the child does not see them or any strain; then put your hand on the rod and blow or shout, and pull it up until the head of the rod is straight; then cleanse well from the filth that has accumulated, then tie the joint firmly with a double thread, then tie below to another point; and secure with two knots at the second tied area near the pouchet and index finger, weaving between the two ties, then release your grip above hastily and straighten the head of the rod.
Then you make it stand upright with your hands, and it regains strength in your hands or below your feet so the child does not see them or any strain; then put your hand on the rod and blow or shout, and pull it up until the head of the rod is straight; then cleanse well from the filth that has accumulated, then tie the joint firmly with a double thread, then tie below to another point; and secure with two knots at the second tied area near the pouchet and index finger, weaving between the two ties, then release your grip above hastily and straighten the head of the rod. Then let the blood clot little by little, as it is a delicate matter; and apply powder above and below with a pouch sealed with a half egg cooked without salt mixed with rose water, beaten with good rosemary oil and fresh, and leave it until the next day, and treat with another treatment until it is healed.
The form of the strength in cleansing is this: both eyes should be kept and be sharp, and the eyelids are as equal as a comb.
The error of inflammeback occurs when the core within escapes from the incision; therefore, it is necessary that you extend it to your nail, so that the outer makes an abscess; and cover equally, and if you cannot hold by your nail, then with tweezers you take hold of it, and then cover.
And if they transgress three days, and that which is from the shaft is swollen, let it be until the abscess is soothed; gently scrape off, cover as you move, and protect the area near the shaft, doing no harm at all.
Therefore, treat the sudden wound of powder we have discussed in treating powders, and if it is covered too much, and it goes beyond, causing no harm; treat as we have said until it is healed.
Retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to obstruction by stones, frozen blood, bowel, or similar things, as we have mentioned in the section.
And if the urine is not drained out, and you see that the retention is due to a stone lodged in the urethra or at the neck of the bladaderamaintenance. The patient should be bent over on their knees; place their feet on the back and stretch their belly upward from behind, and restrict their waist as much as they can; then constrain the neck of the bladder to express the stone above, so that urine drains out.
* (a the text by .
The manner of urine discharge is to take a double thread and tie it with a small piece of wool or cotton at its end, then insert the chief into the syringe. Trim any excess wool and fit it snugly up to the top of the syringe; afterwards grease the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a seat, and use oil soaked in urine, olive oil, and water to lubricate the bladder and penis.
Then gently insert the syringe into the penis, reaching as far as the base of the penis, then wrap the penis around with its sheath; then insert the saturated end to the bladader and let the patient feel it filling up until empty, because this is not done in accordance with this order due to the direction it goes being twisted; gradually remove thread by a little piece at a time, allowing urine to follow, then extract the remaining fluid.
And restart with the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and let the patient be relieved of discomfort.
of bladder diseases
When scrapes or blood flow into the bladder, with putrefaction present, and you see to distill waters and medicines, make use of all the instrument called "Clepsydra," which is as follows:
It is closed and has .iii. flaps: two on one side and one on the other as you see fit; and the opening above which the medicine channels are cut properly to allow for urine flow without addition, so that we can drain moisture if necessary, and insert as required.
s. If you (et, l'ko; t, but n:
This is the form of the subtle suppository used to treat the bladder: here it is.
And it is made of silver or copper, and the head is higher; from there the threads come out through one ear; then take an animal bladder (of a sheep) and insert the moisture intended for clitorization. Then tie the two sides formed by a good double thread, heat the mixture over fire; then place the top of the suppository into the rod, then hold your hand on the bladeroid as soon as all the moisture is introduced to it until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
And if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle in it, then pierce it roundly all over; then insert a strong thread through these holes, then join the circle as one would assemble leather, and put inside what you intend to use oil and moisture and water, and bind it with the instrument; and do so as if you had made from the bladder, press with your hand until the moisture reaches the vessel.
Of the stone
We have discussed in the division the methods of stone extraction and together with medicines; and we've explained the difference between stones incited by rain, all signs, and where one must work on cutting size; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you openly and briefly.
I say that stones incited by the bladwalnuts are more common in children and it's a sign that the water flow of the bladder resembles to clear urine due to its subtlety; and there is also sand, and roughness the male experiences burning sensation in his penis, and he often empties it, then strains; and with these voiding episodes, they undermine their foundations; and children's treatment is relatively light until they are 4 years old, but it becomes very difficult in elderly people, being moderate for those who fall between young adulthood and middle age; and the cure is easier for those with large stones compared to those with small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient by enema for evacuating all feces that are in the intestines. For they often cause an obstruction.
Then take the patient by the thighs and stand them upright, tilting downwards until the bladder descends to the front of the pubic area, sometimes even high up. Next, make the patient sit between your hands arranged accordingly, with their hands below their thighs so that the bladeback
And if you feel the bladder in that space, hurry to cut it above. If it does not come out completely when touched all over, grease your left index finger with oil from your hand and push into the base of the bladeroffspring or middle toe if the patient is young; then press into its foundation, feel for the bladder, and once you sense it on your finger, guide it to the neck of the bladder; then squeeze above your finger, pressing in any direction where you want to cut.
And instructs the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and tells him to stretch out with his right hand the tendons at the top, and remove the skin that is below the tendons in the area where the incision is made; then he inserts the cauterizing spatula fully:
And make between those who are between the tendons and the foundation, neither too much nor too little on the left side of the groin; then be straight above the stone, and turn your toes inwards or outwards towards the heel, and widen it so that if wide enough at the front but narrow inside according to the quantity of the stone, not too large:
And occasionally press the foot that is at or near the heel so it bends easily without effort; and know that there may be stones with corners, and edges: if they are loose to come out; and some parts like a gland, round, whose exit is easy. :
If the shoulder has edges and borders, make the incision larger; if it does not open, you must widen the gap with pincers that are like a file at the head, to extract the stone so it cannot escape; or place over the bone an instrument shaped subtly curved at the top; and if you cannot manage this way, make a small hole in the skin, then insert the tube of vitriol.
If there are multiple stones, first extract the largest from the bladder neck, then below it, then the midpiece, and the small ones afterward if there are more. And if they are very large, let them be sawn, making a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: death or urine leaks through where suturing is not possible; however, strive with milking or using pincangs, until you extract it in pieces.
And once you have completed your work, cover the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and tie it up, then place a cloth soaked in oil and wine or oil and rosewater and cold water to cool any inflamed abscess; then bandage the patient on his neck, without loosening the ligature until the third day.
And when you reset it, the place is greatly soothed by oil and water, then treat with the final dafinic ointment and basilic ointment until healed.
And if abscesses and erosions come into the wound, and blood congeals in the bladder causing urine retention, which is known to flow without a stream with urine: so apply your finger in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, the bladnary will corrode, and the kidneys may be affected.
then cleanse the wound with water and salt and vinegar, and aid in all ways you know how until healed; it is proper that for all arrows you treat, you bind the two thighs together, and apply medicines on the site of injury.
If the stone is small and it is led from the gland, and inserted thusly, preventing urine from issuing; for treating as I have described above, you must dilate multiple times with this treatment method. I have experienced this thusly.
Take an iron stake in the shape described and form it at three angled points into one piece of wood.
Then take a wire and wrap it around the gland near the stone so that it cannot reach back into the bladaturdearcheerly, until it reaches the stone. Turn the stake in your hand against the stone slowly, as much as you can pierce the stone from the other side; urine will come out soon after, then press your hand above what remains of the stone that is inside the gland. It is immediately broken apart, and comes out forcefully with the urine, relieving the patient.
If you are unable to do this due to any obstacle, take a thread under the stone and another over it, then make the rod touch at the point between the two threads, then extract it forcefully, loosen the ligature, cleanse the congealed blood in the wound; and care for it until it is healed.
In women's stones
There are times when stones occur in women, and if it happens frequently, then the treatment is difficult for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman may be a virgin; and another is that one cannot find a woman who knows well enough to undress before mirrors, especially if she is chaste.
And the third way is such that sometimes one cannot find a woman well skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone from the woman's womb is more embedded than the man's, so it requires making a deeper incision with great caution due to fear.
And if it is necessary to remove this, you must choose a very skilled midwife and do so quickly, and if you cannot find one, then there should be a wise and subtle doctor present who knows something about women's health or a woman knowledgeable in part of the art, and he commands her to perform the stone removal as instructed.
And you must look very closely to see if the woman is a virgin: then she should push her hips or fundament and search for the stone; and if she finds it, she should hold it down from its place, and recommend that she insert her hips or clench her left hand over the bladder.
If she is outwardly bent, it is necessary to move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder upwards until it reaches the root of the thigh; then cut around the bone at the root of the thigh opposite the hollow of the knee where it becomes disjointed, and feels the bone in that area; do not move its head above or below the bone, but let the flesh heal first.
Then insert the rod into the thigh; if you feel the bone and cannot easily remove it while adjusting the wound, know that there are many ways to deal with bones: they can be small or large, sharp or blunt, long or round, with ridges; understand these types for knowing how to address them.
And if the bone does not yield, then apply broiled vitriol at that spot and leave it for an hour until it is numb; then return to your work, until the bone feels solid, and take the tinctures I have told you about in the extraction of the bone from dogs to help you with your task.
If the blood does not stop, and it is from an artery that has been severed, apply powder to the area and tighten bandages and bindings, without attempting again, leave the wound alone unless the patient dies by chance, then treat the wound.
And when the heat of blood is calmed and the limb restores, return to your work as long as the bone remains strong.
In case of an inguinal hernia:
Refreshing is nothing but a collection of moisture or fat, which lies below the surface of the joints that contain the vein; and it's called "fascitis," and never properly in the tissue of the vein, as one might think it to be another type. And it's the leather between the white fascitis we have mentioned; and this does not occur at all.
The generation of this refreshing is due to weakness in the joints, and it spreads that substance.
It never comes from impact on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: sometimes it appears pale like jaundice, or without redness, black, or very white, and this happens more often.
These are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is as we have described, white and pus-filled, then the abscesses are long and thin like an egg's shape, and they do not open at the head, because they are entirely moistened.
And if it is moist in the proper cloth, then the abscesses are long and thin with a part of an egg, and for this reason one thinks it's another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the head and the white pus, then it smells quite good; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, apply your entire finger there, from which its shape can be seen beforehand. According to what follows after the intermission, judge as it is within.
According to what follows after the intermission, judge as it is within. And when we treat with iron, it is necessary for the patient to be as healthy as possible and well-nourished in body; then let him lie on his back, on something slightly raised, and place a lot of cloths underneath him.
then have the patient lie on his left side, and command the assistant that he sits to the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the groin area;
. If youre
Then puncture the armpit fully with water through a large hole and drain all the liquid, then place the ligatures, and extend the skin upwards; do not touch the heart of the ribs, but only the skin. Sever it completely or in pieces as evenly as possible from its subtle edge, ensuring you cut it securely; otherwise, fluid will return.
And if the vein bursts during your work, when you have completed the task of the armpit; then join the two parts of the ribcage with a stitch, and treat it as other wounds until they are healed.
And if you find the vein to be corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you tie up the vessels that are dilated, suspecting blood loss; then cut off the rib at all of its suspensory attachments, and drain the vein, and treat as we have said.
When the bone is joined in two parts together, recognize that these are two branches; if you have set one part like the first equally, then drain any blood and apply a linen soaked in oil to the wound.
and place another bandage soaked in wine and oil over it, and put on two cloths, then cover with doubled layers of fabric, tying them together according to this method.
Then take two more cloths and cut them with ragged fabric according to this pattern, sewing them together at the waistband of the breeches. One piece should go from underfoot up to the back, while the other goes around the arm's crook. The third piece covers both forearms, all tied securely in a loop inside the braies.
Et never is this branch of fire-cautery used in place of iron needle, and you must take a subtle cauterizing tool called cultellary, and cover the leather pouches, and heat them as we have said, so that the white syphilitic fluid contained within becomes uncovered;
If you take the cautery according to this method, and puncture the white syphilitic sore with its nodes, and apply the heat from this subtle cautery.
And cover it in all ways you can, until everything is scraped off; and ensure the flame does not touch the wool. Know that this work is more healing; and keep an eye on the blood flow from incision, and be cautious to prevent any bleeding while cutting.
If any contrary thing occurs, such as an abscess or blood flow or other matter, treat that which causes the contrariness, according to what has been previously mentioned.
And if the sick person is fearful and does not want to wait for this procedure due to its horrific nature, perform a perforation as I have instructed you, but only when you are well convinced by the meanings we have stated that it is necessary.
If the patient is seated on a raised seat; then make an incision in the area below and across the entire swelling, placing the perforation as long as possible along the body, and leave large openings so that all fluids may flow freely.
Then place cotton over the wound, bind it, and allow for the remaining moisture to be absorbed; then treat until the wound is healed.
If the gauze bandage does not allow moisture to drain from the wound's opening, it is necessary to insert a straw or instrument used in treating urinary issues as described earlier; and slightly enlarge the wound so that moisture can return, typically within 40-50 days. When assembled again as before, this will pass over time for the patient's wellbeing.
For abscesses in haemorrhoidal tissues
In this part of the treatise on this branch there are various conditions causing fear in many, which I believe should be left untouched.
and I will tell you about the treatment and nature of an abscess.
Therefore, I say that many abscesses occur in the body, especially in joints; this happens quite often.
le t their ciles they dont, so that s thatch er: knottad f.
The color of the abscess corresponds to the color of the body's flesh; and there is no pain, and it is a serious abscess.
And sometimes it is a frightening and painful abscess with an ominous color, and does not come from our arteries or vein inflammation:
tostrange: And it is not necessary for you to touch it.
The one who is afflicted with venereal disease is known for their condition in the expression of being touched by the fingers on the joints.
and can well perform circumcision upon this sign, as well as upon other bodily marks or stigmas; And it is that you cut the head of the clavicle, then raise the joint above, and tie off the vein white band, and free the suspended part from all around the limb.
If the joint is already settled with these scars, then it is necessary that you treat the joint, and cut.
And if it is hard on the vein or inside that which is in the vessels, it is necessary to release all of this vessel, and cut roundly.
If the birth of the humerus is where it lies behind, one must completely sever and extract the nerve, as we have said.
And when your works are completed, you dress the wound with cloth soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other remedeby until it is healed.
For abscesses caused by gout
This is an encapsulated abscess surrounded by wrapping similar to a boil, with the softening of pus. And if the patient moves suddenly causing pain when they go about.
and the treatment of this illness is as dangerous as the one before it in terms of fear.
for a; and other the te t c le bien:
It is necessary that you have the patient sit on a raised seat, then apply the supporting strap over their shoulders and onto your own hips. To all the bandage that is close to the thigh, and then wrap it around his masters' fingers, and extend them fully.
Then cut a slit in the spatula with a sharp blade across where all the vessels are, leaving it bare until they are exposed.
by ue t; That's s to; Then, which c and if the vost oue, but neither lawme.
Then you insert a needle where it is required, using a piece of double thread, and tie it at the first spot where the blood flows, then securely bind to the opposite end. Then wrap with bandages straight, according to the length of the body, and treat any corrupted sores;
Then heal the wound as you would other boils, ensuring that none of the vessels bleed or continue to do so in any part of the limb.
the lu 1. If the bone loses its nourishment due to cutting tendons, they become dry and cannot be healed.
From the secretion of the snake. The secretion of the disease is caused by sore infection or lesions.
This procedure involves either the sacrum or its extension, and come from these two methods of many causes: by impact, by jump, by shouting, by lifting a heavy burden, and similar things.
And the signs when it's an extension of the sacrum occur gradually and over long periods, not suddenly. The abscesses are equal up to the front because the sacrum presses on the intestines.
And the signs are when it is from the section of the sphincter, which causes sudden pain at first and various abscesses appearing near the skin, due to issues with the intestine and the body part affected by the sphincter dysfunction.
And it never descends the bile with the intestine, and is retained inside, causing great pain for the patient, especially when pressed.
And in these treatments of iron that cause fear, one must be rid of them.
And the manner of treatment is to command the patient to relocate the intestine into its place within the wound if it can be pushed back in. Then support his neck between your hands and lift the thighs.
then iste les de son li is not that. Then insert into the ribs of the waist hooked ones as needed to open the wound, and they should be such that the bones allow for passage.
Then scrape off the fascia that is below the skin of the calf, as long as the white fascia remains exposed on all sides.
Then insert your index finger into the area where it supports the calf, between the white fascia that is below the skin of the shin and between the second fascia.
the b (t. What t small s; and that cgeau ce conttlaze it by. The And commands the minister to extend the elbow upward, and loosen what is behind the joint.
The morsure sus les pierre perforations on the mouth is white with holes and if thou dost not put anything.
Then take a needle with a thick thread made of nine wires, and insert it into the rear part near the sacrum, which is after the tailbone; then cut the sinews that are seen from the threads until there are four threads remaining. Then join them one on top of the other in a cross shape, and bind the sacrum, which we have said is above the tailbone, with two strong ligatures. Then wrap the sinews with threads and tie them firmly with two parts, so that no vessels that supply blood cannot enter into you, causing an abscess. And then apply the ligature according to the first joint long two fingers wide; and after these two ligatures leave the sack which is below the head of the knee, as large as a thumb.
and afterwards the other according to its roundness that it carries; then cut into the part which is below the skin of the knee so that it fits snugly, and the bowl, as we have said before.
then prepare lin thread in oil, and apply to wounds, and fasten the ligature that we have mentioned. And at no time are the facial hairs cauterized as we have said, after incision, due to fear of blood flow.
For this happens many times, and leave the bandage until it changes by itself; and if it is slow to dry, raise with warm water as we have said, until it dries.
then care for the wound of another cure, until it is perfectly healed.
et les. And m the l's:
In this treatment, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure with iron.
And the ancients said it is done as if joining the joints like a hinge, after making a cut near the bone lightly on both sides.
Then open the cut, and treat the abscess from which it works, until the joints bleed; and heal as we have said, until it is sound again.
in line: ould. The same the answer: with it and they do not said them t (doze d.
And if it remains too long at this point, it creates a wound or hernia until the intestines protrude.
And this occurs due to the extension of hernia at the edges, as we have said, because it is extended and then softened and inflated both outwardly and opened.
And the treatment is through fire cauterization, as we have previously stated; and it is never treated with iron in this manner.
And it is that the patient lies on their back between your hands, then bandage the wound with a pad inflated to the size of three eggs;
and then extract the sphincter which is outside the skin near it, then take the probe and place it on the wound next to the sphincter.
and press at the front of the belly, then cut the two openings near the sphincter on either side of the probe's tip, and cut both.
Then extract the skull from the neck, and cover nothing over the sac or extend any other thing, as I have shown you in the treatment of the bandage for intestines.
Then proceed with wound care. And when you bind the threads, if it becomes infected and treat the wound until it is healed.
The sac is restricted, and has no appearance in the route, and the fire cautery becomes loose at this place, and closer to health.
From the softening of the leather thongs
Many times the leather of the thongs is softened in certain people because the wheels that are within them become softened and sweat; and when one wishes to cleanse it, one makes the patient lie on their back with the coat beneath them, and cuts off the softened leather from the natural skin; then join the two edges into a seam, and as you see first remove the excess softened leather in three or four firm stitches; then clip between the stitches, and cure it as other wounds until it is healthy again, and let him sweat.
From the breaking of
Dislocation is mentioned in our law and I would prefer not to discuss it in this book; however, there are two reasons why it's necessary: one is so that the physician can respond with treatment when asked, and the other because we often need the castration of certain animals to assist us, such as goats, sheep, rabbits, and others. Therefore, I say that dislocation is done in two ways: by attraction or by incision. In the method where we do it by attraction, make the animal sit in warm water until its testicles are softened and swolamo
Hermaphroditism is a condition present within our discussions; yet I choose to exclude its comprehensive elaboration from this text. Nonetheless, two imperatives necessitate its mention: the first being for physician's prepared response upon inquiry regarding treatment and the second deriving from frequent requirements of animal castrations which serve in aiding us - including but not limited to goats, sheep, rabbits, etc. Consequently, it is stated that dislocation procedures are executed via dual methodologies: attraction or incision. Under the attraction technique protocol, immerse the creature within heated aqua until testicular softening and tumescence occur; subsequently apply pressure with your left hand to ensure realignment until sensation returns to baseline post-intervention.
.ijung femmen: the arse est d :h bien sizest a l’opercuit. The les mimesi toi, maistres-lue ce que maniere avons. Dilimnus des ame et ; li chieres qui cuis pricked; ands de cess (li coit de est une l'exerc:
From strain or tension
Tension is a swelling close to the natural part and it is too unsightly; and some women have as much of it as one hand, and that's the cause. It must be dealt with by gently pressing down on the excess tension in your hands or joints, without applying pressure directly from above, so as not to trigger bleeding, then treating any other injuries until they are healed; and if there is another swelling at the base of a tooth, and it's filled with pus, and perhaps burst suddenly, and resembles an ulcer, and because of this they called in ancient times "ulcerous disease". If it needs to be pressed down on, do so as we have said for tension, and treat until it is healed.
Erratic stones are those that move or fall from their place without apparent cause; they can bring misfortune or illness according to the beliefs of some people at the time this text was written.
If ectopic is when the nature of woman's body does not penetrate fully, or her passage is small; and it is innate by birth, or incidental due to illness that has come upon her; or it occurs through close contact, or by a subtle leech or insect, and forms completely within the uterus, or in the groin, or elsewhere, or wherever it may be; and prevents conception, pregnancy, and possibly bearing children. Knowledge of this is gained by observation of her menstrual cycle. If there are signs of bleeding nearby, approach with your two fingers or thumbs. If it is due to a subtle leech, and it appears in the two-week period, hurry, and find them like so: place your index and middle fingers together, and the woman should lie on her back with legs spread; then extend both fingers fully until the subtle leech emerges, and stop at the site of bleeding. Then take wool, and boil it in oil, and apply to the area, gently massaging each day so that they cannot unite. And if the leech is hard and abundant, then you must perform a procedure similar to fumigation with myrtle leaves. If bleeding occurs due to childbirth, support at the vulva and provide care; and use blood-fortifying medicines such as dragon's blood, incense, in combination with frankincense in abundance; then prepare a wide plank so that the wound cannot close; continue this process for an extended period, and apply a linen bandage. Then proceed to other treatments until healed. And when bleeding occurs from the vagina due to childbirth, it should be treated according to these instructions unless there are advanced abscesses. For with infected abscesses in the vulva, one must not touch them at all.
Here comes the translation of the text:
Morning sickness is onset of veins which are not customary, and when morning sicknss becomes old it turns to ulcers; and we have already discussed in the division their appearances, signs, and symptoms, and now I will mention those that respond to cure. I say that hemorrhoids and ulcers, if they are fully within the rectum and do not appear on touching, can only be healed with iron. Those at the mouth of the rectum can be felt, and thus can be cured. Therefore it is necessary that you place the woman in a cold house, then extend the hemorrhoids with forceps, and pull them out from their roots; and apply powder on medicines that restrain blood, such as dragon's blood resin and incense, among other things; then put her feet into boiling water for an hour, then place in cold water. If there is bleeding, it comes with a decoction of sumac bark, pomegranate rinds, hawthorn berries, and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix with honey and oil to form a paste, and make a linen poultice on her back. If this is effective, it's good; if not, apply bladder-like veinous pouches on the back and near the genitals without ironing; then take flax, and milk into juice of plantain or goosefoot with wine, and make poultices at the site. And when the abscess is healed, use ointment until it is healthy again; and those called "albatros" are red, have a rough surface like an ulcer, so cover as I mentioned before for hemorrhoids; then cure until it is healthy again.
Abscesses of the rectum
sonttera andhe (sse:t;le. Chest:ridoze saura. What. Anderaise the mainezrelemforsme Qustantv;sso t orstrie
Of childbirth
The first skill in childbirth is for her to know the natural figure of childbearing and the signs when you see a woman rush to labor, wanting to smell urine: then hurry that the baby comes forth; thus it's known that such childbearings are according to the natural figure, and there will be an issue from under her head, with twin birth alongside; and when you see these signs, one must gently press her belly so that the baby is born quickly; for as soon as he emerges from under her head, there will also be a twin, and the brain's superfluities are well expelled through good cleansing; but this which comes otherwise does not come naturally. For it sometimes occurs upon its feet, and powerfully the body or head, with hands that come on her belly or soot, and is turned by chance about her neck, and in other ugly figures; therefore skillful at childbirth must be clever and subtle in these matters, and free from error and deceit, and I will show you all the forms as to how one should assist.
If the baby comes out from under her head naturally and the woman labors vigorpertly, and the vitality of the child is weak, then make her sit on a stool or holders carry her; and let nature's oil or fenugreek be cooked, and then put the midwife between his thumbs the small spatula in this form: And split the second metacarpal as far as the moisture that is on its way; and rub the woman's abdomen until the baby descends, and if it does not descend, one must enema the woman with a muscatel solution of fenugreek mixed with oil from sesame; then apply pressure and induce vomiting for an hour: now expel the baby. And if both hands come out forcefully, they should be gently pushed back in gradually; and if they cannot re-enter, place the woman on a stool, lift her feet upwards; then stand the stool on the ground, keep the woman from straining during standing; and if the baby'cuedn't enter, and the baby has died, cut the hands at the earlier incision made in front, extract the child, and reset it evenly.
From the exit of the child through its feet When the baby is born on his feet, one must place it upside down. And then turn slightly and slightly more until they are equal;
Then pinch a small piece and extend it slightly and gradually.
Can it jump up to the knees if commanded, and the condition causes sneezing; If it jumps out, if God wills.
And if it does not jump as we have said, but turns a little at a time, until it is in its natural position. For then it will be slightly.
a me: And apply this oil with its essence inside to her womanly parts, and avoid anything contrary. Then have her sit in warm water up to under the ribs;
And when she is swollen below, give her a ball of myrrh wax and place it there, leaving it for an hour; Then make it sit on a chair, then induce sneezing and strain its mouth and nose, and gently press the belly, for now the child urinates. From the release of the child at his knees When the child comes to this form, then the bailiff puts his hands here and there.  (This refers to a medieval practice where a judge or other official would touch parts of the body suspected of harboring disease)
: s, so much est m s n the cortes a se t It requires skillfully bringing back the hand: If it cannot be brought back, lift up the woman and go.
If she cannot walk, make her lie on a bed with legs bent at the knees:
is not m ne bon it should be that don’s, but soign.
If it does not give birth, make her sit on a chair, then study how to reset the hand. And position the child according to its natural shape, and make it sneeze, and command that it suckle until the baby has grown strong.
After childbirth on its neck, let its hands spread out and turn its face towards the mother's back. by:
When it is evened out, place the mud-like substance of wax and oil as we have said, then instruct it to move little by little.
And once you have done that, if the patient sits on a chair and he commands it to swallow; and the patient then sneezeblows. In this same manner, perform every secondary incision
In this same manner, perform every secondary incision When this comes in this manner for secondary incision, perform the secondary incision at your fingernail, until the moisture is drained.
And if a child falls on his face and neck, so that the cup of the skull is not supported, he will die.
Then place the child within, making sure you've positioned him correctly, and instruct the woman not to move at all.
ça et les enfants; (t; That he la Galls often arise many times, and never in one occurrence there are three or four; this is not a strange thing, and it seldom happens. Two things are strange and do not live, if rarely known.
I know that they multiply, and are destroyed by the flea which drives them away, which is bound to feces.

And if they arise quickly, follow the treatment as we have said, and be subtle in your skill, and do swiftly and lightly what is needed. Do so to keep them moving towards health. Moreover, many children.
Moreover, many children. ; and to (and;t the the comm; this.
And it is necessary for the barber to know all this, as sometimes similar things happen. The instruction in French says: "Do as it should according to this." This seems like a directive for someone to follow certain guidelines or instructions that are not specified here. Therefore, without additional context, we cannot provide a solution. Could you please clarify what specific actions or decisions are expected based on the given phrase?
by m and its brock�man Cognbt but en ga <brwalt. xt (pr:li; If not-ha et so prirent, puis que marche;t se et t
When treating a woman who has lost her child or is pregnant, as I have described in the section on divisions, and if there is no flowing blood, and you are compelled to use manual therapy. If it becomes necessary that you ascertain whether the woman is in good health and has no injury or fear of death;
If it is fitting that the woman be sound on her back, with her head tilted downward, and legs raised;
es. The ungr??
Then rub the mouth of the dislocated arm with oil from almonds mixed with musk and fenugreek seeds, then anoint the patient's hands with these oils and mixtures. Then gently reset the dislocated arm, then wrap it with bandages or cloth as needed.
And be careful if the child is prematurely born that they do not descend onto their head. ; don's ; Jara.
And if there is dislocation on the feet, where it pierces or pricks and at middle ribs.
And it is proper to wash the onion with his right hand, place the pestle between the thumbs of his left hand, and gently put all his hand against it, and insert the onion in any of these ways we have said, until it empties.
Then position it against another joint where you require to extract, so that the extractions are equal.
And then extend evenly by moving from one side to the other in order for them to move outward, and let the joints be even so they can hold their position, as per the shape.
that est a way heal: the other et so that the le combte t.
And if none remain there, position this cuff higher or farther upward, and fold it as much as necessary until it slips off completely.
And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be brought back by gripping, If it becomes necessary, wrap a cloth over it completely so that it is covered entirely.
Then apply the bandage at the joint of the sole or heel and so it is necessary to do likewise with the other hand, and for both feet.
And if the child's head is large and troublesome at birth, or has an open skull (fontanelle), igne by. When you place it on the instrument called "almidach," which shapes with tools or paste that follows this;
and in the same way, make it so that the child has a large natural size. and then treat the bones with tongs,
can they should'fait with variouse on their:n:  the bole (prud :0s.
And if it cannot escape, cut it by parts as you move.
And if it is swollen in the abdomen or outside of the ribs, one must pierce until the fluid drains out.
And healing to put the leu l'e: car it in sa peis s’est tres; and they are the fie les poignes.
If it is painful in the belly or breast, one must wind it with a cloth wrapped around the hand; and if it be dislocated from its place by any movement of his body which he makes, it should return to its position. And if it affects the belly or breast until the moisture that is there has dried up.
Then c le remet, est placed thatt yet other otherwise, it to the same, as much orem soi; s are ou the place de the is, they reset. And tas, and so not dose, its les places to the la moiture of li place d’autre, et youre thet and beet les, then the a. If he thrusts his hand far up to the head of the arm, and pulls it all the way to the armpit. Then he pushes a pincers or two into it, and moves them back and forth.
and if the head of the arm is pulled back due to a hot abscess that has arisen within it, then he should not try to treat it. ous for s c And the inflamed areas are soothed and made moist with water.
And if the child is on their back, and you can place them evenly, arrange as we have said in the living child.
And if there is no power to do so, then the flesh should be cut into pieces, leaving nothing of the spine intact.
And after you have done this, if it is arranged as we have said with abscesses that come in the bones;
. And so and the
And I saw a woman with child who had one dead child inside her womb, then conceived another on top of it, and expelled the other as dead. After many years, an abscess came in her leg, swelling until it burst, and began causing great pain.
I was called to treat them, but for long time, and could not heal the wound.
. Po c� ; I have told you much, for it is such that belly has no bone.
If I thought it was bones of a dead child.
I desired the wound, and in doing so touched his bone, until the woman was at her best point; 
And I have not recorded this chapter for the reason that when masters encounter something strange, they know how to apply treatment.
To return the shoulder to its place
Next comes the form of pressure, where one finds the books; and at two turns there are two keys to the two locks. line tre:m fornge in.
And may his mouth be like a staff, two fingers wide, with tree margins one finger, and long half an inch. And between the two joints there should be two hinge supports of the same staff, firm in both, half an inch long or slightly more.
And these two hinges are attached to the mouth of the staff for opening when one turns both horns.
ctirme tues by le t c the f l’tf: car u Brot: And it is of two shoulders with two dislocations, as you see, one inch long and two inches wide;
And when you see opening the sinews with all instruments, make her sit on one bed, with arms and legs extended; Then place the two dislocations side by side on the sinews, and hold the head of the instrument between her thighs. Then work your hand with all the instruments, as you did with the pliers evenly, according to the amount you see open the mouth of the muscle, until the patient makes what it wants.
This instrument is all mounted in front, and there are multiple kinds of them; and the more you have prepared the mirrors, the faster the work can be done, and higher at home for their quantity.
Do not disregard an instrument that you have not prepared, because its necessity is not excusable.
When the testicle is retained during childbirth, one must instruct the patient to grasp his penis and then perform an abdominal incision, and restrain both hands on his mouth and nose. If it falls through that, it's alright.
If that doesn't work, take a pot and make a lid or cover, and put in herbs that could open the mouth of the wound such as chamomile, rue, anise, lavender, henbane, and fennel.
All these herbs, whether any or some of them, boiled or placed in water over fire; then put a pestle or lid on the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the mortar.
and let them breathe until the steam comes out from the mortar; then make it sneeze, as we have said. If his eyes are watery, quickly dry them. ; they.
And he who wants to perform the reduction; and when it has been found, gently pull and extend it gradually so that the muscles do not contract during extraction. However, one must move it slightly to the right and left, and then pull; it will come back into place and dislocate again.
And if the bone of the muscle is protruding, we have said to treat by inducing sneezing and smoking herbs.
vman, so that c the ome:
But it is necessary to tie the one at the mouth of the arrow, to the thigh of the woman, then enema with ointment of four pharmacists.
If you loosen and reset it again, but it comes loose once more; however, if it smells bad in the stomach and head when released, it causes nausea to the patient.
If it is necessary, then perfumed smoke should be done on this: none of the old ones have tested smoking with parsley and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument with which one smokes the woman for contraception, namely is this:
And it appears to be similar to a hawk, and one places its sharp end in the region, with wide eyes near fire.
and it is done by smoking over coals, and the lice until they are consumed, then repeat another one.
; sguir se faire la: heum, so that pratique. 1, et p2t; If the e te le tiguilt comme en les m togement by c. Do not the same the ne and thera ben que est they.
Many children are born who do not have true sensation at all, but whose roots are subtle threads. Therefore it is appropriate for the healer to sense that subtle root at its right place and not just from the membrane's surface, and ensure the placement so they do not touch.
Then apply a linen cloth in wine and oil to it, then treat with anointment until it is cleaned.
at that you; <uence in the same If an combsul bye; t neir et m:
At no time does this swelling of wound or abscess occur; if it is the case with suturing: treat them as we have said in the chapter on plaits.
From the fistula at the base Fistulas that come from below the foundation are inflamed and grow larger as they develop near the foundation; or in a space of two-thirds parts,
If there is an abscess or more than one; and when that swelling is old, act upon it, and use especially cold wet or subtle bandages.
And these abscesses are not permanent; and they are known by what is found or discharge or windiness when the patient makes a discharge, and sometimes in his urine some particles.
And if abscesses reach the bladder and up to the middle of the penis; and they extend up to the hip joint, and up to our part of the knee.
And thus one finds a leaking abscess at the base, not merely leaking. And it is that you insert your finger or base and use a thin needle of silver or iron into the fistula if there is no twisting.
the, et the of that is li ones tost: nde f.
And if you do not feel it, nor come with pus discharge or winds or sweat as we have said: Sweep so that it does not pierce, if you hasten with the cure.
And when the fistula reaches to the bladder or urethra, if it leaks urine and cannot be remedied with medicine.
If it is pierced near the hip joint, so is the tendon coming to its place; t (t.
And in these perianal fistulas there is no effective remedy except for toil, and the vanity of foolish men who attempt it.
In those that are not ancient and do not have longstanding issues, there is hope for healing with iron as I have tested.
the Then apply a tent of linen or cotton if there is any twisting, until you know where the tent lies.
If the patient feels numbness at the base, it is fitting that you place your index finger there.
. The de the a more and make the must bele so that. If one does not skillfully treat it, it cannot be healed.
In any case, we can successfully heal some [conditions], but this occurs rarely.
les que are on thet MT and so they: When the bottle becomes very hot in the abscess, until it approaches near the foundation; and does this two or three times, as long as you know that these shards have been cooled down, which resemble an eagle's feather.
Then the treatment of swoln veins rubs with butter until those shards are inserted, then apply ointment soothing and binding them together.
If this is the case, it's fine. But otherwise, there can be no other healing.
And if it is inserted between them and does not penetrate to the bone that lies beneath, and between your thumbs and the tent one put an ample covering of wax or syphac, and you observe the fistula where the skin grows over the covering. If from the beginning of the fistula you tie it off and place it before the tent, then apply the cautery afterwards until it reaches the top of the tent.
And it shall be relieved and shrinked; then remove those twisted vessels that resemble a bird's feather, and leave none behind.
If the vein wins out, cut between your skin and the vessel; cauterize with fire or medicinal ointment.
For the fire cautery brings together two things: that is to say, the abrasion of joined bones and the stopping of blood and drying out of moisture.
Then treat frayed tendons by boiling or grinding with a mortar and pestle until they are thoroughly soaked, and let the joined bones be separated in the boiled substance.
Then treat burns from sudden ignition by drying out the affected skin and apply healing salves to the area.
When restored, it is made whole and does not return.
And if a fistula comes from near the root of its source, and is moved away from the body, then you may bind it with bandages or foundations, and inspect it regularly.
If you feel swelling, and between them is the bandage or gauze, or where it needs to be pierced, there should only be a way of confidence and hope through its administration with one of the three methods:
by the same.
And do not move too forcefully, for you may injure the structure that supports the foundation, and waste comes out as it pleases. And then the treatment, as we have said;
And then the treatment, as we have said; By chance, if it is sound, or remove that covering and cleanse after it has been cut near the foundation, or with a probe or another instrument prepared. then mend the proper flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can.
then study to restore the wound and maintain the fistula in the part forward of the foundation; if it were more easy for the patient.
and le pas ple4; ça u the grand. If you take a tent pierced at the top as follows: And insert one bent wire in two pieces, and sew the tent throughout with all the thread until it reaches the top.
If it is torn at the margin of the deep foundation, then extract that wire and sew your two pieces or foundation.
the dextile;
And do not fasten at any time, until the children have copulated with each other, and urinate.
Then treat the wound until it is healed and cleaned.
If the boil does not burst, pierce it in all ways that you know, unless it is too large.
It is not necessary to perform a complete reduction if only slightly dislocated, then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
The form of the pointed spatula used to make a fistula is sharp and one-sided, with a cutting edge. and on the other hand not, because that which should not be cut is not to be cut, as you see here:
In various ways: some are within the foundation like resin, and there can be small and large ones, as well as blood in the veins. and some are removed from the foundation or more than one, and they leave the foundation and reach the top of it; however, those that are removed have little moisture.
and again or a bit of yellowish water or blood, and they have the color of flesh.
the numm. If you hasten, and hold it with pincers or your fingernail, then wrap it tightly at its roots.
and if the splinters cannot be held due to their slipperiness, then grasp them with a piece of cloth or cotton, or a scrap of camlet. and extract it with your fingers, then wrap it up, and sprinkle some hot powders that are in place of cauterization. (do-S.
If the foundation cannot be released, then enema the patient with an irritating and bitter cleansing to wash out what is at or near the base, so that it may come out openly.
When the patient leaks, and if the thread (referring to a wound) is very close to the base, then the cure is easy. And you should pick them with your fingernail or pliers, and bandage, then treat as we have said until it is healed, so that the patient fears iron incision.
If it is necessary to suture according to this manner: take a twisted thread and put it through a needle, then pass the thread over and pierce the needle on the other side, and turn both ends of the thread away from the eye of the needle. and if it should be wide; then pull the thread tightly, knot the thread, and remove the needle, and do so with all others, leaving some to absorb excess blood.
then place a lin cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the foundation and cover it, and instruct the patient to rest there.
And then let it lie until they can move, and when they have healed, treat with ointment and other remedies, until they are healthy again.
Thus also the foundation of fears or illnesses. Often it happens that there are blockages in the intestines and due to natural constraints; when the illness is old and medicine does not help.
ild:930. If yout to, such as v. I're (do-flows and zeardius. But also thera s. Then treat as necessary until it is securely set, as required.
And if it cannot be secured, start reshaping more firmly than before until the wound bleeds profusely, and then cauterize. .
By a slight movement A flea is a small creature found on the body, and it moves about much.
and never brings coldness to the veins, but feels like death-like shivering, and comes into all the body, more so in the hands than elsewhere.
isnt thatt: ougue they, and m s ecried. Then turn your hand to wrap around the entire pain until you grasp it entirely, and place it straight, and strengthen the trembling at its roots.
And if you see, make a bandage of lin or iron as in this manner, and be subtle underneath and transverse above.
Do not feel with your hands, but hold it together and apply pressure; And if you see, cauterize the trembling, as when it is before or like a fire cautery.
t et t. M: theta lign cont du C’suest que persue R f Never has one made an enema of silver or copper, or molten wax or softened lead; and never have these small and large suppositories been prepared as prescribed for those who need them.
Those that are thus made in the treatment of children who are weak and sorrowful are small.
The shape of both the small and large enemas is such that they should be inserted wide, or the belly depends on this manner:
and it has an eversion or the belly is twisted, as you see, and the head is pierced inside; and have two small openings on one side, and on the other side also two.
And the belly or intestine is filled with remedies from a beast's bladder or parchment, and it is pierced entirely through both small openings.
And between each small opening there is a space to hold the remedy, then insert through these openings a strong thread of twisted wire for about ten or more turns, and thus gather the belly as with a goat. And when the medication is too dense, tie it to the instrument with a strong thread, then enema; and that's the circular shape.
And let the medication not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head of the enema with oil or goat butter or similar substance, then pour it in gently.
then the minister takes it with his two hands together until they are full, and extracts the enema, lifting the patient's legs off the bed.
so ; they; by Ca; with the  (line.
If you perform a clyster in case of intestinal disorder and the patient's condition worsens, and if it recurs repeatedly until healed.
And if hemorrhoids are found or an abscess, administer the clyster as subtle as for a child.
and this is the form of the subtle clyster with which the skin should be tightened:
est s; 1, either leur;
In our discussion of wound treatment, we shall now say about the treatments for hands and medicines, according to their completion.
I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and by what means or types of wounds are made, and why they are made.
The things by which wounds are made include being cut by a sword or knife, or from lance, staff, arrow, or similar things.
Or those that are done according to the parts of the body: as if a wound bleeds from above the neck, or the head, or the groin, or the abdomen, or the liver, and similar limbs.
And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and begin with simple head wounds, for memory shall come to your treatise.
I say that when a simple wound to the head occurs and the bone is not broken, be careful if it is from stone or similar causes, and the skin is all torn and the wound is large. And you gently doubt the presence of an abscess: if you make a cut immediately on the head area itself, and there is blood from the wound, and it should be held to the opposite side of the affected part.
And remove the impurities from the patient's body with wine and large meats.
And if he does not want to be cut, then let his meat be reduced, and he should not drink wine or eat flesh.
by so 1 the end; thene prud siel; but also t theraustsemble (with their are.
If there is no abscess, place it on the wound, if it is fresh and has all its blood, and not moved by air or powder, which I will say some more later.
And if the wound is moved, apply certain unguents until it heals.
And if the wound is large like a sword cut and of similar kind, and the lips cannot be joined by stitches, join them with sutures, as I will say for abdominal wounds, with suturing.
If the wound is exposed to bone, and thin, and holds only slightly with dressing, then first treat the wound with medicines, and restore hard leather in its place. And instruct the patient to eat fatty meats, as tested with wheat cooked, and similar things like hairs.
And if you find or feel rot in the bone, and there is no connection to the bone, then dress it entirely, pour out any pus, then treat it.
If it has an artery in the wound or vein and cannot be stopped without a poultice, then no matter how much you try with remedies, if you find it dislocated, tie it off with thread. And if that does not help at all, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, here is a light treatment: put this powder which will move the rust as well.
by bon's  that they. And treat the wound, and hold firmly, until it is well healed and rejoined with all its blood.
And then securely bandage it and allow it to heal freely, if there is no swelling; for the medicine is not removed until it is fully healed.
ici: docter les soigne, the caut;t and are not le tissand done they ce quitte then the esté if you well dresse the that lest heal, to it is the times que ail n’s. And until ce et dont lesse sont they pait de the cide:
If the arrow has moved the wound, especially if it is embedded therein, do not apply any of this powder.
However, apply with some digested ointments or breadcrumbs made of barley flour, water, and honey until it soaks through. , maisthem; but the w lest lessewounds est pliant, pour la peigne le plus or the tissage is gist of li pas que ongs et cane and it est de ou sointes sont they are a lin your. d and yout the s ome cite:
If the bone fracture comes with a wound, and it is small, then extract carefully using fine tweezers.
And now I will tell you about fractures to the head afterwards.
If you have the body, then take the mots it is as it after the wounds the poisons and sins of be them all so that l'eux in the les bleeds now tear; and do not let me tains the hand.
If a wound comes at or near the neck and it is straightforward, there may be no difference between it and that of the head, but if the veins of the neck or the artery are severed.
If it is the veins, there is no other remedy but to leave the dressing, and not put anything constrictive, for it harms the veins and makes them recede. and do not apply anything cold to the wound, for the substance of the veins is cold, and their extension along with the brain, which is the highest part of the body.
However, let the medicines be soaked, as hair is washed in gentle water and mixed with rose oil, and boiled in the same gentle water. and other preparations of herbs according to this method, and moistened unguents.
And if the wound is large, then bind it with bandages, then heal until it is sound.
ons:k;
If the arrow is lodged, and blood flow occurs, then remove it, lay it open, and if necessary, cauterization must be done.
If the spine of the throat is lodged or a key (point), and the channel is guarded, causing the flesh to suffocate. If it is stuck on the bone of the throat, do not affect the throat but reset according to its natural form. :
When the wound causes pressure on the bone, if you wish to do so. And if there are bone fragments, use all possible force to extract those that can be removed, and leave the ones you cannot remove until the wound heals. Ouvre of s is it d broken os de la l’os, tu si les bras du joint des.
If the wound is fresh, apply powder as I have mentioned. If there are bones within the wound and an abscess present, treat as I have described in this chapter.
From the puncture or cut wound
If it is a puncture or cut from a lance or knife, and the wound is deep, observe if there are any signs of infection as they manifest in the patient's agony: understand that the wound can be fatal.
And if it is not deep, and its blood is fresh throughout, do not apply the powder in the first hour, nor bind with anything that prevents the blood from flowing freely. and return to the body, causing pain for the patient. but apply soothing balm, and bandage it two times a day.
by the e  (t:
Let the patient sleep on the wound for 3 or 4 days, or longer; et tu l’as liés aux quatre membres a une charrette de bois par le long du bras et les deux jambes pour quil n'i puisse mie ne se muevoir. If there is no muscle spasm or severe body tremors from weakness in the neck; et fai coucher le malaide sus lour pereceaux par les deux mains. And when you see that the bone is in position again, so you know that the wound is healed. Cure yourself with bandages and other remedies until you are healthy;
The li os est les membronts tus estes, quis istrest sont es:
And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it's simple or on the back, treat as with that which is before.
And if it is large, bandage; and if it's small, with powder, and if it's pressed into the bone, with broken fragments taken out, treat the wound and remove any foreign objects if present. And if they are not removed, let the wound heal, but lighten the extraction of debris.
And for other injuries to other limbs, there is judgment as we have said.
Regarding the rupture of the abdomen.
leave orner.
From a large wound, blood does not flow at any time into the intestines or their nerves, causing an intrusion of pus.
and cauterization is more difficult to perform, and it never worsens a small wound compared to a large one.
for this is why you must often reset the intestines if they are not set back hot by hot. line them ct. If, which doesnt t; and nothing is a grosse de la peud:
And because it is necessary to move the injured flesh, so that when resetting it moves back into its proper place like the other two.
And know that abdominal surgery has four methods.
There are two common types of suturing in the abdomen,
theta. The b; car
And indeed they are more suited with a stitch on the belly, and I will say each one and declare it.
I say that when the wound is small, and there is nothing from the intestines out. in, and so quits as et crop out the ou est de comme eau la scours on. SATOR they esprent les point ce. Or for the smallness of the wound, as we have said, Or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: A soft sponge or a piece of cloth soaked in fresh water solely Or boil in fresh water with salt and pepper. And let the intestines swell as much as they are filled.
And never is it done with such constraint, but must be loosened to allow expansion.
And when you see the swelling begin to break apart, if the intestines are soft from water or have become thin and weak, for thus is the entrance joined by little substance.

et les jambes du malaid sont a l’estre; Et la main del malaid soit en sa place, et le col del malaid soit alignez. that none should cut it without great necessity or need.
and this is the incision for splitting:
so that s:
When the wound is expanded, and the internal organs rupture. If the arrowhead is reset according to its natural form in its original place. if you can manage it, because this involves movement.
the first line: ous;k ben: If it becomes necessary to make the patient lie on their back, And raise its legs higher than its head; and if it is in the part below the abdomen,
And similarly, if the rupture of the abdomen is in one of the two areas. Then align so that the injured part is higher than the other;
any f ete that they:
For small wounds use what has been prepared for you
Then take in your hands the pious servant who will comb through the entire gash with his hand. and bring together the edges; by.
by. et il doit être longue d'au moins deux doigts pour assurer une tenue ferme; Et si le membre est grosseur, choisissez une aiguille proportionnelle. Then leave two spaces from the edge of the wound and insert a needle with strong thread through it. And pierce both shoulders with two leather straps on either side.
Then strain a double thread through both eyes of the needle for sewing; Then promptly join together the two edges of the wound;
Then leave a space of two fingers, and insert another needle. Then tie off the thread as you did with the first needle. And continue to do so according to your need for more needles. As long as all the wound is restricted;
And they become half-moons, both fine and large, because fine needles cover the entire chariot, and those too large cannot enter well at all: It is necessary for them to be set aright;
And one should not insert needles too far from the bone and into the skin;
that they do not reopen wounds before the incision.
Then bind the head of the dislocation so it does not bend and bother the patient while sleeping. And place bands or cloths on the dislocated head to keep it immobilized. and leave it until the wound is healed;
fir t-tium by them; they: ZCobjour se ne va ze su que les mort. The possible; the ou nolzents. For this, you have inserted a needle or two.
The second stitching method is common. and it is that you join the two heads of skin with an eye needle, using strong thread or medium thickness. by: la pek espouse so.
by: la pek espouse so. If you reset the dislocation at the part where you began, in the manner of how one sews garments.
and make space between each stitch as thick as a small finger.
these stitches secure the wound,
; dont tu form and s to ce est lesse as le Tres la they pruch kum: the same:m de pas; although for by a.
Who was tormented by a knife. and had a wound more than one palm wide of great size. and there were the intestines opened to a width of two large palms.
they do not be done are the tiss. Then comment is to issue any: all s nothing mais que la ou ones. The c none, ift m and cannot be so, like. I returned his intestines after it had been out for twenty-four hours.
And the wound was closed until fifteen days, and healed by treatment, becoming well again.
And the physician had judged that he would die, but it turned out to be a miracle;
And I did not apply ointment to it, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine. And I placed without fail twice a day on the wound, clean linen cloth and washed it with honey water until healed.
Here is how you will say the two proper ways of suturing:
the main and to. The line by d a t, so that he said: any trement de the m. If you cannot they that t f:
When it has perceived the head straight on, then lay the wound from where you stuck or inserted the needle.
and pierce through to the inner part until reaching that distance further.
and the understanding of this stitching is that you cut as a furrier would with furs, And let one leave the sinew of one side, and take it again from another, until the stitching is completely done.
The second method of stitching, which Galien describes properly,
If they are such that they naturally unite as one, like the two halves of a broken bone. In this situation, once proper alignment has been restored by skilled hands, there is no need for stitching or binding with bandages. Instead, these separated pieces will rejoin spontaneously and heal themselves in time, much like how natural elements may come together to form one coherent whole when under the right conditions. And they apply one of the heads to the other head, in such a manner:
Pierce an arrowhead or nearby bone, and make that cut only slightly. And leave the two heads of the sica. :nge de chollemant quet in ane à bele; and head. As there are two dislocated shoulders;
Then make a percutation of each one from the part further up to that inside, in two other shoulders like mirrors that are opposite sides.
and this is the manner of suturing and the most common.
so that m;t:
One must sew the belly to two needles with thread on each.
And one must insert one needle from one side and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew belts.
And know that when the pus is within the belly, : and muste s (1 tire sofait.
The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds:
And it is such that when you find a fresh wound with all its blood, as if the archer has moved it, If you reset an intestinal dislocation, and its course; then place upon it powder of wormwood.
If you reset an intestinal dislocation, and its course; then place upon it powder of wormwood. And if the flesh has moved, then apply any salve that is available until the wound closes. And trim the hairs, and make them soft, and let it bleed slightly; iaus is any they de de. If they should be to ce;
And if you have no remedies, then apply as soon as it begins to tremble, cotton wool. And stir it two times a day until it heals.
For infections, and bezo d'autres the wound as other remedy is more than tenement d’artisinest they can arise by a bach.
Et si vous doutez que la plaie fasse communité aux principaux membres And if it is necessary to grind the flesh lightly with oil of tar, or rose oil, and place it within the joints, and above the elbows;
de: If black wine enemas are used too much, especially when it reaches up to the intestines.
and perforates any abscesses, and drains them in such a way that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to cleanse than the small ones.
If there are les petites sanz if you do not heal and li lez de la pains saner are large as easy it is to be taken in the fistula. And it is because of the weakness of veins that they are so, and due to the subtlety of the entire body, and its closeness to its own nature's nerves.
And if an arrow falls from the wound, reset it as before with the intestines while they are fresh.
And if it is old and has turned brown or black, then you must wrap the area that is black to prevent bleeding. -b; don'tstf ;
Then cover the area between the joints And place two keys hanging from the part above the wound downwards to ease arrow extraction when the shaft breaks, and the wound bulges.
From the procedure of treating a swelling
sud ;fait; you may be not too d: M.se a: If it can be restored in some people,
because I see that some men have been troubled by an arrow in their stomach;
and it was the wound on the right side of the stomach, And it was infected and became a fistula, leading to discharge and inflammation.
I applied treatment as best I could, and continued with subtle manipulations until it was restored to health and the joints were solidified.
And thereupon be not soothing they healed, as though I did heal it should occur and recovery was made. And there is no harm, but remains in better conditions, eating and drinking.
And they said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound in such a way: Take clean gauze or linens, then gather the edges of the wound. And when the tremor has opened the mouth, it is placed on both lips,
Then apply another bandage as before, until the wound is fully closed;
And let it heal. Those who cut into internal organs do not harm the patient in any way.
c which:
When done thus: In this manner: take the head of this intestinal string so that it is thoroughly cleaned. and then fasten to the top of this thread a subtle twisted flax thread. the text is correct that cane est:
And this manner of stitching from fresh wounds is not different than according to the method of faith and hope.
And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the internal organs, there is no remedy or health, but subtlety.
from a fistula or wherever it may be un it; the most they c:he; In this that does say I. When it rises up and returns to its place.
And an abscess is the result of improper vein formation that is hard and pale, where there is no pain felt. and it also grows like the feathers of a bird;
they are not: ſt est. At no time slight, and at other times sufficient;
And I have spoken in the section on wounds, that any wound not treated will become infected. This is due to one of these seven reasons:
the stie ile que esttet, et lium: ous: Or because of its malignity; Or because there are hard spots within, and on the lips, do not allow any hair to grow. Or where there is too much growth of armpit hair. When the bone is fractured, and the material is of poor quality. when the medicine is not properly prepared for treatment. because this contamination takes on a form similar to plague; byt and so (s, then: When there are veins or bones:
And I have previously shown all these causes, signs, and medical treatments in the section.
Now it is necessary for me to inform you of the treatment of a fistula made by handwork.
I dont he wrote ond ans, then, et lis ine lacks de de d. Because there are fistulas that come from large veins, arteries, and nerves. In the scrotum, in the intestines, in the bladard, or any of the ribs. On the spine of the back, or any joint of hands or feet.
And all the fistulas that are of this kind have difficult healing, and there is only hard work and ignorance involved.
the patient; OX that line ;t; the p'i (1e the same: so :z. Tad: 20 have the following thems tome to-na and name it eusle le ourible in context. And you shall recognize it, then take a tent of wool or iron if the fistula is straight, choose one.
and if the fistula is twisted, search for a fine tent (tentacle) of thread. because the threads bend near the twist;
l’d the c sis: they, and scader; que lesse t'fors, or gaies est to-to ce malest ke ti. If cleansed by one of the tubes (or channels)
because moisture comes from one tube to another, and it purifies.
then you should seek a proper remedy in your power, so that you know if there is bone or nerve involved, and it rises from within.
the w:
When you know for certain where it is located, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery or vein, in any of the cases I have told you, if the treatment according to what I have said,
in any of the cases I have told you, if the treatment according to what I have said, and remove the other bones and corrupted joints that are within; And then the treatment until it is healed.
and if the fistula is well deep in the right place, one must cut into it from the beginning as much as possible. then I apply moldy medicines with a fever, and insert them up to the top of the faster-growing part of the body.
then I apply moldy medicines with a fever, and insert them up to the top of the faster-growing part of the body. they beau:
And then apply healing unguents to clean wounds until they are healthy.
And if it does not heal by this method, then you may proceed to cauterize as we have said;
And if the bone is compromised by the abscess, do not hesitate to amputate it. If veins or nerves trouble you or principal limbs, as we have said;
And if the bone is exposed, and there is decay and blackness until the king's order has consumed all the bone. est as heulet them bonde, that sonis a: it soies, et, you may be its d diez lesme to doe stombe or in li oum. And tont and l’ovre the oment is allt, but not s ton de la meunus est, and;
If it is not securely fixed, and returns as before, Say that you are not yet able to go near the fire:
If it reveals and rises as far as when you reach the bottom. And remove all decay, then reset to its original position;
And if it becomes so healthy, that's good. èt movements as de lits and est ; puis taie lese they ouso: the is pricked then eul; but so; If there is no other remedy than using a ligament by nature;
And if there is a small decayed bone, and you can pull it out with pincers, If you extract it with an instrument that is appropriate for this,
And if there is any bone, do not leave even one.
and if moisture causes the opposite effect, and there is no mistake or fear, if heat and moisture and cold are present, and free the bones.
is to do: And let it stay until the joint is reconnected near the bones,
then afterwards they will have the bones more easily.
and if it is a large bone, like that of a leg or thigh, . Then restore the wound;
And if there is a large part of the corrupted bone, and it approaches near the surface of the bone; If the necessity is to cut and remove all up to the infection, then heal it until it is sound:
And I will tell you of a case of an abscess which occurred in one's leg, If you wish for an example and assistance in your work.
There was a youth (within thirty years), who had pain in his leg from a cause that came within the body,
While materials reached to the leg and was drawn from a large abscess without needing to be opened.
but the doctor by their madness worked until they opened up the abscesses. and from it they drew out a lot of material, which became a fistula, and much pus came that all the pores emitted sweat and moisture throughout the body.
s. That soffer la mort le; Do not that heu e est: Thea les theym cautione the t a dur C't.
As long as I am called upon, and see his leg and the remedies with which it was treated. and those that are needed through punctures into large bodies. and the body became red as in youth, and had a yellowish hue.
line tey med:
And I found that one comes against the other from all parts of the leg.
So I did my best, and examined in one of the holes until I discovered a part of the bone, And I found it corrupted and felt its presence, and the corruption reached up to the inner bone.
the same:
And begin to heal the wound with soda remedies for long periods of time, and cannot be soldered.
And then I resumed, and discovered the bone as before.
the c s. I1 ;
However, I could not move as much as when grasping near the bone of the hand, and it broke away completely. Then it was restored with medicines; and soon healed quickly and soundly.
and no longer resumed the treatment except due to the patient's weakness who could not bear it, : For evacuating blood often causes pain, but he was completely healed.
For evacuating blood often causes pain, but he was completely healed. And there arose in its place a hard scar, which was of good shape and had no harm or hindrance at all, neither to movement nor approach.
with attir: And open the joint where you see it separated, ensuring that the bone does not cut through the flesh. and place a splint or a stick beside the bone to support the fractured joint; And it should be treated as long as one can see and feel the decay, and even more frequently.
it is s: If disclosed is the entire joint; then place a peg underneath,
and then it is the spread from one part to another of the infection, and there should be taken a piece as long as the extent of the infection; just as we have said.
or and is healing should be put s’en it est done of the a peas, puis after les parties then the from dose cautere aviriongule. 9020. C.
And if the inflammation is found along the two joints, there are no other remedies but to use heat.
And if the inflammation is in the fingers of the hand or foot, it is a very strong thing, But still it is necessary to inquire about the erosion, how it opens. and cleanse it in every way you can, but let the vein or nerve not oppose you;
and know that the saws and files for cutting bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance.  And for this reason, one must equip each kind of work with its appropriate instrument.
and know that your hand will reveal to you the instrument you need according to your knowledge of this art. Or for the cap de vous les poilz que tu est du l’ovrage, curet and li teuillirant the as long as pendent oure la par exemple avient to that you must be made, tue le art de. If you think of the instrument you need according to what is necessary.
From fire The head may rot or become dislocated due to pressure, or because it is not well placed.
When you have applied the remedy for corrosion through medical treatment, but they do not benefit. If it is necessary to cover that limb up to its original place or where the ulceration occurs. d are not teues a l’ovrir the et eue and have to t les medecure des le do that the f, and ointé li les sissued unt.
d are not teues a l’ovrir the et eue and have to t les medecure des le do that the f, and ointé li les sissued unt. And the signs are such that the limb becomes black, as if it were burned by fire. And after darkness, then it progresses to the consuming of limb by limb, And all the pain is done of the corne est semblablemente: a l'ovraige de pas oui escorps tous heurel. ous, and pense la pluste bien sois and bele, et les membres are not.
When it is by the strike of any poisonous creatures, such as sea scorpions and serpents and similar beings.
If the erosion is at the top of both thumbs, bandage it, and do not allow space for it to reach up to the hand.
If it reaches up to the hand, bandage at the joint, so that erosion does not extend up to the arm.
If it comes to the arm, bandage around the joint; and if it passes the bandage, then it is death. Et il ne mérite aucune atténuation en fonction de la quantité de son efficacité.
Et ainsi agir quand la corroissance se présente ou une pierre : s'il apparaît dans la première articulation, alors cible après l'articulation suivante.
And when the articule ori, il est li coraigne; et les petites chirurgical jointe en la joigné à une ctre parler pour que tu ne croissance de l'articularisement les arthritique. If it rises up to the leg, grasp at the hip joint.
And if it comes above the hip, there is no other remedy than for the patient to die.
and the manner of treatment with bandages or linen cloths is that you bind it above and below. so f; And you sever the cartilage between the two ligaments with a wide spatula until the bone is exposed;
Then cut or sew it, and place on each side a liner of linen, ensuring the suture does not touch healthy tissue; And come to the patient other injuries and boils.
so fat; Or you apply certain binding powders; then return to your medicine until it is completed.
Then bind the injured limb with a bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
and I will tell you what happened to one man in his youth:
the witht; d.
And this erosion first came to his elbow on the right foot, so much that it affected the entire foot.
And when a man sees the erosion, if he cleanses and covers the foot with copper, it becomes healthy.
And long time afterward the erosion came to his elbow again, and it moved towards me.
they should he li est droe le temps de lesstide: that nus.
And I urge you to cup his hand, so as not to have hope of restoring the matter. and also fear that if I were to cut off his hand, he would die. for the virtues of the body were weak; and it was despairing, and returned to its homeland. so f; don this t
And I have not mentioned these methods except for those which are used elsewhere if needed.
At no time does an abscess appear in the reattached area, and it remains so long that it forms a large mass of pus. And they become hard and burst open, and the pus fills up like blisters; and there is a feeling of heat in the eyes. Et le cuir qui est au-dessus est aussi fin comme un tissu délié, And they shall not extend up to the bone nor nerve, and such diseases are called "healed."
However, if it is so stretched that it reaches almost to the bone at its origin, it is called "fistula";
And if it heals so much that you must cut away the entire scar tissue, especially when it is fine like a piece of cloth. and not because of its decay.
; Et la peau est épaisse comme du chagrin, donc prenez soin de l'enema ainsi :
Look to see if the breasts are large, and the vein that is there has a foul-smelling odor. Then administer the Egyptian medicinal enema as follows: tox. As long as the medication is red, and becomes as thick as honey.
And then take of it according to your need, and make it with water and honey. and in cleanse the chest, and strain the urine; li's: it is de
Perform this many times, until the joint is shaped properly, and bone is at its place.
and never once is it cleansed with water of ashes, when this medicine is not available, then you may take ashes from the wood of a vine and pour water on top,
by m:
And if the patient cannot endure it, nor the Egyptian medicine or ash water. If you use an enema of water and honey containing some litharge. or if you use an enema with honey and sweet wine, so that the honey has properties to cleanse and purify. t s:
When you have done this, and you are assured that it has been properly relocated. If the clyster brings forth heat within him,
and you should provide a room for rest and recovery, and use rose oil mixed with wine. and mon;
If the feces are protruding from the chest, and he cannot pass a suppository. If it is slightly enlarged by a hot iron and you apply an Egyptian ointment poultice, When applying basilisk oil, let it spread widely;
And if the wound is too wide, if you leave just enough so that they can enter: either where it was or where an enema may pass through.
And if there is a boil filled with pus above it, then place the bandage either higher than or lower where it lies. et se c s de lde le t ou pruil; nd so e: f açs, and that; don’t by the *b. If you cannot cover the wound properly as you see it, If the bowel is protruded, arrange it so that it sits at the lowest point possible,
And if you cannot cover the wound from above as you see fit, If fitted thusly, let the bow string pull lightly downward, and leave nothing of the bowstring. and take consolidating medicines to apply on the wound,
And they extend underneath a linen cloth that covers the entire chest; Then grip firmly the skin on that spot of the chest, one-third wider than the first. And then apply soothing balm under another linen according to the amount of the spot. And place on the protuberance of the chest to relieve pain, without removing the large bandage for many days afterwards.
And those who are upon the protuberance of the chest often remove it in order to alleviate the pain, and understand that which flows out from the bandage, whether it is poison or pus or sufficient, or digested or undigested;
And take care if the patient feels pain or numbness, and whether there is an abscess or not.
And when your medication has spread in such a way that you see changes beneath the skin near the breast, And so heure. ici les mains.
Et puis redressez-le au matin ou au troisième jour, et quand vous réparerez la plaie. If there is a change in the bandage, and renew the ointment.
And if it becomes an unpleasant swelling of the breast after many days, understand that the breast is not ill. soigne:
When illness approaches. For there are men who treat their wounds with warmth, and others who do the opposite;
And if it remains inflamed for many days within the breast where the milk does not flow, knowing that the breasts are unhealthy;
And if the breasts become dry later on and wither, then apply moisture-drying medicines in substance but dry in virtue; And so they said: C. the and so que time Tamen la w. Do this t. If: M.tileme it'ud their n'zard:
Take essential oil of myrrh, and mix it with rose oil, and add equal amounts of old wine by substance.
Then concoct and use it; and likewise makes more effective when cooked to thicken. In the making thuisi'qur. Ou cognique et cuit deteriaus si vous est confiture et leis de bonle couvrez avec douze lait and quoie aulat; et asseoir cuits lor teilet les miz à s’on que tu, se tissantee le paira.
When you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them, then powder over honey while it is on the fire. Then take a bandage, spread it out as a cloth, and place it over the breast, without applying any long-lasting ointment. and roots of holy basil, which are like flour from wheat and barley;
and roots of holy basil, which are like flour from wheat and barley; the line When the treatment is lengthened, and it is not healed by this remedy,
When the treatment is lengthened, and it is not healed by this remedy, Therefore tell them that the suppuration is in its onset, and it exerts pressure on the bone or hard tissues, or joints. If [there's] a treatment of an abscess, as we have said before.
the line the ou they with h like:
Panarics are boils that arise under the nail of the thumb. or of the foot, or perhaps arises elsewhere.
ine pluse too much les pie to the worms's and; And they will turn and pour bowl-water until it reaches the root of the nail, and perhaps turns the entire thing.
And it brings infections up to the bone, causing pain until it is full, and the head of the shoulder is two fingers wide, and the color is dusky.
When you treat them as we have described in the section, but the treatment does not work, If it is necessary to cut away all excess flesh attached to the nail. Then cauterize the wound afterward. The cautery is of great help if the bone is sound, and the nail is healthy;
heal et al te: If it is necessary to place the rod under the nail where there is a mark. and insert the stick on top, and gently but subtly separate that marked area. and place on the remaining affected area medicinal substances that are burning and corrosive to remove all of it.
And if there is decay in the bone, coat it and wrap tightly, for as long as the bone decays, it cannot heal.
and if you see the joint decaying, cover it with a cloth as previously mentioned. (e:
And if it is forced outward, causing a bulge, and there is great pain, then you must first support it. Then cut off the toenail of the great toe by trimming across underneath.
de, and do not:ssont; c ils lesse te
If this occurs, place something above to soothe.
Those who are dislocated in the hands of certain men by chance are all fleshly. text there is not as much like that is to f. Then he may beign; and then they don’t the youre de t, s which est lis noit:
And none of them spring from the root of the joint, where the birth is among some of our bodies. Those who are born with any deformity do not move. And those at the joint of the two fingers, by chance it moves.
The size of those who are fat if they are somewhat lightweight in a certain manner: Size them at the root with a wide spreading cut.
Those who are born at the root of the joint are particularly difficult to treat; hold them with your handkerchebreak.
In those who are born or come afterward, it is necessary to bandage the area around until reaching the bone. Then bandage the bone with an appropriate swathe as such, then heal it until it is sound.
by at; and the patient (Ceste.
If it is necessary to treat that swelling so that it heals according to its natural shapes. Then place between two sheets or cloths moistened with oil of roses, so they do not stick together; Or you put between two pieces of fine linen until the eyes are healed, as it is appropriate.
et so and c, then toœuvre de l's, and s, ou:
Of evil ones
These are large veins swollen with excessive melancholy blood that come to some members of the body.
and more often occurs in the legs of those who go on foot and work and carry loads, than with others.
It is necessary to then provide it with an occasional purge of colic, and then sanitize the navel of the basilica.
The treatment with iron is in two ways: one is to wrap them and let out the black blood. and the other way is that you lift the vein and draw it all out.
n’s; That l’est en ligne le*e le t i want thera de a moi; they; by.flement. Then straighten the leg of the patient from above the hip to the area below the knee. Then cut the vein at one place or in two or three places of a wide size.
Then draw and strain the black blood into your hand from one end to the other as much as that amount which the patient'cuers can bear.
And then wrap it, and instruct to color with meats rendering it black.
And begin the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are clear, causing discomfort to the patient.
The actions of this treatment are as follows: raise the affected limb, if there is much hair. in at s (and they present c: that the re que c
And if you have no bandage, heat it with fire, and then wrap the vein for a long length at the head of the sinew, or in the area below the ankle.
Then proceed with cutting the skin at the incision, and scrape the vein from each side until it appears as you touch it.
And when it is seen red and black, and when it enters or crosses the skin, it seems like a white string;
If you see.
Then wrap it with a piece of cloth at another location above three fingers; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears. Next lift the arrow shaft, as you have done before, and attach to another sheathing.
Then cut a different size, or more if needed, then lift it, and encase the arrowhead in two pieces of wood.
they should be f iusme las:
Et s'il te n'as pas de tressage et de levage, alors il met une aiguille à toute partie solidement attachée. Et il fixe et tire dessus, et place une broche au centre, puis tourne votre main à gauche et à droite jusqu'à ce que cesse le mouvement. Et il doit être soigneusement maintenu pour éviter de se coincer ou de se coincer ; sinon, il ne peut pas être tissé ni soulevé, ce qui nuit à la personne.
And when you have completely treated it, place a linen cloth soaked in wine and oil over the wound area; treat until it heals fully.
And if the vein is twisted and coiled together, not straight as we have said, then you should... (Note: The translation seems incomplete here because the original Old French text appears to be cut off. We can't translate further without more context.) If it is necessary that you split it twistedly but do not cover it completely; and treat as we have previously said. (Note: The translation may be challenging due to the archaic medical terminology and practices described in Old French texts.)
If it is necessary that you split it twistedly but do not cover it completely; and treat as we have previously said. (Note: The translation may be challenging due to the archaic medical terminology and practices described in Old French texts.) with this.
Et il est d'une grande bosse, car s'il était subtil, il couvrirait le ventre, mais il est large comme nous l'avons dit, et c'est sa forme :
From the civil vein
This vein is situated in legs and warm parts where no grass or trees grow, and on land without moisture.
;  lest.
If as it enters within the body like a snake and winds about, embedding between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of this vein's beginning are such that it brings a great inflammation to the leg. Then it changes the spleen, and begins to bleed out as though a root of a plant is growing.
the ou
Et leave the bolt during on the leg, and all times when it is not at its end, then wrap around the bolt and the wound. And if it is too long, then cut off a part, and wrap the remainder, but do not cover it completely at its root until fully healed. because if you cover it, it may enter into the flesh and cause an abscess or rot there, and a bad disease.
t shall mace: The c;
And it is sometimes this vein when treated with five or six long palms (lengths of bandages). And once upon me came a man who had it (the vein) cut from ten or so lengths of bandage, and when you bind it, he pours out some blood or pus, and penetrates all the way to the bottom.
and it flows out completely; and all the material within (the vein) is emptied, then be made whole again with putrefying medicine for several days, after which it's healed like abscesses.
: And it often comes from a fall, causing great shock; treat it then as we have said before.
Of worms that arise between skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land 'ox sickness', for it often occurs with boils.
the d; And it feels so very much from limb to limb, as if they are torn at the place where it goes, and breaks out in force.
And it is inflamed due to putrefaction of certain humours, as snakes and worms and ascarids or bellies come near.
And there is doubt about its severity, because when it goes through the body, and rises to the head, and comes to the eye. Jum: �.chfro;
When you see it being bled or milked, one cannot force it when it goes out.
If it thus becomes necessary, then bind the joint firmly above and below with strong ligaments tightly.
Then also wrap around and secure on either side of a fastening that is fully in place in the chair, and you do not fail to: If fire cauterization is done on top of it, until it dies.
and the greatest harm it causes is that they run with oil, as we have said;
and if you see it coming or near the oil, firmly pull off its eyebrows, then bandage with a cloth.
the same: so that c, and also to s, and there, ift;
And if infected with meats gone rancid, putrefaction.
Of pain arising from windwasp This disease is called 'vacire' in our land, and it brings pain to certain limbs. 
I was called to a sick woman, and I discovered swelling on her arm near the elbow.
And after a while, I saw them rise like worms in the shoulder; And it's quite sudden as soon as heal. Et me se l’espeirez.
The pain departs from there and shifts to the shoulder.
And then shortly after, it runs through the entire body until it reaches the other arm.
Then he told me that it returned within the body as I saw it.
(1 dislocation: Anyhow, I want to maintain that they moved pain from there to another. but I did not see it in the woman as such.
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins exposed, thet.
And they do not appear immediately due to this reason for those who are insane, and have wet bodies and veins returned.
And when you see treating this disease, and the insane feel that pain, if it reveals to you as we have said. sofate empi; Et cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
If the treatment of those that stand out from pus-filled bumps like foul pills and syrup pills, and similar things.
Arrowheads or arrow fragments
it; the in de the c,
The variety of them is such that there are those with large points, small ones, hairy, and loose. and those that have two edges, and those that have tongues, and those where there are fragments. and those which fall off in any limb do so in one of two ways: or on the principal member they grow hairy,
; When it bleeds from any part of these limbs, and signs of death appear, which I will now tell you about. If it is necessary to extract this arrowhead, for death comes in various forms afterwards; and if this bad sign does not appear, and the arrowhead is not deeply embedded, then pull it out, and treat the wound.
cguarde; ’s (do they t; And so pleu do not is not a such that: yout. When there is scotoma and blindness and vertigo and redness in the eyes, and inflamm <|im_sep|>inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile. And sometimes it is without strength in the nose or ears; and occasionally affecting speech and voice; And jump of the wound white as hairs, and healing like red meat.
If these signs appear to you, proceed with treatment, and extract the arrowhead if it is not deeply embedded.
The sign of the arrowhead when it is lodged or has passed through indicates that it is near the left shoulder blade and feels as if it were embedded in a hard object, not hollow. And sometimes the arrowhead moves as hairs would; and there is black blood coming out, accompanied by coldness, chills, and sweating. how far. the te l'fcorheck: 2 said prsee al jette s but if not de est et its, then le's n’d (1; they t
The sign of the arrow wound that is never found without a stream of foam from the wound; and the throat swells, and the patient's complexion changes, and they gasp loudly and seek cold air.
And if the arrow penetrates into the flesh near the small ribs; and it produces a large wound with great pain and gasps, causing all limb movement at the shoulders to cease.
And if the arrow enters through the belly; or perhaps it exits without leaving any of the indigestible flesh in the wound.
When the arrow comes to the belly and does not pass through the intestines immediately, there is no hope for its removal or treatment of the wound.
And if the arrow penetrates into the bladder and the urine stops flowing, causing the patient to feel severe pain; suspect that the wound is fatal.
The other limbs, as the arm and elbow and throat and shoulder and neck and spinal column and back muscles, and thighs and legs, are safe according to various conditions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not poisonous, as I will tell you how it happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
It happened to a man whose arrow struck the top or root of his nose. I tried it, and injured him on one side beyond the fat of the ear, yet he remained somewhat sane without a doubt.
s; t, and: theyrsted et s c, so far: And the arrow is reset, reaching it with just the tip towards its base. and it was the large arrow of a Turkish bow with all its feathers intact on one side, no ear-holes; the shaft was whole, and there were no peculiar incidents to it.
And an arrow pierced his throat of one with Christian beliefs, and the arrow was Arabic with ear-holes:
I approached the Barbarians cunningly until I betrayed them, but the Christians remained safe.
And I betrayed an arrow into his belly, thinking he would die.
and after it had passed thirty days, his condition did not change; les se pee s hau:
And if you see a man with an arrow wound to his head or back, and the injury is dressed above it;
and lodged within, it remains undisturbed, not changing its natural position, If this, they do not and some: s ;
And see another man, to whom an arrow fell on his face, and his wound was quickly healed.
And it remains without causing much pain; and many similar cases.
And pierced an arrow into one of the king's servants, that was lodged near his back, d s and le t.
I went to treat it after it had been present for three days, wherein I found the wound greatly narrowed.
I carefully touched it with all my skillfulness, and felt nothing. And there was pain and discomfort near his right ear. by the p rascels. Dozb'9 dont it, then to make;t is t s unstable et so:
I place on the spot a soothing poultice to promote digestion because it prevents swelling. and I saw the wound from the arrow.
and I saw the wound from the arrow. And I applied a soothing poultice immediately, and cleansed the injury thoroughly; thus the patient remained ill for a long time.
with nail to se de t. En flue so it is nott that s; I place on the wound a corrosive medicinal vinegar until it is opened.
And I tried, and felt the head of the arrow which was loose in its place; Then, on the approach to the wound with that particular medicinal herb, until the head of the arrow appeared clearly.
And it passed well through all its terms in about two and a half months.
And then I dressed the wound with pincers on both sides which could not be removed;
les so s and yout they b in sondement; the ou ils l'ta; pas; that helement line c p are not ce pe: According to how its form comes at the end of this chapter, I will treat it and leave the wound open.
And the doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be repaired: I will leave it open then; and afterward, the wound is stitched up, and the patient is completely cured.
ete ome donde pate: If you attend to this which I do not say, for books cannot fully comprehend.
but wise masters compare a little on important matters and that which is currently present and failing, five works, and five instruments are involved in dealing with strange things occurrebeing in this art.
t that they, so s; ct a e ce de the patient la: E tre Cordon'sisle, and make you can: When they come out at their place or from another direction.
And the one that has slipped into it enters through those openings and is lodged in body tissues, and does not slip out again anytime soon.
And so times byt leue los qu's.
And so too if it is fixed in the bone, and cannot be removed, let it remain as such for some days, moving slightly each day.
And then it may pop out, and if not, puncture around it with a fine hole as long as the surrounding flesh is stretched thin, and then pull through.
And if the arrow is reset within the body so that it cannot be seen, seek out all its parts. and if you feel it, use any suitable instrument to extract it.
and if you cannot reach the wound or the depth of the arrow due to its location, the mains waste as you said s nowt, and se par leur bon: Et trace the arrowhead if you see it, and if there are ears on the arrowhead where it holds.
Et trace the arrowhead if you see it, and if there are ears on the arrowhead where it holds. If the bone that is half pierced by two parts can be moved as you see. and then break or bend the ears of the arrowhead as much as you can pull it out.
and then break or bend the ears of the arrowhead as much as you can pull it out. 1 ine de d.
And if you cannot do it once, let it reach the joint's vicinity before pulling, for extraction would be agonizing. And if the flow of blood is opposite, follow what we have said in its chapter regarding treatment;
and beware of the incision on the nerve and vein, and devise as you can extract the arrow without danger,
: This is the greatest aid it can be, and if you cannot do so, then follow what the signs show to you.
The arrow that enters from another place where there is no opening or swelling in the skin can be seen or felt distinctly.
Therefore, cut accordingly as long as the pliers can grip it, and then extract it; if the arrow is now loose.
(s a griggd: 't. Do so and there that line the same f : "I sant;
If it cannot come out, let it remain for now, then resume extraction until it comes out completely.
And if it were of the arrow shaft that is there, break off all its parts;
and if it were bleeding, and you are to administer bandaging, then with a suitable instrument proceed. the same.
When an arrow is embedded, if it uses a pointed instrument entering in, to ease extraction.
And if the arrow is touched, it must be cut around where the poison is, if you know where. then treat the wound as necessary.
When an arrow falls out or pierces the belly or bladder or ribs, and it is close to vital organs, and you must cover up on top of it if necessary.
And be careful not to cover the veins or nerves, and then extract it, and then close the wound if needed. and let the wound heal completely.
feust by n's, that f.
There are many ways to handle it: large, medium, and small, depending on the quantity of the arrowhead.
From the veins of the common body Veins from which one is cleansed are thirty-one, including sixteen heads.
Of the ears that are thereafter "their names are: And the two arteries which are visible in both temples; And two veins that are in the armpits of both arms, which are called "aspiracles"; And the vein that is amidst the forehead; and the vein that is under the nose; And the two tendons which are at the shoulder blade; and the two veins which are in front of the mouth above the lips, and these are the veins called "palatine"; and two veins that are below the tongue.
The veins of which we commonly have five on each arm:
one is the cephalic, and it lies near the left ribcage, and they call it "the head's vein" (cephalic vein); and the middle one is called "vena saphena", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilica veins; le t. and they call it "the spleen of wind," located near the spine. and it is that which one palpates, clearly felt below the ribcage.
And the spleen is the vein found between the little finger and the ring finger, with two branches.
by it’s, also a sus lesse they aret and the ble if you should be in and then so ont is not d m et t. And the second spider, which is near the right ankle bone; and the vein called "Nesse," located in the foot of the opposite leg.
And in the other leg are three veins above those.
The treatment of veins that are behind the ears helps with old catarrhs and migraines; They. And then the main trecor de so a mic; if: f their to
They. And then the main trecor de so a mic; if: f their to And rub it with a rough cloth where the veins are; then tighten the patient's neck with a cord. until both veins appear behind the ears, in two places depending on the head: choose at your discretion, and wherever you feel hairs above your ear, if it seems necessary.
they do: And bandage and skin and veins well, two fingers across to cross them, and let the blood flow until you see it.
then strain and tie it tightly, until it is healed.
and I have already said the incision and fire cautery in the first book.
 And swelling, accustomed paralysis, and watery tears from their eyes.
and the quality of his bones is such as I have said: and it is that the patient's neck is strangely affected, until both veins appear openly; as:
Then grip firmly above the vein at your wrist with your index finger, and place the lancet upwards. And lift the vein upward, along with the cuff, as you have done in two other veins before, and make a cut according to your needed blood flow.
Then release the patient, and place your hand over the vein for an hour, then apply cotton.

The drain of the vein on the forehead is as valuable as the drain of the head for ancient face diseases, and for migraines, and for redness.
and its quality is that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears. then take the instrument called "saw", which has this form:
I. This l's and so that you t, with: theta. The cont et ponder m: Ca big line est contra tad but se ctre quisme : Then apply a ligature to the patient's neck, and bind the vein until it is unsteady and not once does the blood flow from a wide wound.
However, it must not be too tight with the bandage; and if the vein crosses, because the bone is close by, and at times the bandage breaks when it is too thin.
The bandage of the two veins that are in the temples soothes the eyes, and on the gums, and on the nose's redness, and on the orifice within the ear, and diseases of the face.
The nature of their ailment is such that the patient twists his neck by turning any ligament. As before;
Then the bone, and may their illness be crossed with a short slightly wide gap, for there is no healing charm.
And if the gaps are subtle and may be broken; then dose the blood, however much you need, and afterwards apply a poultice and bind it well.
how: p; they do so ume c; ìtat the t TA: As with migraines when redness comes to the face, especially if it is old.
and the condition of health is such that the patient grips his neck with his hands, then strains his eyes toward your left hand. and take a long thin stick, inserting it into the space between the two nostrebs. ;s c unt de la:
And do not go too far with it, and make a proper incision according to your need, then let it rest for a night, as it is quickly restored.
The dressing of the two bandages helps with the extension of the limb and in starting meals, and many illnesses, and impetigo, and erosions, and herpes, and itchiness:
so that the. Don'ond (three per cent Pccordse t, either s butnfro utn; The word; line man and con, it; thentiguir : f in sonte; If he estt et ques: Morgue bon les et de lign: And let the master stand over the patient's head, and the patient sit on a stool.
Then he cleanses the vein with a bit of oil generously, then traces blood quickly, or as much as necessary;
Then make another incision in the other vein, then ties off the vessel, and compresses the veins moderately. The patient should not restrain themselves; leave them until morning, so that the wound may be healed.
From the healing of boils For the healing of sores in the mouth, and gum disease, and lip splits and ulcers and wounds, and burns within.
And the nature of this illness is to make the patient sit before you, and hold his neck as I have said. Then turn the lip and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left. by le bon ne they are t he u ça. Therefore treat both sides, and if you do not recognize them, and you have doubt.
Therefore treat both sides, and if you do not recognize them, and you have doubt. If the larger of each side is treated, make two incisions as well, one above and one below, for it is done the same way.
From beneath the tongue .
And the quality of the sinew is that the patient seizes between your hands in front of the sunlight, and lifts his tongue, and looks down from each side for a black vein.
Then cleanse both [veins], and do not cut too deeply, as the arteries are there from below.
The veins of the limbs that one commonly cleans according to two methods:
When touched at any one spot, there is a worm-like swelling or an olive stone that is as cutting sharply as scissors, and it is called "anesil". And they are wide and subtle according to the breadth and stretching of the veins. The form of the worm-like swelling is very famous, and it is wide as you see:
To open veins with clear blood filled abundantly, containing thick blood and turbidity. And it is the form of an olive-shaped bubble:
and is more subtle pointed, and is for collecting fine veins where there is subtle lemon-colored blood.
the l’s and so e le bon:
The appropriate physician's aid must ensure a sound sleep, and that he be well-rested, and that he cleans the artery which is below. And if he cuts the artery, and a flow of blood comes, as instructed, as I have said. It must not be grasped by the flame (flame being a term for sinew or tendon), but cut with care as previously mentioned.
And if the pillow does not open clearly, it is proper to remove it and replace another. Or if you desire any part of it, or you sense within its place in the arm: it opens clearly; And cover with a linen cloth at the wound site as we have said.
the same things as:tile: Then sign the place of injury with egg white, and then bandage the arm, and cover the wound with a cloth.
And be careful not to injure the artery when you see the swelling at the site, for it is an artery: avoid damaging it.
And if you see a protrusion upwards just like the urine of an infant, and the wound is red and delicate, understand that it is from the artery. there by: 98th if f. And the tt a; If you give an example by ;
If the arm is tied up, let it be so, and do not move for the patient; stay still in fear until healed.
If the wound is not stitched up, and it bleeds, and medicines are not prescribed, cut the artery if open, for the head of the wound contracts; thus, bind the wound.
And take a piece of fumitory, and crush it, and take one half and apply until the next day.
by theta and you'ard, with t ;
Et les étincellements ne sont pas des griefs dans plusieurs positions pour le peu du lieu de la plaie, et la possibilité due à la liaison du bras.
The sanitation of the vein causes so much help that it draws blood from above and below the body. because it is composed of the basilar and the cerebral regions, as we have said;
by: 1. And it swells and the nerves become numb, and sometimes cannot heal.
And this nerve has been opened many times, and if it does not open at all due to its subtlety, you must sharpen the instrument slightly; and extract the nerve as much as possible with your power.
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, it causes great pain.
The cerebral shining helps, drawing blood from the head and assisting the eyes.
And it is fitting to poke at the elixir of olive oil or myrtle sap because it is the most effective of all remedies, for there are no nerves nor arteries in them.
Nevertheless, it is best to seek a simpler position, and do not worry about anything during the first attempt, and then start again. And sometimes the head swells in certain individuals; however, nothing should be done initially, but it's not troubling. The quality of health depends on your thoughts.
the chop; And if f la: nd Jare that les que ne ben; Do so and so, for his time.
To avoid future illnesses; and it shall be the surgery performed in one of the three veins that are here: namely, cephalic, facial, and basilic; And one should begin the surgery with prayers and fasting, and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear;
And if it must be treated within one day or two days after 2 or 3 hours.
The treatment for ailments that is prescribed does not have a set time, but when needed it should be done within a day or two, in all hours and at any time.
oun et the tire not to ou s’apres done ; ors; and dulst. In the first must be de la peouldes: Do not attempt to lift anything heavy, those who are old and have surpassed 16 years.
And if anyone wishes to lift anything at all, in whatever manner it may be, then it is necessary that they cleanse the intestines with a gentle enema. if there are many feces retained, so that the veins do not draw out excess fluids harmful to the principal limbs.
Those who are too indulgent in meats, or drunkards, as long as they remain so, nor those with dropsy.
and who have used purifying treatments after experiennce with colic pain, vomiting, abdominal dilation, frequent intercourse or travel, staying up late, coition, and anything else that affects the whole body, whether by things of weapons or bodily injury.
then subtly drain the fluids, if they are heavy with meats and drinks or by any means you have at your disposal.
Then with a bath or poultice if anything does not impede it to facilitate the blood flow.
and cleanse the vein near the wound on the third day as we have said;
and keep clear that day from work, pain, dislocation, and similar things;
thet, if they prud sesfoux the dele et de a boler.
First strain the ligament moderately, for if it is stretched too tight or too loose, it cannot be corrected without causing harm.
Then rub the area with your hands until the veins swell and feel warmth.
Then moisten the shins with a small amount of old oil, and then place your finger from your left hand over that vein slightly below the area you wish to strengthen. t; That isso l’tat; lesse: sofferd, as; c. There are veins that flee as well as cords in the armlet, and there are those that are full of windiness. for if when it is placed over the flame, drawn to fire, and cannot open the vein, then one becomes of those.
and if it works on the vein, so that the wound is too narrow, then it must be that the armlet-makers are knowledgeable in these matters.
est b in the line tous text a certain f. That is they shouldntara et:s s.
If the vein is swollen and the patient hopes it will heal, allow one or two days without tying the arm. Perhaps an abscess may come; neither enter nor bathe, then resume cleaning if it pleases him.
And if the shaft is small or you doubt subtly and do not bleed as much blood as you see, so faithfully:
And perform the work quickly, so that the vein may become inflamed; for this often occurs when the wound is small.
If you see the vein swollen, do not resume the bleeding, and apply a little oil there, for it eases the body's blood loss, and moistens this place with the oil.
and so administer the oil mixture on each bleeding vein that you treat, to stop the flow of blood.
:ssi fon leur et les seben; the l’t to bond 0 (bon't; they are.
When if it comes to large abscesses, which occur many times, especially when the opening of the vein is small and not fully healed. If hasty, place a damp sponge with warm water and salt on it, and hold it for an hour.
And it is necessary to do this after the blood drains from the vein, and if there remains any blackness or greenish color at the site for some days, do not disturb it. tul Castle; they that.
And it often occurs with the appearance of an abscess and inflammation in the groin area: therefore place your hand upon it, and if you find the location soft to the pressure of your hand, that is the harmful appearance. Avoid placing anything on it as we have mentioned, for sometimes there may be a severed artery; but make a dry plaster to harden the area, then treat with another remedy until it is healed.
And apply treatment according to each blood's quantity and its color.
If the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see it thick, let it become thinner; and if it is too warm, let it cool down.
And one who is pale and weak, requiring blood extraction, should have the incision made wider, creating larger gauzes.
And for those who are weak, do the opposite, and they should be nourished with little but often, and it is better to nourish them by cutting across rather than pulling.
This manner of dislocation is free from blood flow issues and nerve compression, and it allows the joint to move both long and wide.
And for those who need the joint to function, you should give them millet bread soaked in pomegranate juice; if they are faint, bleed three or four times.
And if they have cold complexion, give them millet bread in syrup or honeyed syrup with aromatic spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, well-fragranced syrup.
And if it is inflamed at the wound, after much blood loss, one must give him broth with vinegar and a sweet-smelling syrup.
and employ the other remedies we have mentioned in the section on fainting for draining of blood vessels.
And if he wishes to vent the arms and drain them again, when they are greatly inflamed, it must be done little by little, according to the quantity of their virtue continuously.
And if you want to suck blood from the arm after the first drainage, and it has a strong body, then remain healthy six hours after the first drainage, or after the final hour.
And if you wish to bleed from another area, do so on the second day or later.
For there is much blood within the body that has become heated, and it causes fever; if one must drain a large quantity, then dilate the vein as much as possible until it flows freely. after he s tould; but by theirs This often occurs when the surgeon is careless;
and it is unnecessary when you see the arm dislocated, to make blood flow out again a second time, with the artery closed, so that you press firmly above. and if it is curved, extend the arm quickly, because this would be very bad.
However, let it heal until the second time; or do not touch at the tip of inflammation, as long as the vessels have hardened and clotted. And place on some fresh sinew, and press lightly.
And if the vein has receded, leave it alone and do not press until the abscess is soothed.
And if it is necessary to bleed again the blood a second time, whether from that same place or another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein within the arm is bled at its root because it is composed thusly.
And the manner of bleeding is that the patient puts their hand in hot water until the knife turns red;
Then bind it securely so that the vein appears well, then sew now across the grain, not wide or long.
and let the wound be wide open, and sew well near the joint of the hand so that nothing can escape from it, then wash the hand in hot water, and allow the blood to drain into the water until you have enough.
and if it is infected, do not reinsert the hand in hot water, because during winter it's done more often than in summer.
;d sober s. 8t; the (th and; a bishopte cont be.
The blood of the salve on the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it's done:
Stretch the hand, and pour on hot water until the veins are seen. And if you see any blood vessels across it, and cover them entirely without causing harm.
said:
And then place the hand in warm water if the blood is frozen in the wound, so that it cannot escape.
And when you have treated the wound as much as necessary, apply oil and fat to the veins quickly to bind them together, doing this with each thread.
The treatment for the disease in the left hand is as I have told you for the right.
; don'fe an: As with diseases of the muscles, retention of fluids, and illness of veins, and old hernias in thighs and legs, and similar ailments.
And the quality of his illness is such that the patient brings forth pus in hot water, and rubs over the vein until it dries. and he lies on the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and from there it goes out much blood.
so far;
When you sanctify the foot's bone, beware of the nerves beneath it and cleanse as with a spatula; let the fumes ascend.
If the sinew cannot be removed, place the foot in water and ensure that the vein empties well.
If you need to repeat it for a second time above a little, because the bone is tender. sontrigu; Is- Oudiers.
The root of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle joint and its inflammation causes pain in the thigh when it is hot with blood.
And the quality of its inflammation is such that the patient lies in bed and raises it above the ankle by four fingers with twisting.
because otherwise it does not open up; and if opened, the inflammation extends in all ways that you can see, including across. And instruct to move so you can grasp it, for the place is loose, and it is greatly supported by handholders.
And instruct to move so you can grasp it, for the place is loose, and it is greatly supported by handholders. And if you cannot grasp it, use any part of the body that fits around or behind the two flat sides, and towards the small hole, while guarding your nerves.
And make a sufficient incision where you see blood, and then tie the ligament, and place it on a cotton bandage and compress; now it is healed.
sir scouch;
Ventouses are made of horns, or glass, or ivory; and suction is performed in two ways: either by pricking the blood to draw it out, or without pricking.
And this suction method that does not involve pricking has two ways: either at full heat, or without heat.
and two others in the two ribs of the neck; and the veins below the chin. and the veins above the shoulders; and the veins over the knees; , which is not de lest: And the blisters of both ankles; and bleeding does not occur from venous punctures, but rather minute drops scattered within the vein.
And therefore one should not be afraid of it, as with the evacuation of blood; And heal only those diseases that come from the evacuation of blood until they are cure; do not be afraid, but it has no fear and such, so qu’il est maladies qui venin, like otherwise feux.
When by necessity of illness or custom, we take a rest at the beginning and end of each month, and in between every hour.
For there are some who, when they need to rest, have a heavy headache;
and if others experience bloating and redness on their face, and in their head, and neck, and darkness in the eyes.
nat#C. Do-rairet's the ru: bon: And if there are some who think about it, and see with their own eyes blood, wounds, death, and similar things.
And when we see these signs, especially when it is in the middle of the month, we order to ventose after three hours past noon.
The saint of the muscle helps with strength in the head... which comes to the eyes, and it must not be before the evacuation of all the body.
so that is a; the s:t they on the d does as much. Insect f (courd. The same taillez not to ch�farrith by https are the bewit continue and f:ler, but also est thems (or ceide et m les mort;llt se est s :
And it is not proper for those of cold constitution or with catarrh to do so, as it causes them much harm.
And for this reason, it is not adviseby those with insomnia or cold head diseases to use them.
And often become disoriented and for this reason put the balm more to fear of illness; henceforth is applied with ointment.
Ventilation within the neck is located near the windpipe and base of the skull, hence it affects the stretching of the throat. and to an incision in the channel of the larynx, and all, and swelling.
and should be gently treated, for if it holds too tightly, may cause obstruction or a bloated abdomen and body.
Ventilation of two ribs close to the neck causes pain in the head, otitis and migraine, and strangulation, and pain at the root of teeth.
And it is in the region of the sanctuary of the Basilica; and you must instruct the surgeon to express his hand for placement, so he does not cut an artery or cause bleeding.
Ventilation near the chin causes diseases of the mouth, and decay of gums, and similar illnesses within the mouth; it is in the region of the sanctuaturi de l’orifice du ventre, et as dolors dou flanc qui est par le nerfs des costez.
The whitening of shoulders signifies an illness arising from heat and fullness.
The whitening of wrists is as much like three veins in the arm. too pude:
And instruct the surgeon not to cut too deeply, for the flesh is close to bone and contains veins and arteries.
The bladder that is above the rump is for hemorrhoids and diseases beneath it, and it must be large, made of wool, requiring thorough milking; and sometimes if it were too fine, it would break, causing great wounds.
The bladders for the legs cleanse openly because they draw blood from all over the body and are effective against ancient pains of the knees, hips, and bladder, and alleviate symptoms; they also weaken the body after prolonged use in certain positions, bringing about swelling in various conditions.
The method of applying the cupping is that you first place it empty and do so promptly, apply quickly, move equally, and continue without stopping until you see the spot turn red and swell, with a reddish color from blood: then release, remove the cups, and be aware of the condition of the body, for there are those who have tender flesh and clear pores; thus it is necessary to strike once only, making wide and somewhat deep incisions, and suck gently.
And if the blood vessel is large, it should be struck twice: the first time to thin out the path of the thick blood.
And if the vessel is very dense, it should be struck a third time; and when we want to draw out blood little by little, we only strike once at most.
And if we wish to obtain much blood, let us begin often; and if the vein is weak, cut it deeply, and terminate so that the vessel be pierced firmly.
And for those with large and hard skin, and who have inflammations, one should warm the bubbles of oil remedial and dissolving. if it is in this case, with blue oil or almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil.
s;m; the her. Don're t
If there is excessive swelling that is large and cold, take oil of myrrh, or balmmyrtle oil, or aniseed oil, and similar substances.
And if it is the one you treat with tender skin and wide pores, there is no need to apply oil.
but it is necessary to wash after ventosation with pink water, or cold water, or elderberry water, or gourd water, or porcelain water, or other similar substances.
by *t and there; The same* archu (pris the telle;
And those who have large excesses rise from old wine or water of beech, or infusion of anise or chamomile, or other similar substances.
And they must not exercise after the hot bath or in the bathtub, but an hour and a half after the bath; and do not sleep immediately after the cupping.
It is necessary that he takes a bath when he needs to be cupped and when he has been cupped. the bie. 1if. M. Do this de t; If it is necessary to apply cold things such as ripe pomegranates and endive and lettuce easily, and similar things.
and spices like cumin, and the fat of the chestnut, and moist meats.
And those who have a cold constitution should take a syrup of honey and fragrant wine that is neither too old nor new, with little seasoning, including spices like cumin, fennel seeds, small birds, and partridges.
the me said it'ise alta; conterfair C.
And it is customary to give certain individuals triacle or muskat in front of the dislocation, or afterward, to strengthen the main limbs. And it should be subtly administered without heating; however, only those who are hot may drink it.
The cupping vessels that are placed without causing harm are those placed on the liver, and kidney, and gout, and abdomen, and scrotum and groin, because these members cannot be pricked there.
bytight las les main se tgrhe; that la: Sce they should n’sould and the ou f: As we have found with the limbs when they are diseased; to remove the hardness that is in the member, as we apply pumps on the belly and the buttocks to reduce the swelling.
And remove the pain, when there is obstruction or stones, and draw out the obstruction by its attracting power, if possible, or return the stone to its place.
And thus do it when you put it on the liver and spleen where there is retained gasness,
And these blisters are made hollow for draining as needed; and sometimes they are filled with heat, and at other times plain water.
As with other pains in the loins, and thus you fill the blister with hot water poured over it or water that has boiled healing herbs in it.
The form of administering fire to the blister is as follows:
with dur:
et it may be from a fall forward such that it does not hurt the patient when placed on the limb;
And let there be a rod of iron or bronze, to put on an appliqué chain;
And they should be large and small according to the diseases and conditions of those who take them;
For children's blisters are different from those of old men, and thinner than fat ones.
And thus this blister should be placed upon the limb:
Take a candle of wax or ointment, and place it inside the blister across the shaft which is within the blister, for their they should de:
And then place it under the limb, and your thumbs should be under the joint that we have mentioned, so when you want to, as air goes in and out, inflate a bladder.
And apply ointment as before, and repeat often, if needed.
In the bladder used for treating pleurisy, it has no shaft nor prickle and is only applied when filled with water, and placed on the limb momentarily.
by en il Flet suest; but that la jum; 1uer esttre ces their n'emlement mar :l its e tel le ou not so or.
Without bandages being applied except to limbs where one cannot apply blisters due to their size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas. And in the removal of scabs from burns, like boils or pustules, and other similar things.
And the quality of their use is that when you find bandages that are in soft clean sheets without stains, take them.
by tocherne (uccut. Then make them of veins and compresses, then rub the limb until it is red, and apply bandages.
And when they are smooth and dry, if there's a place to apply compresses or not, then do so, as it is very effective afterwards.
If not, lift the wound slightly and apply plenty of water, squeeze well afterward.
the mostn: 1
When there is a multiple increase of pus, apply crushed vitriol or scales and similar things until it dries up.
Or place the lukewarm ointment on a layer of scraped skin, and leave it until they dry out completely.
And if you need more, take additional dressings.
; the chis. And then place it back on, and almost immediately as they feel the blood, they become rigid.
And when you see them bleed, apply a bit of aloe and ground silex or ash, which will stop the bleeding now.
Here begins the book of fractures.
These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and they involve the repair and replenishment of fractures and dislocations.
Understand, dear student, that the wise physician knows this chapter, which is not seen in any ancient books or letters read.
and therefore this knowledge is rare in our land because I have never found a good one.
the t are allus, and sofckse J-h80. M. igne: that he c. I's.gement. The
And I have described to you in this chapter what is contained therein and abbreviated at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the treatments that are made, as I did in these two previous chapters.
Therefore, we must say that in this book are the summits of speech and chapters wherein the wise place their understanding, staying on truth so those experienced may know and learn this noble art and teach it to others.
I say that when any fracture or dislocation or twist or distortion comes to anyone, it is proper for you to stabilize the patient's limb on both sides, if nothing holds them entirely, as in weak joints, or infants, or elderly.
If the tension is not very strong or too cold; and mix with cool water, that is to say cold soups, chicken, and veal broth, do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself up too much with foods that saturate the veins with blood, until you are free of fear of an abscess or discharge of matter in the limb; then return to the first course of regimen as you have used it.
And when broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with foods that cause heavy nutrition, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, beans, lentils, cheese, eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar things. Because with this kind of nutrebrightness the fractures heal quickly and faster.
And know that broken bones of the aged and infirm cannot be well mended or joined according to their natural state for limb strengthening, nor those who are too tender, like bones of small children.
But pay no attention to it and reset the broken bone with large tendons that are strong and join the member together, until they strengthen as before; do not perform all of your work on it, and for this reason, nourish them with hearty meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures are various in many ways.
When a fracture of the head is different from that of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. For some fractures go up to the head and others by sharpening, as writing with a pen tip.
For some fractures go up to the head and others by sharpening, as writing with a pen tip. And if there is a break with a wound, and a crack like a small tear.
And each must have its own means and proper instrument for restoration, according to what memory brings forth in that place.
and is known the bone break by how the eye is twisted, and opened well on its side, and it is close to the press of the hand.
if you have: counce.
However, it can have twisting, or tearing, or a small break. But do not move the hand unless it is necessary; then apply medicines that come later in this manner and gently restrain now subtly.
And know that the breaks which are hanging loose, and are the two parts disconnected, they must now be brought together evenly, as when abscesses occur.
c. The d cut Then make it even with movements that you can perform easily and gently, knowing that the restoration is easier than those where there are broken pieces; then strain as necessary afterwards.
And if the bone is broken into two pieces, whether it's hands or feet, or to your hand if it's small limbs, or to two tendons, or to one tendon and your hand;
And set the limb according to its natural shape, so that if the parts of the broken limb are disjointed, you align them by all means at their original positions with movements that you can perform easily and gently, and ensure through your work there is no injury or pain for the patient.
And properly align both heads of bone according to their best forms.
And if the hand feels quite well to you but not perfectly: dress it neatly and do not strain or press it as those who cause abscesses with heat and contraction of limbs, which we have seen many times.
And when the limb is about to break, gently restrain the patient so they do not move it, neither while awake nor asleep, nor turning in any other way. And ensure that the limb is so securely fastened that it feels no pain at all. For when it feels no pain whatsoever, and then it must be placed in a position where it experiences no pain at all.
For when it feels no pain whatsoever, and then it must be placed in a position where it experiences no pain at all. And ensure that it is set straightly, so that deformities do not arise once restored.
the they had the lesse ne so be a m. Do you should no la f, and e:
Know that broken limbs are of various sizes, both small and large, and forms.
For there are small limbs such as arms and legs: one must wrap them with soft fine linen.
And those that are large, such as thigh and leg: one must wrap them with a wide strong bandage, for broad bands encompass the whole large limb, and grip it evenly on all sides so there is no slack.
First, use gentle tapes, three or four turns depending on the limb, and hold your hand tightly along the entire length, then go above the fracture and grip less so that it's not too tight over the break, gradually move away from the break.
and soften the limb a little at a time until you grasp a large part of the healthy portion, then take another tape, and wrap around again near the fractured area.
then return to the part below the break and grip it moderately, not too tightly or too loosely, as we said in the first section above.
Then place between the stretched linen or cloth strips so that they are all equal, then tie it above a bandage, and then set proper dressings on top, unless there is an abscess or inflammeblock.
And if there is inflammation or abscess, then apply something soothing to the abscess heat and remove the swelling, leaving it thus for a few days.
Then tighten the dressings and be of a moderate width strip of strong cloth or wood shavings, or palm leaves, according to this shape:
But it is necessary for the lever to be placed on the fracture somewhat larger and wider than the others.
and so be as long as needed depending on whether the limb requires minor or major correction;
then strain the lever in the same way you did for the first time, and further with a cord if necessary, just as was done initially on the fracture.
ane is:
If the threads are thick, as I have seen in works of foolish people who make their loops with linen thread, it is a great error, for the loop cannot be even if it is too fine, and it must not be more than less than two spaces between each stone.
And if the patient is in pain from the heads of the stones after resetting into healthy positions, place cotton or linen rags under them so they do not move.
When the wound is accompanied by broken bones, I will explain its treatment hereafter.
And know that it is not necessary to strain all broken limbs on the first day. For when limbs are large, it is not necessary to apply splints unless after 5 or 6 days, or more depending on the risk of infection setting in.
And here is the manner of ancient splints to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists: take flour that stands on mill walls, mix it with plenty of egg, and use this concoction, not too clear or too thick, which is a common way of using the restorative splint for various conditions in adults as well as women and small children, since it is neither too warm nor too cold.
Another method of poultice for healing fractures and dislocations and twists: take pitch from the pine tree and tanydeum and olive oil and gum arabic and mastic resin, about 12 parts each; myrrh and aloeswood, about 5 parts each; frankincense .viiij. (7) parts; and make a powder, with honeycomb wax mixed with raw butter; if the patient's constitution is hot, use this poultice as it has good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, beneficial to many individuals.
Another poultice beneficial for twisting: take mastic resin and white wax, about 12 parts each; myrrh and aloeswood, about 7 parts each; acacia gum .viiij. (7) parts; frankincense .x. (10) parts, grind finely, mix with water or raw butter, and apply to the affected area.
Another poultice for joints and bones dislocated from their usual position, relieving pain upon application, and helps with the healing of fractures: take new wool, lint in oil, and put it on the affected area. This type of poultice does not restore but is good to alleviate inflammation caused by abscesses and properly soothes pains.
Another method to mend broken bones: take dry leaves of fig, and leaves of earthly poppy, and grind them together, and make a paste.
Another method for mending broken bones and easing the remaining abscess. Take roots of valerian, chamomile, violet flowers, bran, from each part; grind it, then mix with wine, and if the limb is swollen, apply the mixture mixed with wet coriander or water, as needed.
Another method for mending broken bones, especially when the abscess is persistent in healing the limb. Take roots of valerian, flaxseed, balm, sesame, and celery leaves, and flowers of violets and chamomile; from each part grind it, then mix with salt water or fresh water, or wine, depending on the warmth of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras states in his book that nothing should be applied on a broken limb for healing other than wax and oil mixture, and it should not be too hard or too soft.
And according to Galen, one should apply dry and slightly warm substances on a broken limb for healing, such as myrrh, aloe, incense, and similar things, as we have mentioned.
Another method for dressing wounds and alleviating pain: take crushed dog and cat hairs or feathers from birds, as well as yarrow and equal amounts of the same herbs, then grind them together to create a poultice and apply it to the affected area.
And then gently realign it shortly afterward, and be cautious to ensure the patient does not feel any pain, nor has his bone moved from its place; if he cannot remain in position, do not attempt re-dislocation.
If pain comes to the place, or itching, feeling of restlessness or swelling occurs, hurry and re-dislocate, and make the limb immobile now; take a light cloth, dampen with seawater, and immerse in cold water, then raise the area until the itching ceases, and pain is alleviated. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then wrap it in dry linen, moistened with rose oil or warm water, and bind it up, until you are sure of any heat coming from an abscess.
When the inflammamoin is on the limb and bone pain persists, then resume the subtle adjustment, with a little opium, and do not stretch it as strongly as before; delicately until it becomes steady.
And if you see that an abscess and redness and pain and swelling are throughout the bone, and you need opium and ligature, when it is resumed as before.
And if nothing comes to the limb as we have said, do not loosen it until after three or four or five or six days; and never leave it untied for twenty days, according to what is seen, as long as the fracture heals, and approach the joint above.
Then you must first reset it more firmly than before, and let the flesh grow, as I have said earlier; and if you see that the joint dries out more than necessary, know that no movement can occur. It arises from warm water baths taken each time you dislocate it, and do this every day, and rub the area lightly.
Thus through this practice you will induce numbness in the limb, and quickly follow what the wise doctors advise: they restore the member correctly; it is wrong to twist it back without proper care, and these are dreadful practices that lead only to more pain and working directly.
of various ways of breaking Many ways of breaking, various shapes, and causes are different;
because there are breaks made from the percussion of swords, and joints where the bone is cut all the way to the socket above the bone, as with an axe or stick; and for this reason, this type of breakage is called "hachure."
When the sword cleaves the bone above without piercing, and this manner of fracture is called "absolute"; there are wounds from these two large or small fractures.
And if there is an impacted break, crack, or stone bruise, or from falling on stones, and similar injuries.
And if there is a sliding fracture, which reaches the skin just above or below the bone, and this wound is large or small.
And if there is a wound that has been sutured in the bone as subtly as hair follicles, and it is a small tear, thus this breakage is called "hairline".
And if the wound is made by being pierced with an arrow, or falling, or similar things, causing the bone piece to protrude, and its edges are as close together like pots on a stove; then within it there lies between the pieces of the arrow.
And this occurs mostly in those who have soft bones, just as children's heads do.
And this occurs in all ways of bone fractures where small pieces are displaced as such; and I will speak about it here.
And we know all ways of bone fractures through displacement above them, and examination with probing rods, and by the decayed cartilage that is below.
The hair-like appearance is known when you have discovered the bone and rubbed it gently; then the bone fracture appears black.
by; and so.
And if you do not see an easily recoverable accident, but expect a cure, then begin the treatment.
And when the pain first reaches you, and it is in winter, one must remove the bone before the fourteenth day that you can move.
And if it is thus (the situation), and you hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, then so that the tissue around the bone becomes corrupted, come the accidents that we have mentioned.
If the bone fracture reaches to the cloth covering the brain, then you must split the fractured part as such: and it is that you grasp the head where the patient has been wounded, and expose above the bone in all ways possible, and on the surface of the wound area more gently than possible.
And if bleeding occurs at the exposed bone or abscesses appear, use what is necessary and it is that you fill up the area with milled cloths in oil rose. And allow the wound to rest until the abscesses are soothed and bleeding stops; then start working around the bone to remove it. This is done in two ways of surgery: one way is that you cut at the narrow front portion, and this is its shape:
And then he makes another incision larger than the first.
And the second method is to have numerous incisions of different kinds, some narrow and others wide, pointed or made with an iron instrument; perform this work gently, without cutting the head.
And if the bone is thick and hard, it must be pierced all around so that you make incisions with chisels without piercing through the skull, and there should be a margin or circle above the tip of each one to prevent the point from going beyond the bone; therefore, you should have several, so that each is placed according to the thickness of the bone, having chisels for all types of skulls; this is the form of the three methods of chisels:
You place a vessel over the broken bone so you can feel when it is completely pierced; then move the vessel to another part for a while and do this throughout, then use scissors on the space between the fragments of bone as subtly as possible and gently, as we have said, until you reach the bone with your hand or any of the tools you have like pincers. And be careful not to touch the brain or spinal cord.
And when you have pierced the bone and reached it, then it is necessary to use an instrument similar to a scissor for cutting that remains attached to the bone, but it must be thinner and more subtle than the other scissors.
and if there is nothing left of the small bones or scales, then lightly with one of your tools; then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
And another method of treatment is that which Galen describes, which is more subtle; and let it be done strongly, as he says. It is first necessary to expose the part of the bone where the break occurred, and once it has been exposed, place atop the flat head of this chisel-like instrument, which looks like so:
And make the incisionez. Et les oilleu mors un le chrestant les oste oteinne:
If it is dislocated to the bone, gently set it, as improper setting can cause harm and fear.
And if the bone fracture does not pierce through to the skin and the bone is cut above slightly, leaving small fragments; then apply care to that area, and use a fine razor to remove scales in varying amounts as needed for each location with the most suitable treatment according to the nature of the fracture and its shape.
If there are many large scales, first use more substantial tools, then transition to finer ones, and continue until it is thoroughly done.
In each of these other hair treatments and delicate breaks, it is necessary to reset them according to their precise direction; and this is something that cannot be restored for those who have studied in this art.
And if the wound is discovered, it is necessary to take a piece of linen cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and moisten with oil roseate, and place upon the wound. then take another piece of cloth doubled two or three times, and moisten with wine and oil roseate, and place upon the first cloth; and do this gently as you can, so that you do not burden the wound, but rather ease it by placing another layer on top, without tightening it more than needed to cover the wound only.
Allow it to remain thus for a day or two until the abscess is calmed down, then release it and administer medicines as root of lis, barley flour, wheat flour, incense powder, aristology, and similar things. And from these substances make powder, apply to the wound, and administer again medicine without causing pain.
And ensure the wound is thoroughly cleaned, do not leave any ointment or bandage residue, as when sores gather above the brain cloth, they become hardened and swollen, causing great harm; for when a stinging substance is applied on top, it irritates below.
Take care then, if by any chance something happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
And if darkness does not come with the medicine applied, so that it has its virtue, one must take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil mixed with egg yolk, and apply it to the sackcloth. Then proceed in treating as is fitting until healed.
Know that at no time are the two bones above broken or severed by themselves alone, for they are both bone; and that below is cartilage, which does not break nor twist, but heals in due course.
And if one of the two parts is broken, it must be that you set your little finger or thumb near the nose, and make the fracture even within your index finger, and in the palm by default, until the nail returns to its natural shape. And do this gently, ensuring that the patient does not feel pain during your procedure.
And if the fracture is above the nail, and cannot bring the finger back to its original position, it's necessary that you align them even with a bit of force on one side.
And if the fracture is of two parts, you do likewise to reset it, and hasten to restore on the first day, if you can.
If not, after the seventh or last day when the abscess has calmed down, then bind to the neck with linen cloths, if the fracture is in one piece.
Or you bind another on the other side, if the fracture is there; and let the linen cloths be so large that they fill the slits of the neck.
by ous are the ou the cnzecors— (no in the whole. In this.
At no time are goose feathers blown into the tent openings, and if one is near an exposed sore, it becomes aggravated, causing a breeze that troubles the sickly person; thus do as you see fit.
And if an abscess comes to the wound while you work on it, place a piece of lint or cotton soaked in rose oil, or a small amount of diaquilon (iodine).
And if the abscess does not appear, apply a plaster using flour of sage, powdered incense, mixed with egg white, then place it over light gauze strips without binding them to the wound.
If the broken bone of the nose is small and crushed into tiny pieces, extract it with appropriate splints, then straighten the fracture, and treat various difficult conditions such as inflammatury and swelling, as necessary with suitable plasters and ointments.
If there is no dense nose without wounds, apply bandages and compresses until it heals completely.
Regarding the treatment of a broken jawbone:
When the jawbone is dislocated and there is no resulting wound or fracture present, and the breaks are slight only, unless cracks inside can be seen with ease.
It is necessary that if the fracture is on the right side, you insert your index finger into the patient's mouth; and if the fracture is on the left mandible, put your index finger of your right hand in it gently, align it carefully with the other hand slowly, and make it even.
And if the fracture of the jaw is dislocated at two points, it is necessary that you adjust the expansion so evenly.
If movements of the teeth occur or jostling happens, then strain one with a thread of gold or silver or silk; place on the broken mandible cerot, and put on it a double cloth; lay a large well-made stone under the cloth, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the mandible, at the junction you can see, and instruct the patient to rest, and consume light meats.
And if you see that the figure is changing, relocate the dislocated joint, and then restore what has changed; place a poultice over it with finely ground powder or wheat flour after removing the cerot; put on a light linen, and as long as the poultard remains, the patient's condition does not change; often it is cured in three weeks.
And if abscesses come about, treat them as we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, no part of the bone has been set; subtly remove the fragments near the bruises with this tool.
And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with flame as needed.
And once you have removed all these pieces of bone and it does not stay in place, close the wound if it is wide, and apply on it some bandages to stop bleeding, until it heals properly.
by; æm�:our : The force breaks in many instances on the shoulder blade, and there are three ways to break it: where it is broken and torn into two, with fragments, and it is easier to restore; or there is a fracture with an open wound.
And the work is as follows when there is a fracture with an open wound, so you have two assistants; one who warms the shoulder that has been broken off, and the other extends the neck to the affected area; then place the fractured bone on your shoulders so that it forms correctly, without any appearance or discomfort.
And if you need to extend further, place a round rod made of cloth or wool under the patient's shoulder, and make it as thick as necessary; then stretch out the broken bone and lift it up, so that you can properly align the fracture with your hand.
And if you cannot pull the dislocated shoulder back into place because it comes out from the front, then let the patient lie on their stomach and place half an ounce of weight against the shoulder blade, and apply pressure to push the shoulder downward until the bone is realigned.
Then go to the broken bone and if you find fragments, make an incision; gently extract the pieces of bone, and if the bone cannot be joined by any means, apply a splint from one of the instruments you have; but place it under the shoulder blade for support:
And make it into a spoon shape and not pointed, and be of the same width as needed according to the size of the bone and strength of the hand; and have two handles, if you see them, with one being wide and the other narrow, just like the pattern of the wound that was made when you treated the bones:
And when you are sure of an abscess being hot, if the wound is small, or if you doubt whether the pus is hot, lay a cloth and bandages on the wound according to its amount.
And if an abscess comes out, apply oil-soaked cloth and lambswool and wine, and place it on top.
The setting of a bone when it is without wounds and not torn, is to put plaster made of finely ground powder and egg yolk on the bone, along with light bandages, and if needed, place a shaft underneath the cast. Then take a very wide band of palm width, then place two folded cloths over the dislocation, and the splint; then take a subtle rod three fingers wide and long, wrap it around that band, ensuring the head of the band is hanging. And place the rod over the dislocation, turn the band around the neck and above both joints, good and bad; adjust each part's movement, and when you see that the fracture is held steadily, and clearly the rod does not move beyond the broken bone, rewrap it daily, and keep restraining once the ties loosen.
And lay the injured on his back, and place a small pillow underneath their shoulder to elevate it; this will help with pain from the dislocation by supporting the shoulder, where you tie the arm to the neck, ensuring no bad accidents occur until 20 days.
Then begin the splint again if it is needed, and restrain and leave it so until it is restored; and it is restored in at most twenty-eight days for some people.
Of the broken shoulder
Occasionally the shoulder may break or dislocate and cannot be moved with force; if you are to set it according to the shape of the fracture, and mold it in all natural ways that you can; then put powdered meal on the wound with plenty of egg white, and light gauze; then place a wide and delicate bandage over the shoulder, slightly wider than the injured area, ensuring evenness along the entire shoulder using linen thread for sutures; and then restrain it completely with a large strong binding so that the bandage does not move from its place, and check each day if there is swelling; every time you adjust, ensure the bandage remains in position and elevate the patient's chest. The shoulder will be restored within 20 to 25 days, but it must not be released too soon because bones do not set easily again once moved.
When a fragment of bone juts out and is not covered by skin, push it downward, and the bone, as we have said in treating an abscessed lump with heat.
In the case of broken thighs
The thigh is never broken all at once, but this happens rarely; however, it often breaks further back. And when it is broken in the middle, it descends below, and the patient feels great pain, weakness, and numbness, and sometimes vomits blood, and opens up cracks in the broken bone, which they feel very well.
The method of restoration is that the patient lie on their back, and place a pillow between the shoulder blades, then press the shoulder blades, and bring together the edges of the two ribs with your hands, and subtly adjust them in all ways possible until they are as they should be; then place emollients and plasters over the fractured bone, or any other light material, and wrap it in a bandage so that it does not move; then return the ligament to its round shape on the back, and do so gently, checking every hour for movement, and if it becomes more relaxed, keep it strained; and if it needs to be dislocated due to corrosion or pruritus at the site, pain, or pustule, do so promptly, and loosen it, remove the plaster, and provide whatever treatments are necessary for healing; then reapply the plaster, and keep it strained until it is healthy.
The breaking of ribs
This is the questioning and it's done inquire well by this: "and so beau li les ares dite paroles.
And the resettings are to make the fracture even as it should be. Then place the splint, and strain with a stake if necessary.
And if the fracture of the ribs is descending into the chest, causing the patient great pain and pointlessness, like from pleurisy, because the bone lacks flesh; it swells with points, and vomits a large amount of blood, making it a serious illness, and the ancients have given much attention to this.
And if there are those who say that it is necessary to administer meats that inflame the stomach in order to push the fracture forward.
We do not cause abscesses to become infected if they were not already present. And if it is present, let the healing process begin.
And some say that they apply bandages on the body to soak with tincture, and it seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the bandage may draw excess fluids to the area due to its weakness.
Cover the bleeding wound with hot oil and apply bandages between the ribs to ensure even pressure around it; then treat with plasma cures, fatty substances, and medicines.
If the patient feels great pain that cannot be endured by the protruding bone, and there is doubt in the patient, then you must split open the fractured rib area; and it is necessary to use an instrument to guard over the wound; then you must cut the bone, gently extract a little, and then stitch the two edges of the wound if they are large, and treat with plasters until healed. And if pus comes out, apply moistened linen cloth soaked in rose oil on it, and place it over the area; and while treating the fractured rib that requires treatment for abscesses, ensure bandaging is done correctly along the ribcage where necessary, until healed.
Treatment of a broken collarbone involves applying moistened linen cloth soaked in rose oil to the area and ensuring proper bandaging over the affected ribs for healing.
At no time does there come a fracture of the hip bone, and rarely happens that it bends; and similarly to the spine of the back. And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will survive or not, be aware that if you see their hands becoming softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them or extend them, and when you poke the fingertips with a needle, they do not feel. Know that it is fatal in certain conditions, but if they are moved and feel well when restrained and not allowed to, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and the patient will be cured if proper care is given.
And when similar things happen to the spine of the back, and you want to know if they will survive or not, be aware that if their feet are softened, and there is an accident where they have clots (hematomas), and under the back one feels windiness and egestion without volition; and when it has been soothed on its belly, it also experiences egestion without volition. And when it is soothed on its back and wants to rise, it cannot. Know that it is fatal: do not attempt any treatment in their care.
And if this accident does not occur, it is a lighter matter.
And the treatment is to apply ointment of rose oil or oil from a young goat on any abscess until it's eased; then place it under one of the comforting and drying plasters, bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; and they should not sleep on that part where they feel pain until healed. And if any bone is dislocated, cover the affected area with a cloth; then remove the bone and join both edges of the wound, stitch it closed if they are large, apply anointing ointment from charcoal until healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, known as "head of the cow", put your pouch on your left hand, and place it at the same level as your right hand, then place a plaster and bandage over it if needed; then press, and if there are any dislocated bones, fix them, remove them, and treat the wound until healed.
Of the breaking of the bone of the hip
Occasionally a hip bone may be broken, and if so, it is not greatly reduced in size; they become long, incline towards the pelvis, causing pain at the location, swelling, and breaking further.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it until you are above the fracture; and determine which bone is broken and its shape; and if the fracture is solely at the head, then set the same fracture to have natural alignment.
If the break is long or it descends into the innermost part, have the patient lie on their stomach until the restoration of that break is ready. And once you have aligned it, place it on the embalming table, then put a wooden or metal rod underneath and secure the break, so that it does not move; and remove any debris from above the ribs until they are level.
And command the patient to sleep on his sound stomach, or on his back.
And if an abscess comes to pass, do not touch it until the abscess is soothed, and follow what we have previously mentioned; then return to restoration, and bind as needed, unless there is any unfortunate incident; this is how it should be done.
Of the shoulder joint fracture
by 1 the p
And tie off two arteries and veins, and cut them short, then suture the wound over one of these; then pour some boiled oil or egg whites onto the sticking plaster, until it reaches the edge, and have a wooden trough underneath, then hang it from any heavy object or extenders reach out towards it; then place your hands around the tear equally, until the tear heals as it should.
And the other method is that you suture the wound over its hollow part, and tie off the hand at its neck, then command two assistants so one dyes what is above the tear to his hands, and the other dyes below any vein, and they extend each to their respective parts.
And if you see that the extraction is too large, then tie off one vein above the tear and below it, and extend each assistant to their part. And if the tear is close to the head of the shoulder, it's appropriate to place one ligature under the joint, and another towards the neck, on either side of the tear; and similarly if the tear is towards the neck, then place a light ligature without too much force so that the tear becomes level with its location, and with the neck; then balance the cut equally as it should be, and tie off, unless there are abscesses.
If an abscess occurs, do not attempt to extract it until at least 3 days have passed; in the meanteby placing a cloth soaked in oil and vinegar on it until the abscess is calmed; then extract it, ensuring that you place the splint over the break, assemble the arm above the shoulder, and put your hand under the armpit or breast; cover with a bandage, and hold steady against the shoulder, then the arm so that it remains in position for setting unless something prevents it or if the bone is not moved.
If you suspect that the bone is not aligned, use splints and place a wider and stronger one over the fracture than the others, with two inches of space between each splint; make sure each splint is large enough to extend beyond the fracture by three inches on either side; then hold steady against the splints as I have described at the beginning of this chapter regarding holding firmly and not too loosely.
And if you notice the fracture site and swelling from compression, as we have said; then wait until seven days to check it daily for three times a day so that no inflammation or infection occurs at the site where it is too narrow; if necessary as we have stated. If there are other complications.
If no such incidents occur, do not dislocate it until after three or more days, and let the patient sleep on their back with hands placed over their stomach; place an equal plain cloth of wool under the shoulder, and check each hour during the day or night that the broken limb does not move or soften its ligaments. Then proceed by the virtue of medicine, and give them flesh as we have previously mentioned, in a way that the meat is at first subtle; and when it begins to regenerate, it should be thicker. It is customary for the shoulder and leg to heal completely within forty days; then you must dislocate and administer baths and ointment medicines to straighten the area. If the stricture is ugly and bent, delay dislocation for one day or two months.
On the break of the arm
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fibula," one being small and the other large, and it's that lies below; and sometimes the large fibula or both at once; occasionally, the large and small breaks occur together, or when either only the small.
When the small vessels are broken, restoration is easy, as is healing; and when the large ones are broken, so is the treatment difficult, and more painful than if they were broken all together. If only the small vessels are broken, then it should be extended slightly but evenly.
And if it is the large vessels, then stronger stretching is needed; extend over a small cushion, and raise the sleeve of the hand higher than the others, while the smaller fingers should be lower than the others, and cross your hands on either side of them, with another cushion in front of you raised higher so that you do not strain at all. Then extend the ministers' arms to the part below his hand or a joint, with one pair above the other. And then place it evenly, according to its best shape.
And if the break is in pieces, put each piece back in its place, and if any are out of order that reach towards the bone, and you cannot restore them to their place, then move it upwardly until your doctor can see it.
And if with the wound caused by breaking skin, I have discussed it with each individual practitioner; then they should take care of it.
And if in the beginning of healing an abscess occurs, then apply a cloth of crepe made from oil-rosin and white wax, ensuring it is neither too hard nor too soft; place such a cloth gently over all abscesses until they are eased. Then remove the poultice, and insert the splint with plenty of powdered molybdite, after which position the stitches so that at the fracture site they protrude slightly further outwards than the others; ensure there should be seven or more different stitch positions: whether the break is in one bone or two; and apply pressure above the fracture stronger than elsewhere, as previously mentioned at the start of this chapter; also let the bandages that cover the area be soft and moist, not hard or rough; and use thread made from flax, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And after some days, check the limb and ligaments again. And if anything accidental happens to the limb, such as itching that comes upon the member; then you must wash the affected area with warm water until the itch subsides; and let the limb not be left in strict rest. Then resume the straining, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones have settled, continue as before.
: s: nus les maints couvre and the chauz estt curoit a se vint la bles le mule the covent aui de lesmesse en dou ; et ne quire ce li prise et jos tu que si pas, est li, et, then les. And as tout lien l’e ite:
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, do not reset it until xx days or so, then tie his hands behind his neck and make them even, and watch for movement and displacement, and let him sleep on his back; know that this dislocation is restored in xxx days or vj days, and sometimes in xx days, according to the compositions and complexions of the substances.
For a hand fracture
Know that in the back of the hand and sometimes we see fractures, but they often occur more than once.
When the plant of the hand is broken or bent, it must be instructed to bind with a cross-stitch and sit straight up evenly; then place his hand under an extended cloth, extend the broken bones equally in length, and apply plaster and cotton wool if there are no abscesses, then put on a splint according to the quantity of the fracture; and be wrapped in a linen sheet.
If the fracture is near the windpipe within the hand's plantar area, make a splint from cloth and instruct the patient to bind it with their broken palm; then strain using a long piece of fabric, ensuring the splint at its base is as large as the hand'amoeba
And if the fracture is on the heel, it must be that you place a splint underneath and another above in the plantar area, ensuring the hand remains open and straight; then wrap around the entire hand, securing the joint between the bones.
And if a fracture occurs in one of our legs, if it is the knee, then set it evenly as needed; and use a splint, ensuring it does not move; and if the fracture is with other joints, adjust them like those indicated or among others, aligning them evenly, using the healthy adjacent joint that follows; bind all together in one place so they may move accordingly, placing a small straight stake, as for supporting a hernia. Be cautious during healing and placement of abscesses, and care for those who come with it, as I have said.
For a broken hip
The bone of the hip is often broken, and it can be seen when it turns forward and backward; its restoration consists in tying one ligament above the fracture, and another below. And the patient lies on his face, then extends each minister's hand equally to their side; and this is when the fracture occurs within the bone.
And if the fracture is near the root of the thigh, let one hand be towards the wrist and the other above the fracture. Likewise, if it's near the knee, then place the hands by the knee and extend outwards; then align the bone equally with both hands, according to its natural shape, and then apply the splint, unless an abscess forms.
And if it's hot, let the abscess be soothed first and then return to your work and care; the splint is made in part this way. It is necessary that you wrap around the break with a doubled cloth bandage of two or three layers and hold in place any excess. Then turn the leg so that the heel reaches the root of the thigh, and tie a long thread between the hip and the leg, below the knee joint; then adjust the head of the thread upwards; then again wrap above the leg and hip with the cloth bandage, then place a stake over the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and the hip with soft fabric to make the tightening even; then begin to tie three or four turns or four on the break; and as you move closer to the break, apply less pressure. Then go back up to the two knees of the thread that you tied between the leg and the hip, and place three stakes above them, then return to below the heel with the head of the thread until you reach the foot; and if it does not move from its place, leave it as is; then check for any abscess or swelling.
And if it occurs, when the dislocation happens, and address what comes out as we have said many times before; and if there are pieces of bone that protrude, one should attempt to remove them; but if not possible, then cut open the wound, and extract deeply; and treat according to our instructions until it is healed.
and the f if is le telle ; quia s’en our les d't comme a c’est lits it be onme et este lier to the boils. So let them iudged, then, si tu la comtre. Et heus; Et les traite, done ne pains:
And know that the groin is restored in one day or less or more, depending on the variations of constitutions.
From the fold by the knee joint
Know that in the fold of the knee joint there are often sprains, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, then it is only a tear or wound, and leads to all kinds of wounds, and feels like much pain.
t the line f (et n’s: 1.
of a fracture of the leg
He says that in the leg there are two bones: one is called "mustelz," and the other is called "foscile"; and all fractures occur as they do in the arm, so the restoration is just like that of the arm, and the methods are alike.
And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all directions.
by thet.
If the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and swelling can be seen; then reset it. Then straighten the fracture, align it evenly, and secure with splints equally; but always ensure that the breakage looks good, and if there are several pieces, make the realignment lesser and lighter; proceed as your skill allows.
And when you have completed your work, take two bandages made of wooden staves that wrap around the leg on both sides, and are as long as the leg from knee to ankle; then cover with two wraps above and below, securely tying them together so that the leg does not lean either left or right, enscribed well; and no one should administer a stick along the length of the leg if it is made of wood, instead they place the leg in position to restrict movement, properly doing this on the fracture site where there is an open wound; daily move the leg to check for any bleeding or other accidents; cure accordingly until it is healthy.
For the bone break in the foot
At the ankle there is no breakage, but at the lower leg bone there is occasional breakage and of small shafts, and nothing occurs that causes strain or other conditions.
And if there is a break in the lower leg bone, and you see these bones protruding from one another, place such poorly aligned foot on the ground as if it were to walk, then now put your own foot under theirs where the bones are raised, press until they return to their original places; then apply a poultice and bandage over it, and with two fingers plain nail clippers, clip near the belly of the lower leg, then straighten the bone as quickly as possible, then wrap in linens around, and other things as needed.
And when three or four days have passed, release the ligament, for you will find the bones equal, whether fractured or dislocated.
And if there are any broken bones, repair them as we have said for the hand's bones; then put a splint on the broken bone according to the length of the bone, and make it slightly wider, then place the tablet that I mentioned under the foot, and keep it steady; and if there are two or three or more, break them and place a splint on each bone according to its amount, wrapped in one linen cloth, and secure the tablet beneath the foot; so that they may be above the belly of the foot.
And it is important that you do not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, as we have discussed; and treat each injury as necessary.
For the fracture of the bone in the finger
When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, have her sit in a large chair, then tilt it toward the softer back and be held from behind; then fill the bag with cotton, and insert as much as one stalk; then let the woman stand up, and slightly lift her back over time, until the cotton reaches the entrance of the nature, restoring the bone along with the stalk; and when she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and once she has, allow it to return, doing this for seven days or so: the fracture will be healed, and if you wish, take a sheep bladder, tie up a reed at its mouth, and fill the entire bladaderwith liquid; then blow into the reed until the bladder is deflated inside: nature will mend the break. Then have it filled with cotton again, leaving it like this for several days until healed.
And when the bone of the hand or foot is broken in man or woman, restore it as we have described for the hip joint; and these close fractures are not hidden from those who apply their study and effort to this book. For a break signifies various approaches to the correct path of restoration: therefore let them do so.
When the hand orde. Et quant cil a se tenee giseau de. En li est pierre of li oint la coure d’li. iauepare le poignie; and quoi l'oeuf à qui retenent, et poi ou en lesse entor sone the verde il nus, si tes ron nefecle de cite aui: li orde la bon vene est en. Enlores les soient li d’oigne que le est l'en eie, mette oe qui et seing a li ment entriestre the quis ests desment.
Of a fracture with a wound
It is necessary for those who have a fracture with a wound, especially if it is large like the bone of the hip or shoulder or similar, to be examined now so that the injuries we have mentioned can testify.
And if the wound is healing, and there is no further dislocation from lead (verdigris), then continue to restore the fracture at that same hour or day, unless complications arise.
the same;rings they other And there: J. Howevers so that det.
And if the broken bone is visible above where the head lies exposed, it must be gently aligned with your hands in slight extension.
And if the extension is not available to align with your hands, then use this instrument of iron which has seven or eight branches and the width corresponds to the amount of the wound; therefore, it is necessary for the doctor to grip three or four (branches), depending on what he needs in each bone-breaking treatment; and let them be round but slightly thicker so they do not bend when compressed onto the limb during your work, and positioned forward with a larger part at the front:
And it is called "palainche" because the shoulder head must be placed on top of the visible bone; and turn once until it returns, ensuring they are level with each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the splints cannot properly grip the burt, then you should saw off the bone's head until the splints have enough capacity.
And if you cannot bring the bone back as we have said, with a suitable instrument such as a chisel or saw within your ability; then remove whatever is lodged in the hardened bone and small splinters of wood.
And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place. Make sure to moisten a piece of linen with tincture made from black oak gallnuts properly; do not apply any cerote or other substances on the wound so as not to cause putrefaction and decay. Then dress the area once you have restored the bone, leave the wound uncovered, and cover it entirely according to the size of the wound; ensure that there is careful attention to prevent straining the injured part with movement; many times such has been done by foolish doctors who caused deterioration or death in some cases. It should be less tight and more gentle than other fractures.
And if the wound is severe or large, and you suspect that infection may occur, as we have said, and there is pain at the site; it is not advisab le to apply dressing; but wrap around with a stiff cloth instead of bandages, then tie them. And when after one or two days you see healing signs on the wound, remove all that you applied previously, and use an ointment suitable for treating wounds, such as tetrafarmacoin and similar substances.
And it is necessary to loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is settled and healthy.
And it is necessary to equip the member in such a way that the bowel moves easily downwards.
And it is necessary to perform with them all, and the jor pees bones, and les petites, et tout ile ket m'il estrains bone, et pne la lores qui petie li coi et le ait il ne sient petits ou c. And they come it is de que se nus le soient deslies the lesselet les plaintues tu.
When a fistula occurs at the site or another type of corruption, it is necessary to treat it as described in this chapter before. And when bones are broken and exposed on the limb, like those of the hip or shoulder, with similar large limbs, do not pull them, for many times death comes, but leave them until they heal; perhaps later they will be pulled out after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, just let it go.
Those bruises that come around the sore
They often come after the healing of the wound, especially when it is near the joint, and it is an unpleasant sight to see the figure of the limb; and perhaps they cannot make the member perform its natural actions.
Then be careful if the joint is hot: if you administer stiffening medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, frankincense, acacia resin, and other similar things, whether you choose any one of these substances or all together, mix them with astringent wine or an abundance of egg whites or liquid amber; place it in glass vessels, strain well without removing the strainer during the day; then dislocate, and start again with another until the inflammation is gone; or you may use a piece of plumb-line perfectly made, as its property is that it removes all swelling above the limbs; if the inflammamo
After the bone fracture has been restored, and limb that is weakened after healing: because it was too tightly bound, and did not move as if it had become loose; or because there were many injuries at his hand, and cannot come movements, nor suddenly. Or due to much of them with frequent; or from the wounds, and pains do not arise.
And the care is to make the patient eat well and keep the body supple, until the blood multiplies in him; and provide baths for comfort and joy; then place ointment on the limb so that it attracts significant nourishment, and often raise it with water bandages, until the nourishment returns to the member; and it regains its natural shape.
And if the limb remains twisted after healing
And if the limb remains twisted after healing, and the bone is severely broken, and the form of the affected limb is unsightly, nonetheless it does not lose its natural function: do not believe those fools who say that one should completely replace a member; many such folly has occurred in our land. These practices are to be blamed upon, bringing about great harm and potentially death. However, if the inflammaturi are fresh, then you must raise it with warm water or softening herbs cooked, similar to wormwood leaves, roots, and poppy seeds; and make a soothing compress, as one would properly do with diachylon, and take vismalve musk, and mix it with the fat of pork or oil from sesame, and apply the compress. Or you may use fig paste, and grind it with flaxseed flour, and other similar medicines that alleviate stiffness.
At no time is an injury caused by rubbing continuously and long with wet hands. And allow for movement in each limb every hour.
And if the twisted condition is aged and hardened like stone, it may require removal with iron, up to the bone, at the incision site lightly and carefully; then apply compresses and pay attention in treatment.
Here begins the book of dislocations.
by (th; and hipse c. Conto the "b ;
When dislocation occurs, if it is appropriate now to gently bring it back.
Because if you are delayed, and the head swells, and perhaps when resetting it is difficult to place back in position; for that reason one should not move it until it has swelled fully: many times this brings on inflammation and other pains.
Also when this occurs, then bandage the patient's head, and leave it so that the inflammaturms are calmed; then apply warm water and oil to the member, and gently move each joint as treatment is applied in its proper place.
if s: c et de la ou:
Of the lower jawbones,
Sometimes the lower jawbones are slightly dislocated and their displacement occurs in two ways: either they are a little out of place and softened somewhat; or they are entirely dislocated, hanging toward the left side, causing saliva from the mouth so that it cannot be held, unable to close its mouth, and enveloping its tongue while speaking.
When the displacement is slight, they return in various positions.
And if it is complete and accomplished, one must reset it promptly without delay;
And in this manner, let the minister wet the head of the patient, and insert a mirror slightly into one hand from the root of the dislocation of the lower jaw inside the mouth; if the dislocation is of two parts; and the other hand be free, to maintain balance; and command the patient to soften his mandibles and move them in all directions.
And place the mirror evenly until it returns to its place.
And if resetting is difficult, especially when it involves both jawbones together, apply warm water and oil until they are lightly relocated; do not strain the relocation, as we have said.
And when they are equally relocated, and the patient's mouth feels quite relieved, wrap moistened cloths in a wax made of oil blend and beeswax, then gently bind them with soft cords.
and the patient sleeps on their back, with their head between two pillows, ensuring they do not move to either side or strain themselves, but instead gently consume nourishing broth until the pains subside, and the jawbones are sufficiently healed.
And then gently move what it wishes, and do not strain to open the mouth for eating or drinking, until the mandible is properly aligned and healed.
And if the two mandibles cannot be reset within an hour and do not return to their proper places, fever and other familiar symptoms may occur, as well as possible stomach issues or complete vomiting of bile.
And when you see this, then you know it is a serious condition; and often the patient dies within seven days if it occurs.
Of the collarbone
The collarbone cannot be dislocated from the inside of the ribs and back, and never stays in place when it does; its absence is clearly felt.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms; then presses firmly with your whole hand to the wound, which will return [to its place]; then places a poultice and bandage there, and secures it.
en.
And similarly, bring back the head of the shoulder when it is out of its place.
The process of treating shoulder dislocation
. The  they p s the bones.
And does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor within for the nerves; and on many occasions it dislocates downward toward the hip, especially in those with little flesh, as to these it happens quickly; but in those with enough flesh, it jumps easily, and reenters easily.
And sometimes this happens to some people as a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Therefore you must examine it as much as necessary to be certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known when the dislocation is downward toward the collarbone, and there is distinction between the affected shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find obvious differences between them. and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, and beneath the collarbone to where it touches the top of the shoulder, as if they were eyes; and the patient cannot bring his hand close or move in any way.
, but li oment les l’oe ce and their pine de la ne sont bone et son se of le, and the eye hei lis est plie, just the beau saillus.
And this manner of dislocation is not to be moved, except when it is recent or if the child is ill.
And the way is for the minister to lift the sick person's hand upwards, then place poulies under the elbow, and gently raise the joint back into its proper position; next, the minister lifts the hand and extends it upward again. Soon relief will come quickly.
And if it does not return as we have said in days afterward, then the sick person should be bathed in warm water; and they should be rubbed with soothing substances, such as an infusion of henbane and fennel and honey-flower in hot water, and thus treated.
Then provide the patient with a sofa to lie on his back, and place under the shoulder a strip of linen equal in thickness, neither too soft nor too hard, then place the foot of the mirror on the strip, gently lift the head of the shoulder, and guide the hand towards the afflicted person.
and other ministers wash the head of the afflicted person so that it may not move downward; see if the shoulder returns immediately in this manner.
and that you make present a person who is taller than the afflicted one; stand on their left side, and push the shoulder under the affected arm downwards, and lift it up so that the patient's arm hangs below. And other ministers rub the hand down to the patient's belly. And if the patient is too light-headed, then restrain him with something heavy, and the dislocation returns immediately.
And you can reset it in another way: and that is to insert a long stick into the ground so that the head of the shoulder feels as if it were on a pillow, neither too large nor too small; then place it under the patient's head, but that there are sheets beneath him, and let the shoulder be lying along its long axis; then stretch out his hand to the other side properly, and the dislocation will return immediately.
Et si elle ne veut pas retourner pour toutes ces raisons que nous avons dites, alors faites cette cure : prenez un tison de deux bras long et quatre doigts large, qui ait le chef rejoint pour être introduit par front sous l'aisselle selon la forme suivante :
Then wrap it with two arms length and four fingers wide bandage around the head so that it does not touch the patient's chin, then place it under the ailed shoulder; extend both arms above the long rod, and tie the shoulder to the rod at the top of the hand, then put one arm over an oval slit of a wide shelf, and let the hands hang downwards, while letting the body dangle on the other side: the joint will soon be aligned now.
Et quant elle est ainsi placée, dans n'importe quelle manière, alors il faut que tu mettes sous l'aile une tige de laine égale, puis applique le pommade avec poudre pilé, encens et onguent d'huile sur tout le bras et autour, ensuite étirez-la rapideculement sous l'aile, tournez le lien au-dessus du pommade, et enveloppez les mains à leur poignet de cette manière.
And it is necessary for him to juice slightly as long as the limb is comforted, because it will heal sooner; and then juice again after 5 or 6 days, and move; and if it is firm and not softened, it has healed.
And if the joint is strongly out of place due to moisture or another cause, it is necessary that you apply three caustics as mentioned in previous treatments with cautery.
And if you do all this and it still dislocates after 6 days, and the joint cannot be lifted with either arm forward, then understand that the nerve at the shoulder's head is pinched or stretched or softened; and understand that the joint will never be properly set in its place.
The dislocation towards the foot and muscles or behind it is made by impact, extended hands, and administered another remedy; treat until it becomes healthy again.
And if after healing comes tremors in the limb and delays in movement, many times the patient suffers so often until the tremors cease, and it returns to its original state.
Of the dislocation of the elbow
Hold that the joint of the elbow is dislocated by pricking and returns to being pricked; when it has been dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not properly reset, for one can see and feel it well; and it becomes dislocated according to each figure. And when you join the dislocated elbow with its bone, if it can be seen clearly. Because the joint is elevated and cannot bend the arm or touch the shoulder at all.
And it is necessary that you reset it as soon as an abscess appears there too, for if the abscess appeared there, it would be difficult to bring back; and by chance, it may not be possible to reset it completely in all cases, especially when it is behind; it is worse than other dislocations, causes greater pain, and possibly death occurs.
When restoration is as such that it can be returned to its place, extend its hand to your two hands; and arms spread wide, and hands according to the cord around, over and under, reset the joint with all fingers together, or at the base of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, when it comes back as it doubles its hand with its own hand, and pierces from the base of the palm cord that is dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, apply strong extension; and that two ministers extend the arm, and they hold with their arms so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm from each side, then wrap a long and wide double cloth around it.
And when the knife reaches the joint of the jointing with its handle, if it is greased with any oil to soften the joint, then reset the joint properly until it returns.
And when it is in place, if you apply dry paste with egg white, then strain properly and rest the arm on a pillow, leaving it undisturbed for some days, then release it.
And if the joint is firm in its place after release, leave it; and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, restart with the paste and apply to the area, leaving it undisturbed for some days until it is firmly set; then release it.
If it feels painful after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and rub well, and press until soothed; or place a greasy sheep's wool on the joint, leave for one day and night, then remove the bandage, and allow the patient to take a bath. And when it is healed, rub the joint well, then place the wool back on and allow another bath; do this two or three times until healed; if you see it dislocate again, put warm moistened wheat straw over it with butter, and bind tightly. It will return to its proper position.
The dislocation of the hand
The dislocation of the hand occurs, and its return is easy compared to other joints; it must be promptly returned to its place at the same time as it becomes dislocated, whether the fingers are swollen or if there is pus coming from an abscess.
And the method of returning is to place the injured hand on a table, extend its fingers, and ensure it's level so that you can put your palm over the joint, pushing until it returns.
Always, you must ensure that it's properly in place; then place the back of your hand on a table for extension and return. If the dislocation is in the back of the hand, have the patient place their hand's back on a table, and the healer positions his hand above the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that's good.
If not, use soothing emplasters on the abscesses and let them rest until they begin to heal anew.
If it cannot be tolerated, and you are unable to place it back in its proper position after several days, the dislocated joint remains twisted.
and it does not bend nor twist to the patient so that while their hands are weakened, they cannot grasp anything at all: thus understand that the nerves or arteries are cut, if there is no other remedy but to grip with a fire cautery near the wound, and perhaps nothing else helps.
And when the hand is at rest, place it on the plaster as we have said, then strain and leave it for 5 days, then release and leave so.
And if it cannot move well, and there is no trembling, then apply warm water for the hairs to loosen.
Of a dislocation of the hand's fingers
They are never reset to either side of the hand, neither at its back nor belly.
Then the fingers are bent, and the dislocation is pushed into the pockets as long as it returns, then support the head of the finger, and bend towards the part where it is dislocated.
the dis mon.
And do the same if it is dislocated in the abdomen of the hand, and do as you did before until it is set correctly; and do the same when it is dislocated elsewhere.
Removal of the spinal column from the backbone
When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, and there are several that are dislocated, if there is no treatment, as it hastens death to the patient.
byt; (her.
And many times, one slips into four parts; that which slips to the rear is called "gilbosities":
The treatment then is that you must straighten them if the "gilbosities" have come from childhood; there will be no cure or healing at all in this case.
And those that come from a fall or impacts or similar things, the ancient methods of treatment by many words say there is no great benefit at all.
However, I have abbreviated according to my intention, and formed extracts in various ways.
I say that in the swelling that comes upon the chest before it, there is no remedy or health.
and also those that occur directly in the two ribs, and cannot be treated except for those specifically on the back as I say;
.
Then insert a hot iron at the head in clay firmly, and another at the feet, and tie a leather strap around the injured body parts, and another at the hips, ankles, knees, and wrists.
And two ministers adjust the straps, one to the head and the other to the feet, among the two irons.
And they should be securely fastened, as we have said of the irons, and the healer places his palms firmly along the spine, until it returns.
If it does not return through this treatment, take a stick three arms long, and check from the front, and let the patient lie on their side, and place the head of the stick under the chest, then position the middle of the stick along the spine. And align the feet under the other end of the stick and press firmly until it returns to its place; and if you see this, make the turn that turns towards the hand.
And that you insert two pins at the head of one arm for an ample length, and toward the feet, with between each pin, above and below, an inch's width.
In each piece, there should be one plug or peg that fits snugly into the ground so it does not move; and between any two plugs, there should be a turning peg on which they turn, and in the space of two turns, there should be two small plugs about the width of a hand's length to turn the gear.
Then tie the ligament among the bones on the gear towards the top, and the other ligament towards the joints on the other gear, so each servant turns their gear with the entire ligament as we have said, and the master aligns the spine equally.
And when it is aligned properly, place a drying herb poultice with plenty of heat on it, then the ointment, and then the splint from a tablet 3 fingers long to press upon the site of injury and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a ligament as we have said, and use subtle nourishment for the patient until they are well.
If any issue arises at the end of the healing process, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the spoon we have mentioned beforehand; and never once should you insert a piece of iron.
and never should it appear in the lower back spine, and you suspect that it is dislocation; for this is the bone giving way, so there must be no presumption: lest death might come unexpectedly.
of hip dislocations
Joints of the hip and shoulder's joints come solely from dislocations, not like other joints; the hip joint is dislocated in four parts: inner and outer, front and back; more inner than outer, and slightly less so to the front and back.
And the knowledge of its dislocation inward is such that when the injured leg is joined with the sound one, it becomes longer and more swoln at the joint than the healthy, and the injured cannot double their knee over fire. And there is the lump which is swollen from heat of abscess because the head of the thigh comes near.
And for those whom it comes to disadvantage, this sign is such that these accidents are contrary to the previous ones.
When the signs appear in those before him, it is such that his leg extends properly; however, do not double bend the knee causing pain, and if one wishes to make him walk, he cannot stand on his own, retains urine, swells with anger, and as he walks, passes over the ankle.
And the signs of those who experience it behind are such that they cannot fully extend their knee or double-bend it, and that leg is more crooked than the other, with reduced anger, and the head of the hip to the level below the ribs.
The recurrences of this type of dislocation are such that one should remember that the dislocations were earlier, and they last according to their nature, there is no treatment for them; nor does it matter if he has pride.
In those cases where dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocating: quickly return the joint, push it back in, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will realign itself, and no further treatment is needed.
If it does not return in this manner, you need to summon a skilled minister and firmly support the leg with two hands or one bandage around the knee. and another minister extends their hands over it in such a way that they place their hands below the ankles, then tighten a thin bandage around the thighs; and another touches the head with the bandage.
And they extend outwards both upwards and downwards at once, as long as the patient remains raised from the ground in one go, hanging suspended.
This manner of extension is common in four types, and if the dislocation has been reset as we have said, it is well.
If not, one must apply treatment to the type of dislocation. When it is in the arm, you should support the patient under their healthy side, then place a strap at the base of the hips, and lift the weight that is off the ground, extending the strap upwards towards the shoulder and outward;
Then call on other ministers [healers] with his arms, and embrace the large joint of the affected thigh, and extend it towards the direction from which it came: now it will return to its place; and this method of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot grasp it in this manner as we have said, then it is necessary that you bind the two feet of the afflicted together with a strong swollen band above both heels and knees, and let the affected leg be extended twice more than the other.
Then let it be hung from a log at the head and two long arms on the ground; then command one healer to embrace the chest of the affected thigh, and have another healers hanging with the patient who firmly embraces the thigh, for the joint returns now swiftly.
When the dislocation is in the thigh, grip the patient firmly as we have said in those with sciatica, and properly separate a ligament on the affected leg, and at the hip too.
Then place two splints, one on top and one underneath the foot, then insert a splint between the thighs of the afflicted person along the contour. And wrap the area with wet cloths so that it does not slip off the afflicted person, then each attendant stands at his side, and the healer positions their hand equal to the dislocation.
If it returns, that's good. If not, place on the table and press as we have said in dealing with bruises, and lay the patient down on their healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it is to extend the injured leg quickly, and as I have said; let them lean their pain onto the uninjured side, then press with the other hand, extending towards the groin.
And if the dislocation is behind, you should not extend the injured leg downward or lift it off the ground, but rather as if the heel were dislocated to the back, as we have said about lying on both hands and knees; And it is as follows on its face, and the ligaments are extended just as we have said here beforehand, and one must press upon the joint to the table.
And it will be perfectly straight when the patient extends his legs and they are even; then place the buttocks, and put the plaster, and bind with a bandage so that the hinge does not move.
And let it rest for 3 or 4 days then release the binding, and put the plaster on; if you see that they are even as before, bind again with a bandangle, as previously done, and leave it. For 3 days; then release it and make the patient walk gently until the limb is strengthened.
The evacuation of blood in cases where there are injuries to muscles or tendons near a joint or bone.
The joint is dislocated in three ways: namely, internally and externally, and behind; it does not dislocate forward.
And the signs are such that you command the patient to bend his leg to his thigh, and if it cannot reach his thigh, know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, extend his leg if he can, and place your back to his face, and put your foot under his.
; a placie soce ce; That the mains.
And apply the plaster over it, and raise the leg to the thigh, tying them together firmly for iii or iv days, then release it; do not allow the patient to move at all until the limb is restored.
And if the limb has not healed, treat it with strong binding as we have said in treating the hip, until it is sound.
Of ankle dislocation
The heels are never fully lifted nor fully dislocated, but sometimes within and outwardly.
And the signs are that the ankle is swoln, and one must try before the part where it has dislocated.
s; Ift; ould pes Za; Kozmort:
And when it is dislocated completely, you must make the patient sit up straight and support them with a board outside their leg, above the ankle.
Then draw out the leg towards you with your right hand, and then twice with the left. Extend it upwards, and elegantly lift the foot high.
And do this twice as we have said, extending and drawing the leg; if it comes back, that's good; if not, resume the treatment, for it will return.
And if it cannot return thusly, lay the patient on their back on the ground and insert a sturdy stick firmly between their thighs, and wrap cloths around, so that the malady does not move.
Then anoint the minister's thigh, and other assistants extend their foot near its hands or knee, so that it lies across the neck of the leg. Then each minister extends evenly, and the bandages are placed between the patient's thighs to hold them steady as they are extended.
Then place the pins equally for the dislocation in his hands, and other assistants anoint the healthy leg below, and the dislocated joint will return quickly.
t.
Then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligaments are relaxed, reset it; then on the third or fourth day, forbid the patient from moving with straps for four days. And if it approaches this term, do not be assured that it will not dislocate again.
And if abscesses occur, then you must soothe them as we have said elsewhere until they are healed.
et la carme. Et it.
When both are dislocated, then they must be extended gently without force, and it is a simple matter.
And if the dislocation is in either the neck or foot, it must be made so that the patient sits on something flat or a straight table, and places their leg under where these joints are pressed, then firmly press with your foot until they return.
And when it is even, and nothing appears, place a board under the arch of their foot with two wedges, then press firmly, and leave for three days, then release; then make them rest until they are well again.
Of wound and of dislocation together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and it is seen to be restored, often the patient dies:
If you are not overly confident in the treatment, unless you are skilled in the art and have practiced it for a long time, and if you are merciful and compasscuos and patient; then do not be rash.
the w as it ores: When you see hope, now reset the limb to its place, as when an abscess comes near.
When the limb is in place, administer soothing measures for an abscess if present, and treat the wound as needed with dry ointments.
If there is a broken dislocation and you must extract small bones or bone fragments, do as we have instructed in simple illnesses.
s
