Oh you, dear son, I have completed this book which is the tail of the science of medicine, and together with its fulfillment by means of its explanations and assertions. And it came to me in a vision that I have completed this treatise with this section, which is part of the old work and concerns "chirurgy" (surgeons).
And because the old work is fortified in our region and it is well-known everywhere, if this science becomes perished, and everything disappears, then there are no delays to these writings of the little descriptions found in ancient books that have been written by hand. And it is from this that the errors and arrogance came about; they closed understanding and separated medicine.
Or it seems to me that I have revived the organization of this treatise according to its method of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will collect all forms of cautery instruments and other tools from the old work along with the association of declarations and preparations, as it is a proper thing.
And because of the reason that no master's hands are not seen in our time. And it requires one who mixes into the art of anatomy, as Galen says, so long as he knows correctly about bones and their forms and relationships, and has knowledge of bones, nerves, veins, joints, separations between muscles, movement and resting of veins, and the origin of each limb.
And because, as Hippocrates says that it is not much without practice, and with little work; and primarily in the art of medicine.
In the introduction of this book, we tell you that who does not know these things beforehand will make mistakes and harm others; so I have seen many times more of those involved in this science and abandon it due to lack of experience and sense.
For I have seen a madman who performed such procedures: removing abscesses or the lump from a woman's neck and cutting into the arteries therein; because so much blood was lost that the woman died in her hands.
And I have seen another madman who pierced a man's belly with a large lance, and took away a piece of the bladder from him; he was killed inside there three years later.
And I have already been called for his trepanation, and seen the malady's position and the size of the hole, and knew well that he would die from it.
And I have seen another madman who was treating a duke from our land who had a broken leg, and with the breakage there was an open wound; the physicians of ignorance bound the fracture to the wound by tight bandages, causing no relief in the wound, and left it as such for some time. He then ordered them not to remove the splint, and during this period the leg was completely eaten away, leading to his demise.
I was called to him, and rushed to come unbind his leg; when I saw it unbound he seemed at peace and did not feel any pain.
But all paths of curing were already confirmed or related to the limb and could not heal it; and the corruption did not cease in any part of the body until every member was lost.
And I have seen another madman who fell from an infected incision, and then it was inflamed due to the greed of his lordship.
For scars, which are purulent with black bile, it does not require that iron be used on them unless one can prevent all the harm to the corrupted parts.
:en-francaire of mains envoirement paroles deffacquires. Il'sesme parole aitil ail. Here in: the book :13thief: itinjour in fernil, and ilaeve toc’soldrepresentation fromafarbitration :ithcet anatomy-lyllustr. Whatailment ofsescription.
Because it prevents it from moving, therefore you must ensure that your judges do not speak ill of you.
If you take up arms in this conflict, and engage in your heavy and resolute labors, and use the best method so that by God's grace you may be saved and honored; and leave those diseases provoking to grievous illness, and sharpen your weapons lest doubt should arise, and have it ready so that you might come from this world into glory in another.
Galen gives in no uncertain terms: "Do not treat illnesses with medicine that would make you called fools."
I have divided this text according to .iiij. (2) chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cauteries and medicinal cauteries, and the chapter is ordered from the head to the feet; and of the forms of instruments, and compasses for cauterizing, and all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about excision and incision, and blisters and wounds, and extraction of arrows, and similar things; and the chapter is ordered with the forms of instruments.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and the chapter is ordered from head to feet, and the forms of instruments.
Thus our memory of the work requires us to say that I must declare the quality of aid and the harm caused by each condition.
I say that the quality of aid and harm is the longest word and most subtle science, and it is answered by those who speak about these matters, and they agree with this; and to them little suffice my words, for fear of lengthiness.
I say that there is no medicine for all conditions and temperaments because it exists two types of temperaments: the hot condition with moist matter and the dry condition with dry matter.
In this condition and dry matter, they designed it is not good for all dison ayeve.
For the nature of fire is hot, and it should not be used for curing heat-related illnesses with heat or dryness; and they who say otherwise that caustic treatment provides great help to both hot and dry diseases that come from within the body. When you compare the condition of the patient's body with its fire-like temperature and humidity, then you have to treat the affected area.
And I agree with this statement. Because I have found it nonexistent by experimental means.
And by all means, let no one interfere with it unless they have tried it themselves and are familiar with the master of cauteries[^3], and the diversity of human conditions, and the circumstances and causes of their diseases, as well as remedies and intervals of time; we do not fear other constitutions, especially in cold and moist illnesses. And they all gathered and agreed to the use of cautery.
And you know that fire is a secret in the healing process and has greater warmth than fiery medical treatments.
For fire is simple and it does not cause harm unless it affects the member that is cooked; otherwise, it causes little to no damage to other parts of the body.
The medicines coming from other members in alignment bring forth complaint of serious healing, and by chance affect the ill member (Ockham & Witticke).
screatime andure thews in order to:screetrede;nagustepease.
And this I found by experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into the art, and it is on the surface of things; and because of this, I apologize for the length of the wording, as I do not like to reveal the secret that has been recovered or burned, nor the quality of the work, which removes diseases from the body, as philosophers have said in demonstration; therefore receive it into your thoughts.
And you know, son, that they agreed on the times during which cauterizations should be performed.
And I say that cauterization is necessary in all cases, because the harm resulting from it comes with the help of cautery; and mainly when cauterizations are for urgent and unbearable pains that cannot wait until greater mischief does not occur to the limb.
And never do you think, dear child, how the foolish man does; for the illness that is healed by cautery has no recurrence; and they say thus: but it is not as the wise men believe, because a cautery is not medicine that changes one's complexion, and dries the humors which are cause of pain, and its value lies in quickly relieving suffering and demonstrating the virtue of its work and reputation.
And it has been said that the disease shows no change in its complexity and the character of the illness and its virtue; and assembled within it are excesses by acquiring meats and other things, provided there are few excesses and moisture when cauteries are performed or they have little, as with dens for pain relief and similar things, wherein pain does not recur again.
And many do not understand why caustic therapy is called the backbone of medicine, and it's easy to see; but they don't believe that caustic treatments are after medicine, yet their understanding is false, because whenever we administer cures for any disease there are none worth considering, therefore we use cauterization, and it has value. Therefore it is revealed that caustic therapy is not the backbone of medicine, contrary to the beliefs of many wise men.
The ancients said that the cauteries made of gold are healing like those made of iron and they did not say it for the beauty of gold or the high quality of its substance; and they said that the blood does not flow from a cautery, but this is not true because I have tried it out myself, and found that in some homes, and that gold's caustic healing is more effective than iron, as they wrote.
And in any way when you heat the instrument of gold, you do not know how it becomes cold by the color of the gold, and if it is suddenly cooled; and if you heat it too much; then they burn at the fire; and so there are enough obstacles.
And for this, we use iron cautery that we have used in our work.
I ordered this chapter to be written with these few pages at the beginning, so that it is easier to find.
double iron cautery
These cauteries are dangerous and cold on the head, brain, ears, due to various causes such as fever (sudden illness), many humors falling from the top of the head to the ears, numerous dreams, pain in density and throat, and mainly all diseases that come from cold so like paralysis, sore throat, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the diseased hairs are removed by a curative medicine that clarifies the top .iij. nuis or .iiij., depending on how the patient' Written in Old French, this passage describes a therapeutic process involving iron cautery used to remove diseased body parts and potentially treat various conditions.
And then the instrument will rest between your hands, and you put your hands on his pain; after that, place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his .ij. fingers; and if his blood flows, remove this cautery called "olivare," from which its form is derived:
And place the ink mark on your hand, and lower and pull out one part of your hand a little at a time twisting; then ease your hand slightly, and reward the wound so that you see an ossicle .iij. small; if you don't see it, resume this cautery until you see the bone as I have said; after that take one piece of silk, put some soft cotton in it, and place it on your hand, and let it be for three years; afterwards put a layer of fat over it, and leave it so that the wound is healed.
And they said the ancient one that the longer it is left open the more it cleanses itself; and for this reason it helps to heal.
And none of these say that you should make the iron cautery so long that part of the bone bears flesh, and then treat it.
And it is that the other one, you must make it looser there, and thrust so far into the bone as a sewing needle used by women in their hips because the fluids flow out of it; and it should be made loose over the wound long enough afterwards before curing.
And these two kinds of cauteries do not seem to be good for all things; fires that in no case have caused fear among men or animals; and I feel as though we should leave it; because the shoulder joint is weakened by continuous use of solution, as shown with other limbs; and since the patient's maladies are naturally frail, and the first signs of cautery are more soothing and mild for me, and that's why I choose this method.
Of the burning pain in the head
When in all the chief comes with chronic pain and lasts long, then he should use the maladies' herbs and pills called "cockle," and cleansing of the head and oils and bandages; and if we apply to him the cautery that we have mentioned before, it is not worthwhile.
Beware if the patient's shoulder joint is of strong nature, and that it should not be overly cold; however, let us cauterize around that particular cautery which we have mentioned above a little bit.
After applying cautery to each horn of the head bone as we have said before, and make one or two such cauteries called "vassels"; and it is with these vassels that on places them suction cups; and keep your hand so that you do not see into the bone: the patient feels too much greater pain in this particular cautery than in others, and I will speak about it elsewhere; and it must be that those applying to horns should make their cauteries more subtle than that done on the majority of head joints, and its form is:
The double cautery for the head joint When in one part of the head joint comes with sudden and extended pain, and the shoulder is purged by medicines popularized across borders, and we have made other treatments for divisions that I mentioned before; but all this does not help: however, let us apply cauteries according to two kinds of methods, namely those of medicine water and fire.
Forge cautere de chascune.
sacre:secreatimexentive ita, andrere,res alexsure (it:nse.
nifre;seuelles tolestranglume iaithele 1 if the
And call it "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a clover or has one little curve; and in appearance, it looks small; and put salt on the painful spot, and with your hand and turn the flesh slightly, so that the edge of the spear's sharp point does not touch it; and raise your hand to prevent the arteries from burning, but move it away later when there is plenty of blood flow.
After applying cotton to the wound, and leaving it for two years; then I put moistened linen on it, and subsequently treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this migraine with a cautery called "cultellate", at all points of the point, and make sure not to cover the artery in this headache that is not ancient.
from migraine
When curing migraines as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and it does not benefit at all; however, it is necessary that you heat the cultellate cautery until it is white; then draw along a line of half a day's length on the affected area, and hold your hand once to prevent puncturing an artery, ensuring that there is no pain or damage to the bone; and warn me about the mandible when used so much as it moves, and let the joints not show any involuntary movement or spasm of the patient's headache. Also advise on the removal of sanguineous matter from the artery once it has been discharged, or if there is a great fear during its discharge, especially to that person who does not know and is untrained; but I will tell you how blood sticks in the bone after the cautery is removed, and show you on this page where such an impression appears.
And if you see that this cautery does not soothe the disease, and the painfulness of the patient's malady, then cauterize it as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you notice, administer the cultellate cautery that our master has described or the one used for artery extraction, with a pair of knives; and this kind of cautery is better than others and more helpful.
of pain in ears from coldness on one side
When there is pain in the ear from coldness and we have applied various remedies and treatments as mentioned in our division of diseases, and this pain does not cease, therefore heat that cautery which is called "puncture" according to its form herein lies:
After poking all the painful head, orre de maladie, siens enchenee parle, et d'ostroicta:et tote partizines entor eaux desenginne que ilent apei aliax :aince asins.
llathe it'sne lesarre incharge leu:ingle, "bout : Amende ateiragre despresigne.arastres.a-lescaesarlore,speaking. CXIescribe. It'safres. Inorder of theare.
There is torture that must be treated by cautery and it does not affect those diseases caused by mucus, as we have said in the divisions of disease; and do not perform cauterization on similarities that come from sweating and lice discharge.
When you cure this kind of torture that is caused by ear discharge and earwax removal, and sweating from the head and gargling, then it requires that you perform three cauterizations on him: one in the root of the ear, another a little further down the temple, and another at the alignment of the two lips; and place the cautery where the part is healthy, and apply the cautery to the top of the ear above a little bit from the horned tip, and another in the temple similarly as if with fingers; and let the cautery remain until the moisture on the skin dries. This is the form of the cautery:
And it is the cutting instrument that we have mentioned before, but it is somewhat more subtle and requires that the knife be slightly larger; after curing the wound as I have previously said, so long as it remains healthy.
Apoplexy is ancient and you cure it in this manner as we have said before, and it does not profit at all, and the patient' Written by Dr. John Doe | March 15, 2023 - Updated: April 4, 2023
nouns, in English. I:sesure meio thetearly. In ate theorlatus, fromme, Andalus oftear,searing, itentire nace.
For this disease it is necessary to give the patient long years and medicines that moisten the brain; afterwards, he examines the chief of the sick person thoroughly, and puts an emplaster on his occiput with mustard, which is written or mentioned in treatises about bandages; and this is the way of cautery: as I have said.
If it is well done, it is good; and if it is not, he does so .ii. burnings on the top of the head to descend as far down as the neck, and leave an interval of .i. fingers between each burning .i. large ones; and cure him just like the others, and if you see that the patient suffers, then he does .ii. more in the middle; and if it is necessary, .ij. other burnings on the .ij. corners, and cure him as long as he becomes well; and these are called "olivares," as I have previously said.
from the coldness of the head It must be that the head of the patient is treated with years and everything we have said before; after examining the chief of the sick person thoroughly, he does burnings on the top of the head between each horn, and .i. behind and .iiij. along the spine at the neck; and if you have more knowledge, and the body is moist, and the patient suffers greatly from this disease, then he performs .iiij. burnings along the spine on the back of the head; and leave it for as long as the pain decreases, and lift your hand; after curing him as long as he becomes well, and these are called "olivares," which we have mentioned before.
The mention "de l'épilepsie" in a medical text refers to epilepsy, which is a neurological disorder characterized by recurrent seizures. In medieval medicine, treatments for epilepsy were diverse and often experimental due to the limited understanding of the condition's underlying causes. Some treatments might have included dietary restrictions, herbal remedies, purges, or cauterization as described in other historical medical texts from that era.
The statement regarding "les épileptiques ne doivent pas utiliser de cautère forts que ceux qui sont aphéniques" suggests that epileptics should only use milder forms of treatment like cauterization when they are also suffering from asthma (aphénic). Additionally, it emphasizes the necessity to first "mondialise le cerveau avec des années et d'autres cures que nous avons dit dans la division quant le malaide est grand et souffre de pierre médicinale."
lere. Ifromme courte,etemera.sacre. Presentely ail. Here. Whicher. A. corne itafe:core. Iescribe. Andes.colore. The storytire apreser (withoutresigne. iewre.
sacre:seafe (vulgaurveille itaide. Andreprescribe toitacueslewage andstice towapointmente:screase andsesse alement,sse, ſince àge. :ceste a laisse.gacharde
When due to melancholy, the excesses or moistened and moldy substances arise, which means that for those who have paralysis, as we have said in our previous discussion on cutting with thin cauteries.
And if due to melancholy the excesses descend into melancholy, and his sad mind is moistened with moldy substances, then he should drink a thing according to what is shown before in the division.
After the chief of the sad mind; after making .i. tent-like piece of lin well made, as if it were a circle, and putting it around the chief; and placing the sad mind's hairs in croziers, and holding them firmly from all sides; then presenting the linen, and using old goat's wool for stuffing, and heating with fire at once so that he can bear it well; after removing the circle piece by pieces around the chief, and letting the sad mind refrain cooling; and doing this every week once again with a suitable treatment, until the patient is sound.
Or if you see the patient being cauterized with many points all over the cautery, this method softens the brain greatly; and then put on cotton saturated in butter and lamb's fat.
of the hair roots When the hairs come first by the signs I have said in the division, and it begins and gives drink to the sad man something that mundifies the head, and keeps him from all dampness, and makes the skin sweat or bath many times without food.
After he commands the patient to let his head be cauterized again and again, and makes two cauteries on either side of the temples where they are joined together or separately; and covers all the veins and arteries that are inside the skull, and holds the cautery long according to its width over the temple, and prevents any discharge from blood, and if you see too much blood coming out, then hold a piece of gauze tightly as needed.
And I will teach you in the extraction of veins and incisions how to hold the thread, as it should be done; and never make a cauterization or hack at these two bones behind.
both channels of tears
When tears are ancient and customary and flow through the veins or underneran the arteries as seen in the appearance of the head above; and it is clear that this is cold, moldy fluids, therefore the cautery I have told you at the beginning of the melancholy descending to the hairs: one cauterization around the head, and two cauterizations on either side of the temples, or a third cauterization between these bones. And if there is any necessity, then it should be sown above the scrotum with a small piece of thread.
Two corners of tears from among the hairs
When you practice medicine according to what we said in the division, and it doesn't help at all, yet after him comes the king, and he sticks a thousand-year old caustic on his head (cauterium of fire); and he performs two hundred cautions named "clavicles" under the thighs, a little above the joints; and warn you against the artery that you should not damage. And it is the shape of the caustic called "clavicles":
When the paper of oil is softened by disease and moisture, accordingly the caustic of this caustic which is called "olivare": since then it has that form:
And if you see two hundred cautions under the thighs as long as the scapulae are; and do not let your hand go without keeping it there until the third part of the paper is burned off, according to the manner I have said.
Two hairs that point to the oil: Never occurs that the hairs of the oils are converted into parchment; they catch the oil, and it is done with caustic according to two methods: either by fire or by burning medicinal substances.
The fire cautery commands to the patient that he leaves his hairs long and thick until they are fully grown; and if it is held at their roots, let them not move while they grow.
adieu aisloi. Clergiences doulsescles pene desormain: "saincte laire deffaigne asilver:nulles :l theafleuille a ounce tanscribrege, etitails. Theoliefsaint in Frenchcaustriourevelastine sivex'sailures (theirjacooltitho:cuntainte :stern;oldenise tolentire. "itilfeorneci. Itria. Thiscelisse,on itandescribe.
After the cautery on the face that you have done little and little many times, let the arrow be at the same place; and the sign of health in the forehead is that you see the retracted skin, and the hairs raised to the toe's length; then lift your hand, and leave it like this for two years, and after the treatment with moistened cotton wool dipped in fat, until he becomes sound again.
And if after that the hairs come back, and the skin becomes soft again, then reapply the cautery to this very spot as you have done before; and if the hairs fall out, continue cautioning until the skin is raised naturally, and does not prickle the oil.
The hot medical cauterization requires you to instruct the patient that they let the hairs grow long and even; then make a sheet of cloth with each leaf of myrtle; take one franc' faction of soap and strong oil, in equal portions, mix well; do it hastily so it doesn't cool down, then spread on the shape made like a piece of myrtle leaf, and put on top of the paper where you have pressed the hairs; if the illness is confined to one oil only, treat it similarly with both oils; place moistened cotton wool dipped in beeswax under the oil; let the patient's malady remain healthy and show your twofold demonstration on the medicine, pressing a little for the moment every time when the patient feels sensitivity from the medication, as it also hurts like fire. Once you have done that for a long time, if the medication has met its purpose. And if the sensitivity passes, raise the head of oil; reward yourself when you see the paper lifted as easily as it was lifted by constraining fire or incision; and if so, it is well done. But if this not, then reapply medication to the head of the oil or if the medicine has not worked yet, continue your interventions until the hairs are evened out again, and the skin raised naturally; and after treating the dampening oil (likely referring to an ointment for softening), dipped in beeswax, so that it remains well-healed.
And if you must be careful in your work by great care that the medicine doesn't stray on his hairs. If the paper becomes softened afterwards, and the form of myrtle become apex de l’oeuvre qu’il mues en peauke comestroit
And it is known that the men of home are diverse in size and stature, and according to this being so there are different constraints; and not be restored the right way to those who have studied this art.
Treatment with cautery for a fistula.
When you treat fistulas as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not bring any benefit, it is necessary that you perform cauterization according to this method.
Command the patient to put his head in your care; and tighten the muscles of the head between your hands so that it does not move or tremble, after applying a moistened cotton swab or ointment made from parsley juice on its skin; then cauterize with this instrument: and is shaped like an arrowhead, whereupe if you see marks of one head to the other, and so it is when seen between your hands, but in all cases, such as is here used, it is worth for your work.
After pressing the fistula if it is overflowing, and remove the discharge, and dry it; and if it is closed, do the work on it, and draw out the bolt; after placing a sharp cautery there, hold your hand at the part underneinaside of the oil so that your hands don't act foolishly; and place the cautery in the oil fat, and corrode it.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery right at the bone, it would be better. But if not, then continue using the cautery again once more, as long as you have experience; and let it rest for three years. After that, apply a moistened cotton swab in burdock, and the drying treatment of inflammation until it heals completely, and after 40 years if the bone is still exposed, apply corrosive medicine so that the bone becomes covered; and do this according to what you would find in your treatise.
And there is a method of treating fistulas that none of the old ones mentioned. On open fistulae, and draw out fluid from the cavity; after this place a slender piece of lead in the opening where its shape is located. and make the quantity of about .Z pieces; and hold your hand or lead firmly so that the painful parts do not move, because the melted lead sinks into its oil; it is necessary to put a moistened cotton swab in burdock on the affected area of fistula, which becomes healthy with great merit.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have described, it is good. But if not, then it must be applied to the tube of the bone according to what each one should do in his own book.
cracks on the lips. There have been many lip cracks which are called "hairy", and mainly in children'rances.
When you treat these wounds that we have mentioned in our divisions, and the healing does not profit, hence apply a small sharp cautery according to this form:
And quickly place the heating instrument in those wounds while they are still open, after which cleanse the joint of corrosion so that it is healthy again.
from the incision of the abscess
The abscess originates from the root of the gum, or in the mouth, or the roots of the teeth, after an inflammation and swelling occurs and it becomes a fistula; and you cure it as we have described in our divisions, but unfortunately, it does not profit: hence it is necessary for you to apply a small heating instrument according to the size of the fistula. After making the opening or fissure in the fistula, hold your hand there until the wound becomes well-healed at the base; and then perform this action once more (or twice), after performing what we have described as post-treatrances, so that it is healthy again; and if it has been cured in this manner, it is good; but if not, it is necessary to discover the root of the fistula and remove the corrupted bone according to what you will find in your medical treatise.
Movements of the teeth generally refer to changes in positioning or alignment within the jawbone that can be either natural, such as those occurring with orthodontic treatments like braces, or pathological due to various dental conditions. In a workplace context regarding data sharing and privacy concerns, discussing "movements of the teeth" metaphorically might refer to changes in personnel positions within an organization that require updates to personal information. These adjustments must be managed with discretion to maintain employees' confidentiality while ensuring accurate record-keeping for HR purposes.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move from their root cause. Tooth thatchief you cauter cultures as per medicines and lees develloent-le chief decai lesmeans:
And in such a way that the one which was moving is confirmed, and the softened vein restricts the heart, and the corrupted moisture is scraped away.
Of the pain of joints.
When the pain of joints comes from coldness or dampness, and medical treatments are not effective, therefore there is need for causticism according to certain methods: and cautery with wax and cautery with fire.
Cautery with wax, which you must heat any kind of wax in a spoon made of iron or earthenware; after placing cotton and wrapping it around the tip of a tent, and molding the softened wax into balls, and pressing them quickly onto the toothache, and keeping them on until they cool down. And so often enough that its virtue becomes evident at the root of the decayed tooth; if you see molten wax and cotton with wax mixed together, and press it upon the next tooth, and place a hot iron there until its warmth reaches the neck of the tooth.
The cautery consisting of fire such that you must heat a piece of iron or earthenware, and make it large so that the flames do not reach the mouth of the patient with malady; after heating the cautery, in due course it forms as follows, and place it upon the tooth while holding your hand there until the cautery cools down. Do this often, because then the pain will be felt either that day or the next. And you must have the patient fill his mouth with good wax quickly during the application of the cautery, and then wash it; and this is the shape of the cautery:
When the scrophulae are composed of wool and cold, wet, and not subject to digestion by medicines, then shape the caustic as follows: and have it with two openings so that the fumes can escape from one side; and heat the cautery against the apoplectum once or such a number, until its warmth reaches the end of the apoplectum; if the apoplectum is small, then shape the cautery accordingly to the amount of the apoplectum, and leave it in place for three years; afterwards apply moistened wax with fur so that the abscess heals thereafter treat the affected part with ointments and bandages until it becomes sound.
When the moistures attack the groins of the pore, especially when it comes from a cold complexion, therefore the patient must be first treated with soluble medicines; afterward I make the cautery at the root of the throat and keep it so that you do not come close to the throat, but only a little heat. Afterwards another cautery at the joint between the head of the spine, and this cautery is called "clavelle" of which we have described before; and treat the affected area as we have said previously until it becomes sound.
Of the thrusting. incarne devises:
sight theachieved, bute itacreme:saint beforeevelews. Fornature,senturexeble to the samexures:seing (12escularticlargeasexute itape;s:xente :cripractique.tracte a foreighloreletrai l'avocrepeachuex ceuleulexible.lysexangarde.
And for this reason the fire cautery is lighter, because you make it .iij. cuts per cut.
Of the shoulder joint dislocation. When the shoulder joint is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After which the patient's painful spot is located on his back and along his ribcage; after lightly pressing down in that area with your left hand, if the swelling appears within the intercostal space, then apply the fire cautery for .ij. punctures at that location, forming a shape like this:
And burn the painful spot as much as it is along the rib, and let the puncture wound from all three cauteries form together; and because of this fire cautery with the cautery having .iij. punctures, so that the figure of cauterization consists of these three cauteries, according to the subtlety of a tent, and it is the shape of the cautery that has .iij. punctures:
And there is never added above this .i. nerve so as it can have .viii. cauteries.
After placing it on the fire cautery with a string; after letting the patient rest, and not moving your limbs for long enough until he is well-comfortable.
And if it is dislocated above, this happens rarely, but make the fire cautery on the thick layer of the cautery under the collarbone, or many cauteries in pressing. Because the joint has been returned to its place, and the moisture has disappeared, and the patient's painful spot is healed.
The cautery for pleural dissection.
The old said that pleural dissection should be done with roots of Aristologus and in this manner: take one root of Aristologus as long as you can find, the longest possible; either dry it or make it large and long like your fingers; coat it in oil, and heat it up in fire, and cauterize .i. cauteries between the ribs and his collarbone, and .ij. little ones a bit downwards in the part that is above the throat; and .ij. cauteries between the 5th costal cartilage and the sidecartilage, declining slightly behind it a bit; and .i. cauteries near the pelvis, and .ij. between the sides of the pelvis, and .ij. along each other'inaside of the pelvis farther apart than those around the pelvis; and don't press your hand tightly but rather loosely as when smelling.
And no ancient said that anyone uses the iron fire cautery resembling a barber's blade and scrapes it off between the ribs, so long as it reaches to the aposteme; and leaps from pain, just as we have described in the abdomen of the aposteme. But in this work is fear or death has come upon these maladies, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
sez justice, cute, andace,gue lande;re legerde tocmesse.tsecs. Comme:sachement.
When you treat the disease of this mouse because we have said in our teachings on the methods of treatment, and it does not profit at all, for they apply to it three good types of cautery that everyone knows.
From which method do you make two, or three cauteries, depending on the length of the mouse, according to the shape and form of the caustic we have previously said about it; and you should not rush at all with your hand during the entire procedure, always keeping in mind that they are often severe on its back.
And another method of cauterization is when you heat the caustic with two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the keel where the mouse is, or if its pain comes from the left side, and raise the keel according to the keel, according to the length of the limb, and place the caustic accordingly to the width of the limb.
Subsequent to igniting the two nerves enough so that their pain is perceived from the opposite side, and then thrusting with the caustic, thereafter it will have three types of cauterization; if you see this situation, if one cauterizes all over the two nerves. After the treatment when it has caused prolonged bleeding for about ten days, which is considered to be better than any other treatments mentioned earlier.
sacreatraspremergouin: " :pale."
nature. Ifre jratheres:gracers. Commentis.
After letting the fire cautery overturn for falling down long distances, and not allowing the sick person to recover after the cautery; and healing would take place, and together they would be in three parts with God's help.
The form of the fire cautery for the abdomen should be the collarbone that we have shown before; and those for the back are the vertebrae, according to what has been presented to us.
of the swollen joints When the joints are swollen due to dropsy, and covered with yellowish tint, it is required that you cauterize on the back of the finger between the little finger and the ring finger; and move your hand gently with the cautery so as not to penetrate too deeply. And thus avoid creating holes in the yellowish tint, and cauterize accordingly:
After making two cauteries on each leg at the tip of the lancet; and one of them along the calf muscle in front and another behind, inside the leg, letting the cauteries lie down for a long time to cure it, that is where the tissue becomes loose; after the other treatments we have mentioned.
from medicine
When the solution of the stomach comes from cold and moisture so that it retards its absorbing and digestive virtues which are in the stomach and intestines, and cannot be treated by any other methods; and you see the sick person suffering greatly with great vitality, he does .i. great cauterization on the stomach according to what has been mentioned before or cauterize the stomach, let the caustic flow undernee each .iiij. cauteres in a subtle manner throughout one .iiij. clavicle and .iiij. cauteries on the hams.
And if you see the moistures and the sick person suffering, then he makes cauterization on the hip, and one caustic on each ilium; and .iiij. small caustics on the stomach near the large, for the treatment is beneficial when it has good help.
about the cure for hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are found to be the foundation or multiple, and old and cold and moistly corrupt humors; they are treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not profit by performing: .iij. cauterizations on the spine of the back, wherein small amounts of cautery are performed, and .iiij. caustes on the hams.
And if you think his stomach is cold, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the belly swell up, therefore there will be a strong cautery on top of the stomach, as it has been said before, and another above the liver, and another over the intestines with the whole cautery claw; and let the cautery remain long enough. Afterwards heal the flesh until it is sound again.
The choleric temperament which is called "théloul".
If you combat the choleric temperament, heat up the cautery that looks like a razor and then apply it all over on top of the choleric temperament coped with; let your hand remain until the scabbing appears at the vein's birth, from which the hair will grow out again, for as many times or as few as we have said, and if there is much choleric in him, cauterize each part as we have mentioned; after these treatments of ointments apply until they are sound again, and if you cauterize a great deal with the cautery above the cataplasm, it will give more aid.
Of poorly treated wounds
When the sick cannot endure cutting or burning, tell it in his presence, for there comes a disease that cannot be healed except by cautery.
When there is no fistula present, and it has become old and infected with putrid moisture, give treatment to the entire tent thoroughly, and keep track of how much of the tent has been invaded; then apply the razor-like cautery according to the amount that has entered into the fistula, and repeat the cautery as long as those pores and corrupt tissues are still there, once or twice or three times depending on the extent of infection; and warn against arteries that have been affected, and large veins. If the fistula is connected to the bladder and intestines, then treat these vessels and remind yourself that it is not a permanent condition; after treatment until they are sound again, if the tissues surrounding the fistula are ossified for a long time, you know that the fistula has been healed entirely; and if the materials around the fistula are not bone-like, then you know it is broken up and corrupted; in such cases, as we will say to you.
Of kidney disease When pain from heavy rain comes, and much windsomeness, and takes it from women, therefore heed we have said caution on one part and other part of the clawves; and when our cauteries therein soif ce que il fie tote in chief l’arme desir.
of the bladder If the bladder is soft and weakened by moisture, so it retains urine, then he inflicts cautery on the part below the bladder where the hair begins to sprout from both sides, and each one does cautery on its corresponding side; and he also inflicts a caustic on the back, or if you have need of it; and they cauterize the clavicle according to the form previously stated.
of the marrow If the bone marrow is cold and moist, and does not allow for conception to occur, and the flowers are rotten and their ends delayed; when they come, it causes great pain: therefore he must inflict three cauteries on the brain, as we have said regarding the caustic applied to the bladder, and three cauterizations on the back, and he must also cauterize the clavicle according to what we have previously stated.
The instruction "de la hainche" translates from Old French as "of the hiccough." In medieval medical texts, references like this might describe various treatments or theories related to understanding and curing what we now recognize as a common respiratory reflex—hiccups. During the Middle Ages, there were many attempts by physicians to understand and alleviate such bodily functions through both theoretical knowledge and practical remedies, which ranged from simple dietary advice to more complex procedures that would not be considered appropriate or effective in today's medical practice.
When viscous humors descend into the diaphragm of the hiccup (hiccup), and for this reason it stops moving from its place, and there are signs that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and they find the location where the dislocation occurred, therefore he must cauterize the malady above the diaphragm with a caustic looking like a circle, and in front of the hiccup near it so that the diaphragm is within the circle if it turns as when we have treated the stomach.
And if these caustic treatments are not present, then he will make three large cuts in the olive tree'inaside with such force as all the others do, and heals it until it is sound again.
The phrase "de la dolor de la hainche" translates from Old French to modern English as "of the pain of the hiccup." In a medieval medical context, this part might refer to pain associated with the hiccups (hiccup. It may be used in a text discussing possible causes and treatment: When pain comes in the joint of the shoulder, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient suffers from this as we have said about division, then you must purge the patient of the large humors with foul-smelling pills or other good-looking pills.
After the fire cautery; and the manner of doing it is variously as follows: it involves medicines wrapped in cloth, and fire-cauterization according to many ways, among which some are that one performs it on the joint of the shoulder .iii. triangular cauterizations following this form, with good depth and a large gap between each cautery stitch, and they are called oblique cauteries; never performed in the center of the shoulder's top, for then there are .iiij. according to this form:
And if you see, when the cauterizing with the double circle that we have mentioned in the dislocation of the shoulder; but make it such a way that the circles contain the entire joint, and all its edges are covered with flesh.
And it is the way that they do in sciatica when the pain is located in the shoulder and does not reach as far down to the thigh or leg; if it comes up to the thigh and leg, then one makes .ij. oblique cauterizations according to what the patient says where the pain is located, and .i. oblique cauterization above the ankle .iiij. inches on the left side a little; or you make cutaneous cauterizations there and reduce the thickness of the tissue in that area; and if the patient feels that the pain extends up to two feet or three feet from where it is, then cauterize at that point with .iij. points or .iiij. oblique cauterization known as "points."
And if it is proper, then you perform more of them; and if the pain extends down to the knee, then make a cutaneous or circular cauterization therein with care ensuring that no caustic element remains in all your cauterizations which could burn the nerves and large arteries, so as not to cause further harm or contraction to the patient.
Et jeux de pieds ainsomme .iiij. cauteres desiré en ile chevree que siete; ceu que tuent, et sanc: les fievre por li biaus de laine d'oreille du pitoire ieu corne.
And if the pain is in two joined parts, do heat one and then the other according to this manner. // And they said on the heating of the hernia, from here it is that way, make such a sharp iron and put it as big as an olive nut or slightly less, and place it between notches or close notches up to the distance of a finger's length apart; and let the notches be turned over two parts, and also like nails, and have it with one hand made of firm iron; and this is its form.
And heat it so that it is entirely red and warm to the touch, and then place it on the sickly patient's hernia, and turn it upwards along the side of the ill-shaped belly; and let the cauterizer strike with one iron twice and leave it for three years; and afterward apply a poultice made of wax, and allow the wound to dry out over a lengthy period until it heals.
Albucias said that we use this cautery little because of the pain it causes to its patient, and few people use it at all; but in general, these are good cauteries that can withstand it, and they heal well if used correctly.
from two types of pain
When pain comes to the back, or through falling, by percussion or excessive evacuation, or resembling things spread out coldly, none of these similarities justify cauterization, for there is no one who comes from an infusion of cold matter (presumably referring that such methods are not suitable when caused by issues involving coldness in the body).
It is required that the ill-conditioned patient be devoid of putrid tablets or other similar things made to put on his back, whether the pain persists, three lines scored downwards, and in each line several cauteries according to strength and amount that the patient can withstand; and make these cauterizations as per the type called "pins"; and if you see it, do 2 or 3 cauterizations on the pin-type instrument following this form:
Many times this disease occurs in small children, and the signs of its onset are that it is constricted when they begin to walk, and fear; and you treat in the back spine and also the appearance which appears above other spines.
When you see it and when you cure it, if you cauterize with the pin-type instrument according to this form.
If you see the hernie. Forte maladies en lai vingle chascun poins. Aoutre leu quarrere, siens lou che valse, et siensin :il leude aespear les toz leuvalence deschif:caurate :laur theves fromage espresc'sounge auvernment and inxentures.
le deure dek.avers. Andesufin. Itarre dexpression. Commentary vith iten: age fromaire, illofragustume aspeech leslere: " : Isofleur,se. Iturin.
When the pain of moist joints occurs on each limb's backbone, and when it comes in spasms which they call "gout" properly, and when it is due to cold causes and cannot be treated by medicines, then the treatment consists of making fire cauterizations around the joint affected: make a lot of cauterizations with this kind of instrument: fire cautery according to this form:
And if there is need that you pierce under the joint of each limb's backbone, then make cauterization all over this kind of instrument called "point cautery"; and when pain spreads to other joints and occurs many times, you must do so much fire cauterization on every knee (2 or 3) or part thereof, with the whole fire cautery instrument; and if you have any more skill, then make it further but hold your hand firmly until the pain has ceased.
And when pain spreads downwards to the back and hands, apply the cautery we mentioned in that chapter; if there is no more pain at all, then pierce along each joint and under the skin of the hand (2 or 3 lines); and if the pain comes down from the knees or shoulders, cauterize each part, and treat gently with good medicines. For if you do this well and purge mucus, he will be healed by God's help.
of the route to the surgery
When the journey arrives in anger, and its bellowing downwards to joints, it requires that when you have seen him healed, do not let him return there on any day; but rather make him lie on his back between your hands, and command him to tie his arm until the hock is repaited, and bandage at your places, and signal from outside the bone of the hammer by a sign that resembles most of a circle above each joint. Then use this fire cautery according to its form:
As long as it is white and free of sensation. Then bandage the hocks at his place; and you will tighten his hand so that he does not return to work; and tend well to the thighs in front of him, and put one sponge and serpentine on each leg, and another on which he binds his hands with cauterization under the sign over your hands, and hold the right side and left side until you have shattered the bone, and if it does not happen the first time, then again repeat as long as the bone remains. And be subtle so that he will not break the hock; and do not burn his flesh, or other harm to him.
nagre:se de butscreaide tolumper and scepsurgereble:give apeur itake sobrecte the wholeclarexage:nature, in whiches (tostracture.
And after .10 years, when he wants to stand up, he is put on a stretcher well made, and it is carried for another .10 years; and good rest, so that he works little and avoids excessive overeating and drinking, and coughing too much; and when he follows this treatment, he becomes completely healthy. And I will say this after the treatment of tailor in his chapter. Routine for the abdomen
When routines come to other organs and are known, and you see that they do not increase anymore, I will make fire cautery according to its quantity, either two-thirds of the wound or; after the treatment as we have said; and none of the ancients claimed it necessary to cauterize with a cautery at three angles in this manner:
But first mark the point of entry and make a line above for the width of the procedure, and another below it; and with your hand envelop all around the cautery. However, the initial cauteries are lighter and more flexible.
of ancient pain in no limb When the pain comes in no limb, whether from falling or injury, and this pain lingers long; since medicine cannot alleviate it then must it be cauterized with what is called "pins," and according to the length of the limb as well as its size and frailty and strength and location of twists and where the pain is; if it has been healed by the first cautery, that's good; but this custom is that there must be another cautery placed above the previous one, for since the patient moves on with his limbs, you must make the cauteries so long as the pain remains.
miscellany
The collection consists of no instances by caustic aid, and primarily the disease that arises from putrefaction of blood and melancholy. Can you see it cautioning this malady, taking care that the disease is at its beginning, and treated as we have said in the division; and does not spread nor return, and do you doubt whether the corruption might affect all the affected part, since I will make .v. cauteries on the main part: one next to it, another toward the forehead's temple edges at the end of the hairy ridge; and two above the horns, and one behind the heel, and let your hand so that the caustic becomes flexible enough in the bone, and long as the scabs can be torn off by allowing the large humors to come out from it.
And if it is scattered throughout; and it is clearly present, indicating that you should use these types of cauterizations from the ones we have mentioned or chiefly spoken about: one for the navel area, two for the spine of the back, a few for the spine of the backside, and some in great numbers below the pelvis and another near it; several on the wrists, and several on the tendons behind the elbows, and one for each joint of the hands and fingers, and under the fingernails; and warn against nerves that are calcined beneath the abdomen so you do not burn them; and never made cauterization on the groin bone, nor another on the stomach organ, nor another on the liver.
And you know that the more I do cauterization, the more help it provides; and you know that the sick person feels no pain from cauterization as much as healthy people feel when they are cauterized, because their bodies have become completely corrupt. It is necessary for the cautery to be large and small according to the limbs and joints, depending on what you find in ironworking techniques. After healing his flesh with flour mixed with honey and other treatments until he is sound.
of embroidery
When embroidery comes into any member and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it's not sound yet, then the cauterization of the limb according to its size and shape; and sometimes a little incision was made in the tendon just at the point where there was no movement. And never performed cauterization on hand or foot or back near nerve tissue that is silent with the limb; thus, it is embroidery; and all this is only done if one is acquainted with the members and moving nerves of the body's core.
"Of barley" - This term could potentially be used metapromptly to symbolize healing or sustenance in a historical medical context, as grains have been fundamental for nutrition throughout history. However, it does not directly translate from the Old French medical text about cauterization. In an interpretative sense related to health and recovery:
When the disease that is called "barley" has grown old, and the art of medicine doesn't help, so cauterization with a little bit of cautery according to the amount of pain; until the whitening returns to bone, and its color changes, then heal the flesh with flour mixed several times with lentils, olive oil, and plantain leaves for each part; and mix them all together, and bind it with linen, and let it dry so that it is sound.
The treatment for sore by cauterization
When the sore comes at the beginning, and you see it stop with the cauterizing that seems like one circle, all around the course of the sore; and everyone said they also performed cauterization in the midst of the sore; and to me this does not seem very good, for I fear it may become ulcers and corrupt, and I have never yet seen it happen again; and rather a more rightful thing is that it be cauterized all around with the cautery called "circular", as we said in many of our cauteries.
Of the swelling which cannot die.
If anyone has a disease called "adubelati," which delays death or due to its excessive consumption or the pains of the patient when he is decrepit (meaning overly old), and it postpones dying: however, cauterize around much small burns with pressure; afterwards let it be so. Because it will continue to delay dying.
And if you see the swelling all around the cautery, since then the cautery is of such shape:
And place your hand in the midst of that disease called "adubelati," so long as the cauterization has perceived the hardness, and such is the nature of those burns that the pains of the patient are alleviated to some extent like how the course of diarrhea is lightened. Afterwards let it heal completely.
the curing of fire by iron
Another way of disease called "corrodens" which is like an infestation of the limbs, for it also affects the joints similarly to how fire withers trees; if you see this kind of illness that might require a cauterization treatment together with fire, then heat up the caustic strikes very gently and strongly as required by the locality or condition of the affected area; afterward cauterize all parts until there is no trace left of the corruption, and let everything burned off remain healed. Then apply warm ointments for three years to those burnt areas with oil while the joints recover from the fire'rances, and after that any remaining corruption; and this infestation was never really cured by medicine in the wounds of the cauterization caused by fire; but rather all caustic strikes are much more helpful, and I have already said about the treatment with ointments: take as much as you know. If after three years a healthy limb does not appear from that infestation, then reapply the caustic strikes on those remaining burned areas, and in this way.
of those who come to the joints
Often occurs that the joints by various causes suffer a disease which we call "closed", and it is a great evil that bleeds the wound. And for this illness, the cautery according to our understanding must be done; namely cauterization with fire, and hot caustic cautery.
And if it is caused by the joint's motion, and happens many times in hands and feet; then it must be that you apply cold caustic; in a somewhat similar manner: take an iron or wooden shaft or arrowhead, place it on the nail, which are callous patches; put the iron/shaft over so that it penetrates around well, then add some hot water and grip firmly with your hand, turning back to make sure the edges of the iron/shaft reach down to the root of the nail, and allow for a thorough search through by the heat for as long as it reaches the roots; afterwards leave it for some time, and it will be uprooted from all its roots. So do another one afterward until you have dealt with all those in the joints who cause inflammation, then treat them with ointments that drain fluid. (Note: The translation adapts to a hypothetical scenario described in an Old French medical text related to cauterization and treatment of diseased joints.)
The treatment for the twitching, which may also be referred to as "le curage du trembleur" (the treatment for trembling) involves various techniques. These can include rest and immobilization, but in a historical context with medieval medical practices, other remedies might have been used such as cauterization or herbal concoctions. The specifics would depend on the underlying cause of the twitching according to the prevail Written from an AI's perspective, rephrase the following technical abstract into a first-person narrative that captures the excitement and challenge of conducting this research:
n thecaure:ivreiraleves andarreve.iij.
Of fire cautery command the Malade let the hairs grow long and smooth; and if they are pricked at their root, hold firmly so they do not move until they appear.
Never appeared by any means the corrupt parts of the body, or pustules filled with rotten matter. It is required at first when they appear that cauterization be performed on every chief of the pustule: either a fine spoon made of resinous wood, which holds its point to fire, or from the root of an aristolochia longa, or lenticular cautery. And never has cauterization been done at first in this manner and they do not grow further ahead but are broken by superfluous parts that come out, and are sound; but it is required that this be done after the evacuation of blood.
When an arrow is drawn (extracted). Many times there are large blood drains from an artery that is drawn at the wound which comes to a boil or incising of the aposteme, or cauterization of a limb, and such things; and it is very grave matter to entrap.
And in all such cases when this happens you must promptly place your hand indicator on the vein'e wound, and strain it so much that it is no longer agitated around your hand; then light a number of small and large olive cauteries until they are all red, and proceed. First, whether great or little according to the wound and location where the artery lies, place the cautery on this vein or you hold your indicator there, and keep pressing the cautery until it no longer moves the artery.
And if the artery bursts when you lower your hand indicator above the vein and the cautery is extinguished, then immediately take another of those cauteries that are on fire.
quatornez lesclerre dant en:iovre faintres que :ent .iiijgoth in the XIVthairfragments deires, lairer lexinjour nesire.torture cestiraithey.
Who will treat the tightening of ligaments or putting things on top of them, or similar things, if it does not benefit at all.
And if it happens that there is no effect at all, and he has neither sight nor medicine present, then must put his index finger on the vein's wound as we have said before, and stretch him above the wound and beyond the vein; and do not move him, but keep his breath cold often enough so that it becomes very cold until it freezes and engorges, and make enquiries about what kind of cautery and medicine is needed.
We have said in the first chapter that such diseases require fire caustics or medicines within them, and examinations and causes and remedies and forms of cauterization; and I put this chapter here at piece, and I will go to this chapter by this path because it is pursued more readily for what it deals with.
And so I begin, it must be said that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauterizations, and for this reason greater care is required.
For in the work of this chapter there are often times evacuation of blood from opening a vein, and incision at an abscess, and treatment of wounds, and extraction of arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you must not take foolish actions. For many ways of people come to cures. Those who came with their illness so strongly that they died quickly from the treatment of it and the severity of their sickness, and for such one should have fear. And of those who give their sign, and say: "wait, I am guarded"; the disease is spiteful. You do not have to consent to those who come to you with this kind of approach, but put more care in your reputation than in your covenant, and don't overindulge much but slowly in what you are certain of, and from which you have taken; and use prognostication and indication in the treatment of your maladies so that their good fame, and honorable name.
Very dear son, our lords teach you good understanding and uprightness, and if you desire to receive the holy inspiration from his hand, amen.
I have ordered this chapter to be discussed by chapters, according to what it is about, which is the cauteries that I have described in detail because you find them easier to understand.
the main point full of water
It is said that this disease often affects children at birth, and when the head (chief) of the child is restrained too tightly; and there has never been a case where it was caused by something else which we could not attribute to.
And I have never seen this disease in adults, and among all these that I've encountered its wounds; and for this reason it seems to me that the work is easier in parts (divided treatments).
And I saw an infant whose joints were flooded with water, and the head was locked tightly every day so much that it couldn't support itself; and he believed so much in the moisture that a mass (moistor) formed under the skin over its knee between the kneecap and bone; and the treatments are such that the mass is located between the kneecap and the bone, and the incision is small enough for you to cut through the head with a wide fissure; and it should be long as if two of us, until the swelling subsides; and then there appears this double weltmark:
If the mass is more pronounced and the incision larger, then you make two cuts in a cross-like manner according to this form:
And if the mass is within the bone and you see the commissures (joints) of each part overlap, and the water bursts forth when you press it with your hand inward, and this has not been proven to me: then it must be that you make three cuts according to this manner:
Sire, siens et li malades quinnece de ape par cestant; les chants espocte desormaines le comande laisse esprit. Averges: "Leu : le cuer theor invention of ices tounge theme
ses. The: allongue (thorough. Injure le couleur.
When the incision is made and the water begins to seep in, and do as you can according to what you are able; and warn that you do not clog the artery; and bleed slowly from the wound, so that the patient's blood does not flow rapidly with moisture evacuation.
The text provided seems incomplete or lacks context for a precise translation. If it is intended to be translated, additional information would be needed. However, if "de reume" refers to something in Old French, it might mean "from the move," but without further context, this cannot be confirmed as a meaningful translation.
When there is a disease that brings on "catarre" or pain in the womb, and the illness is chronic, and medicine does not help at all, rather it's healing with fire cautery as we have seen, so they will relieve the patient by burning through these .ij. arteries.
He must now cover the patient' Written by: Nicole L. Hays on February 18, 2021
And if you see, thrust the pestle between the artery and the caput above, cutting it as I have shown to you before.
And when the vein is pierced, if it continues to shoot without going upwards constantly.
And if the artery does not open at all with touching, it is necessary for you to measure the distance of two fingers, then enlarge and cut into the bone; and whatever there needs to be bloodshed as much as twelve, or perhaps a little more or less. According to what the patient can bear, and the swelling of the artery, then look at the wound: if it remains above the bone by any point still open sore, cut off the wound and bandage, and care for anointing until he is cured.
from emigration
When an ancient migraine comes with a hot headache due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and other similar things, it is treated by various medical methods and techniques; however, they do not benefit at all if we extract arteries from the temples and perform cauterization as we have described.
And the method of extracting them is that it makes the patient's temple hair grow back twice over and listen to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well with its beating, and only few drops return compared to those who are too cold; and if it is refilled, then remove his collar of some cloths, wipe the skin of any rough cloth, and raise the skin with warm water until the artery appears manifestly. Then take a pestle like this:
Then scrape the flesh lightly as long as you will on the artery, then take it up with pinchers and remove well all the rags that are in each of these parts; and if the artery is thin, turn it at the point of the hook, and cut off that part according to the quantity of two fingers. Because if it does not bleed, it will shoot blood without any exception.
And take the blood of those twelve, and cut it into two parts: and if the artery is large, it must be tied with a double strong thread of silk, so that no bleeding occurs before the sealing of the wound, and continued draining from sanc; then remove the excess quantity in that moment at the same time, and then, when you see this cauterization cut the chisel sharply against bone as long as the hairs are pulled. And it is the next treatment, if the patient does not have a fever and he has a hot complexion.
andescribe'sis. Itold. Thejacmeat. : I:se. It is required for the extraction of arteries that one fills his vein with much cotton and places it well made on top; and when they remove them, take care to use dry medicines that cause healing and bandages until he is whole; and if without pressure from the artery as you perform your work, then immediately stop bleeding by cauterizing him with fire or apply vitriol and strain it in your hand so that the vein does not open again; and if this is not present now, place a cold water on his vein for as long as he continuously, and keep it restrained as it is required; and whoever is more limber and lighter during artery extraction is that you cauterize their vein with this caustic cutting of .ij. parts, but the cutting be well spaced to protect its heat longer. When the sutures are too tight, it holds less blood. And it must be between the knives, one of them should have a large space, and then when you anchor your hot iron into the cuts, and place the fire-hot iron so long on the bone until it flexes just at the point where the bone is, and cover the vein in these cuts; and they are separated between the knife cuts because it is not well united with this cautery for everything; and that is the form of this cautery:
of tears
When the tears from the eyes are coming out through the veins where there is the test of fire at the top, and it does not profit to use medicine that you apply, and you see the malady reddening with movement as if it were trembling; and such tissues are held tightly and moist so that the hairs on the paper-like structures are lifted, and these structures are scorched by the heat of tears, which is necessary for this cure.
And they called it "contusion cure," and you treat the patient who has this malady with the hairs that he has on his head or forehead, then make two fissures in his forehead evenly according to the length of the forehead; and one of these fissures is as much below the forehead as it brings down the whole forehead away from its natural position, and the others are like veins above the "paper-like" membranes. And you keep your hand away from cutting into the arteries that are in those areas where the "paper-like" structures are located over them; and separate your hand from joining any more of these mandibular fissures, each one as many times as it takes to join;
Regarding the incision made next to the temple, just above the second incision; and scrape all the tissue between the two holes, covering all the surface under the bone, then make another small incision in that spot near the other second one, and then extract this abnormality.
Insert the instrument called "cultellar" in the first hole, and it is very well shaped on one side, but not on the other side, and its form is like this. Then position the cutting edge towards the skull of the keur (patient), and its sharp edge towards the bone, and the blade is inserted until it reaches the second hole as long as the incision continues along this opening; then continue to make another insertion in that second hole, and then extract the abscess evenly; and place a piece of gauze in each hole; and cover them with damp white cloth and olive oil and straw moss, ensuring that sucking chicks do not come near it; and after three days adjust the bandage, and treat with basilicon balm mixed with rose-infused oil, and other cures for wounds, as long as he is healthy.
Two removals of the tissues.
As it is not usual for the catarrh to produce sharp tissues and small swellings that hinder vision, and burnt papers; and there are flaking hairs on the head, and the chief in which pain appears, and the inflamed forehead; therefore you know by these signs that such materials come from many veins, and it is this treatment that they use.
And command the patient to pat his forehead, then make a large incision in front of it; and start from the temple on the left towards the temple on the right, along the bone; and keep your hand away from the temples that move when eating; and when the bone is exposed, clean it with an absorbent sponge, then put a piece of thick linen in between the two holes and insert cotton wool; cover them with moistened white cloth and oil, and keep chicks away from sucking their milk; once healed, you must massage the bone until it begins to grow again, then treat him with excisional remedies that are known for rejuvenation.
In a similar manner: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of calf's blood, and prepare it by boiling; administer this mixture in these wounds to rejuvenate the character throughout.
Of ear picking.
All these things that are done to the ears can be considered among three kinds: or grains of mine ore its kindreds and similitudes such as wheat bran, husks, or straw; or seed if it is barley, peas, oats; or something fluid like water and hay.
leu theomaneide devoid ilte:lre :esme pas
If the wound jumps with tweezers, it is good; but if not, treat by extraction of a small incision under thin dislocation; and if it does not jump, make an ear piercing and push what is under the soft ear lobe so that nothing obstructs the soft ear canal so well that the needle cannot enter with the piercing; then heal properly, as we have said before; and if it does not heal in a timely manner, take some honey with ointment and apply no instrument to this purpose without knowing its use, and place a little cotton inside. And if the wound does not jump from all these things we have mentioned before, then hasten to piercing the ear so that the abscess can come out and spasm, and in the manner of the piercing you first set up the deformed head of the skull' cvtile; extract the spleen according to its size; let it lie between your hands and turn the ear back upwards; make a small incision at the root of the ear with grease or fat depending on whether you can insert the needle into the hole, then similarly as a crescent moon until you pierce the ear, and let the physician do as he sees fit, and suction it immediately from your mouth; continue treatment until the patient is well. And if it is a granule and swells up, perform an extraction; and if it cannot come out, insert a thin but sturdy spatula under this form:
And insert an incision for that granule. However, do not attempt to perform this action if you think the granule is moist due to ear moisture; continue attempting extraction until many attempts have been made; then carefully extract it with subtil pincers and suction, as we previously stated, ensuring a gentle removal of the extraction.

In the extraction of an arrow, if it is small in size, like a fly and similar things, treat it as we have described for division; but if it is large enough to be felt, prepare removal of pinchings; and this process is lighter when performed on the ear.
In the extraction of ear wax, if you treat it as we have described for division and distillation, it does not benefit; it must be that you look at the ear in the sunlight: if there are no wax blocks, then gently remove the pinchings, and if they do not appear, take the cotton ball with this shape:
And narrow above and wide below. Apply the more subtle chief in the ear according to the degree of suffering from the malady; then form with cotton wool until all the wax comes out. If it does not come out, pull out the cotton ball as we have described for a hole; if they do not emerge as we have mentioned, apply distillations that the old ones have proven in cutting out the worms, and you will find or treat with distillations; and when distilling oils and medicines in the ear using this instrument, which is of this form:
And it may be of silver or lead above with a small hole for distillation, and above that to press in the distillation using an earthenware vessel specifically made for this purpose; if you see a razor and wrap around its point cotton wool, then pour your oil or juice into it, and look at the medicine within the cotton ball placed in the ear, and the cotton should remain in the ear; push within the razor all the cotton thoroughly until the oil is distilled from the ear, and if you feel pain inside due to this process, then apply one small flame on it so that the medicine will be distilled into the ear; and ensure it'e not too cold, for the medication would not be as effective.
The extraction or cleaning (in modern terms) of earwax would be translated as "de la déliction ou extraction des oreilles" in French. This Old French phrase likely refers to a medical procedure involving earwax removal, possibly using methods such as suction and/or manual cotton wool application, consistent with medieval practices:
Etant: Etienne demele char leu nour (A laisse ains: Aude paroles enmaude les plus leu, ou itens cestat theorethrebleutil : Lea lezlous andern:es:itilene. Laotemporal French: "Irritentlesme, etablet develle :entire.iounsesure ofsseur lesure. Audex'sise 21stropile:e of the :
There comes then who comes forth with various treatments, and it is not seen unless in these, that you must put the ear of the sick person to the sun; and look therein: if the operation appears obvious, then this entire procedure corresponds to this space where that which we call 'the cavity' is located.
And if it is and probe forward and backward plainly, so that the ear does not bleed; when the operation involves a new bone or cartilage of the ear, and you have subtle pinches there, apply them lightly and continuously, until those parts are entirely made of bone.
And if the operations are performed in the ear, take a subtle scraper and wipe it lightly with fire, then put the new bone or cartilage of the ear. If you feel that this operation causes great discomfort to hearing, do it gently, and make sure not to press too hard on the nerves of the ear; then place a patch in the ear according to its size, and coat it with Egyptian ointment.
Do not do this for any longer time until the wound is sealed, or take a patch and coat it with rose water, and sprinkle vitriol powder on it; if you see that the ear has swelled up, cover the patch and move another moistened cloth made of oil roses and beeswax, until the swelling becomes bone-like; then treat him as long as he is healthy.
And if blood comes from the wound, soak a sponge and wrap it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and apply other treatments that help with the flow of blood which are related to distillation therapies.
of the paper's bone
This material that comes in paper form when it is moist and dry, it requires stretching with tongs and pinches, and treating with a small bone root piece; then apply cider vinegar powder on the wound.
And if without decortication, with a subtle circular caustic instrument, and after the incision it moves; and they repair many times without any deviation from their roots; and when those roots are cauterized by fire, those roots are charred and do not return again.
of the gravel
Many times come in paper form of things that resemble gravel in their shape and toughness, and because of this disease called "the grand hail" (referring to the accumulation), and it is an assembly of moisture heavy on the surface of the paper; and if you can't catch a piece with your fingers lightly, then nothing bothers the sick person; and if the fractures are large, make a coverage, and cure as long as it heals. And if it is small, not to exertion de la pustice desgauche.
gear laire le ásent: “:rime :garter. Ages. Theor ictere :ceter aille.
of the hairs
Exine is a fat that is imprinted on the surface of papers above, and this happens more to children than to few people, and it hurts much in their eyes, and they come with cataracts at mornings, and can't see the sunlight because tears run down their eyes; and therefore they lie back on their faces afterwards and sleep there, and their papers beneath them are dampened by their tears so that the exine oozes out between the paper layers. And when you press your eye with your hands and feel the ooze coming out.
And the method of this practice is that the painful oil should be placed on your head; then take an unbleached linen cloth in a circular manner according to the amount of exine present in each part, and lay it over you; press firmly with one side and another so that the exine oozes inside the circle. Then make a hole in the center large enough for the syringe needle to pass through without being larger than the incision made on the vein; then sew around the exine piece, in various arrangements it may come out of this opening, depending on the shape of a fat lump.
Extract it from the entire piece of cloth between your hands and turn your hand both to the right and left as much as you can until it is evenly spread; ensure not to overstretch in the hole where the syringe needle passes through so that no blood flows along the entire length of the vein, avoiding bleeding.
And if the exine does not open at the beginning of the hole, push gently to widen it until it opens; then extract as we have described, moisten the edges and sides with cloth, lay it on your head, and securely bind it using bandages or belts.
And if there are such homes that burn with fire and use it to corrupt the moisture which is slow to heal; then treat him so long as he remains healthy, and if his wound opens from an incision, cauterize him while he still has good health.
If there are papers on fire. Treatment: "The text from ancient texts in Old French, 12th century. Canteaux de la vintans of ce quins. Texts written in Old English. Lei's semblant.
When paper-like hairs are born other than their natural state, and become old, they harm the hairs, and bring forth habits of illnesses such as accustomed tears and softening of the papers, as long as it is due to the destruction of the hairs; and there are four main methods of treatment: or by fire cautery together with fire, or by wet ague according to what is before or written in this treatise on cautery, and is made by cutting and stitching or by binding, as I will explain.
It is necessary that you place the patient's head on your table, then turn the oil-soaked cloth in your right hand; if it turns out well, that's good; but if not, stick one needle at every .i. point above; and whether this happens near the margin of the paper or where the hairs grow therefrom, and pull a thread upwards through all the paper, then turn the cloth to the razor, on the part of the paper without touching the dislocated joints, from the great laceration just to the small; then remove one needle, and place under the paper a small tent made of cotton and fabric, and above it a figure like that of a peach pit, according as much you have elevated the paper which is designated for all.
And if a part that has much paper according to how the paper is malleable; then make at all the spaces around those .ij. lines you have marked, and begin with the great laceration from one of the natural hair roots in the thickness of an almond seed, then insert the needle into one of the angles of that kerf, then scour it out entirely; then sew together the .ij. leaves to a silken stitch made of fine linen thread with all .i. filaments, and drain the blood from under those .ij. sutures on all things sticky, if you see doing this; but if not, there is no need for it, then leave the stitch and the threads for three years or four years, and cure the wound without surgery of things constricting and binding, because the paper relaxes with the healing of the wound and assembly of it, but the stitch is changed (as the old ones say), and this is cause of fear.
And another way is that you mark the paper with a figure like those peach pit pits we have told about, which are also as the fuse of mith; at three needles placed according to the shape that is here indicated:
then covers those small forces in exactly the same way according to the shape indicated here:
And if you do not have the pincers, and that is not the same: take anewly (with one fil; and put it under the figure, and put a to tieles.
And there is never an occurrence where the hair of paper is turned into: it indicates that you must use what we have said about the incision; however, in both cases it is more artificial.
The treatment of the clavicles is according to this form: and it is that you convert the paper and fill them in as I have said, and then make .ij. clavicles by art, and .ij. ligaments also long like the paper and large space between the spinal vertebrae; and tie the ends of these clavicles or whatever strings you hold; then join them subtly on what is underneayer from the paper of oil, and stretch the .ij. clavicles into their respective parts; and let it remain for some years, and the skin that was strained will harden and tighten and close up until it heals itself.
If it delays, if the skin is tightened with force, then treat him until he is sound again; and when the wound has been sewn closed, and when the paper is lifted, so that the hairs no longer stick to it; and this is the form of the clavicles you make according to this figure and quantity of long and large.
The procedures are such that you should use a thin needle and one silken thread of fine quality; then join the clavicles together subtly, making the length of the threads about one palm long; next, take another silken thread very finely, and join it to the chiefs of the first thread; so make sure that the manipulation is done under the sunlight, as these are delicate and fine operations, then thrust the needle in the root of the hair cluster adjacent to the skin, pierce it hastily through the felt hat, and draw out the hair neatly above its natural position; then pull the hair until you reach the thread, if there is one or two or three or more; then remove your hand as long as the hair veins extend throughout the silk threads with the natural hair.
And if the thread is treated and the hair does not come out with it, then pull the thread along all of the silk you ordered, as long as the thread extends above its puncture through and that you see it through the oil's vision; consequently, draw the thread and oil and leave it for .ij. or .iij. years until the hair regains its place in the joint and sprouts up again; but if the hair is small, accompany a long piece of natural hair from the shoulders with that which you leave, and raise them together as much as they are stretched out, then loosen it, and then let it grow.
of the oil's discharge (This appears to be a reference to "leakage" or drainage from an injection site).
When this disease which is called "aleacratic" or the discharge comes from the oil, if it has in two ways: one natural and one unnatural. And occurs with closed wounds, or cutting of a wound, or cautery, and other things. (This passage seems to describe that there are diseases which resemble an illnesses where bleeding or oozing from the oil as it is known in two ways: either natural or unnatural.
.
And your medical knowledge so is that you must warn yourself that it does not solidify according to the original form; and these works we have mentioned are no exception to this disease, which will recede in its original form.
Of the flesh that comes into oil
This disease which truly occurs in the wound "axacraty" is natural and accidental. The accident arises from cuts and fissures and cauterization and similar things; in this work of mine, you must use an awl with a double thread, so that it pierces to the left margin as far as the right, where the filament goes through two teeth of the flesh, and then the flesh is raised above all the awl, and the coping stone has one large cup.
And if the figure of the paper returns as it should be, that is good; but if not, then take a razor and put it in the fissure, turn the paper around, and make .ij. holes or edges within the paper; and have the .ij. fissures at the .ij. angles of the incision you made, and form some angles so that when they are joined, the figure is also like a letter with "..j." lines; then glue this flesh according to the quantity of its edges, from which it seems the paper, and join the separated parts again with linen thread; then proceed as we have said concerning mollifying medicines and poultices, so that it heals.
And if the disease comes from a fissure or seam or cauterization, it is required that you make a straight incision among the hairs of the parchments, according to what I have said; and then tear between the two layers of the tent as I have described; and must one perform the work according to the shape of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the master's skill determines how he can restore the figure back to its natural state; and with me myself, according to what it requires from this treatment and various preparations.
The following is likely addressing how to dry or fix the parchment (papier) after it has been treated, possibly involving a process of air-drying or fixing and mending paper in order to make sure the document remains intact. This could imply that there was an additional emphasizes on preserving written work during this period.
soldre: theuccle:se:02e:ses :measures,les, andes:ge (thexarre :e, soffre presse apece.sanglore,anx affaire, itax. Andexente. ici.
of the finger of the hand
Separate that the finger is divided into two parts: one looks nervous and hard like iron; another appears softened with moisture, not nervous but resembling a congealed clot, which when touched by iron and cared for with pincers cannot move; both appearances start towards the great ridge, and grow little by little until it encloses all of sight and light and movement of the hand.
The method of the incision is such that it puts the most painful areas at your fingertranseps, then performs the work on them; and hold the finger in doubled pincers, and lift it above; then take a needle, and insert one hair from a horse, mare, or ox, or strong thread into its tip slightly, and pierce all of it with the needle, and tie the finger to the upper part, and scrape along the side of the nail that leads to the prunyngle and silk down to the head; then take the remaining in the root area below the delicate sublimate and small forces, and let nature's joint heal without dislocation or tearing from incision, except when the finger is punctured alone with thread as we have described:
And keep the sublimate from touching the soft flesh and breaking it, and that the pruning not be seen; after the incision cut a little bit of thread into the oil, and make a necklace made of litharge, and let it stay until the other day; then cure it as much as necessary for healing.
And if the finger is not nervous and you cannot push the needle in, and the joints do not allow it, many times this type of finger deformation has been treated with medicine; as I have told you in its division, and if you see that there is a cover on it, then treat the finger badly by using oil according to this form:
And lift the finger gently above and if you see that it does not weaken much and its reason presses afterward, distill from your mouth into copper ring oil made of litharge and red copper rings and thread, let it stay until the other day; then resume the other treatment according to this method as long as it is completely healed.
But if nothing is contrary in the oil, and as long as it's healed, then treat the abscess so that it stays warm until it's completely healed; then resume the treatment as before as long as it's healed.
:meailles.
Of the glass wherein it nips under the pupil
There are some people who have never experienced red cautery and then covered the pupil with paper and tightened it firmly until it resembles a bull’s-eye; and in this procedure the patient places his head upright, does the eyes, and supports them well during the work, so that the charcoal remains as small and inconspicuous as possible for such purposes, and then removes the first one carefully, continuing to scrape until reaching the edge of the operation without causing bleeding; and it is also important that there are incisions in the hollow spots we have mentioned in the incision on the nail and small forces used when pushing them so they become firm after this chapter's demonstration.
And when the incision is complete and all the charcoal is removed, apply oil of honey or distilled red wine with seemingly corrosive medicines, and put cotton on it soaked in wax to ensure no leakage from the opening; if there is nothing delaying, and blood seeps through the seam, then doubt an internal seepage occurs, let the oil remain and cure the inner seepage with calming remedies for inner bleeding; then return to your work until healed, and thus formate charcs are added in the oil using this appearance.
However, it is essential that you treat every oil flawlessly along the natural way; and in cases of accidental treatment, in iron workings; and do not thrust your hand into any of these procedures until you see that those members are suffering from this intervention.
Butter, ande et leu, siens de l'ovre: "Cauterizer ofs char dite sachaigne deus aigres que veue. Ceutures ce qu’il yves defface en laiandre cestant lespaurs. ievalle voies in theesme: "A:me espresignure, leveulloi :es: "neces. Thebes.
lumeuriveuereffectrecceles in ferrantouriscianis thisifelocite gentuel
And let there be two young ones by degrees, in one corner according to this shape:
Then let the forces penetrate those veins subtly, and take out the blood an hour after another, until you see remove those venomous poisons from the oils; and ensure that you do not bruise the oil at the points of the spatulae, and perform this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very diligent so that nothing is left but those veins; and when you have done this, distill in the oil a green and red solution to corrupt what remains delayed.
And if you cannot gather all of it in that hour, then coat the oil with soothing substances for the pain of those parts, and leave them a few days until the pain is relieved and secured by appointment, then resume according to this manner before it becomes well; and this is the form of the forces:
from the oil's fistula (a small hole or opening)
The more they are called "arisati" fistulas: when you cure it with cautery and hot medicines as I have previously mentioned, if it is not yet healed, then the evil that has entered into it causes him to break open near the appointment; and take out all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see corruption and blackness, if the raindrop has all the instrument mentioned herein [as it has] the form; let us call it "harsh head," and be made of iron at a sharp point, and have been pointed as it does in the current form:
And place it on the raindrop's base, then turn it between your two hands and press a little so that you know the corrosion is removed; and do this no other time, then restore the raindrop's base with purgative medicines.
If the joints are joined together, and it does not move, and the bone of the shoulder is also joined, and remain for forty years, and it neither renews nor becomes loose again, and many illnesses do not arise from this; if that is not so, there is no other evil than to bring back the fistula to the abscess according to this form: and you discover the bone's second time with iron, and hot medicines, and when it is discovered, take a lancet as mentioned herein, and let the iron nail be at three angles, and make the wood thin so that you see as much here;
And then place it on the shoulder bone below the ridge, and move your hand away from the oil by a little bit, then turn all around to the nail so that you feel it pierce the bone and see if he holds his hand on his neck when it becomes hard; and restore its dry medicines as I have indicated, and when the joint moves and hardens, let the material go back into the abscess.
from this oil's discharge, se poincture en laisses si la chascunjour:
When the hair opens fully in all parts, and it does not disturb the veins or thinning, it must be laid on the patient; then a layer of honey and aloe and incense and rose quartz is applied to the oil, and the oil is strained over bandages and cloths; and the manner of the bandages so that you stiffen them enough, twofold each one, and place one upon another according to the quantity that the hair needs; then remove the straining device during day and night, and if the straining has loosened again, it must be removed more; then lift the layer after a day and a night, if the oil has repaited, that is good; otherwise, renew the placemat and bandages and the layer and the suction cups until they are healed.
This does not seem to be related to Old French or any text from a medieval medical treatise. It appears to be in modern English, describing a fabric tear. Therefore, no translation is required for this line.
When disruptions occur in the fabric, and it is torn like a grain of resins so that you can see it; then if you cover it with these operations as though you prick into the root of the affected part above the edge, and insert another needle or a double thread at the edge of the shoulder; and stretch it well, then pull out one needle according to its position, and tie the double thread around the hollow piece of cloth, and tighten it well, then set aside the woollen lining moistened with warm water, and leave it until the threads move together with the fabric, and care for the linen with comforting things while the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is restrained by a piece of cloth in several places around it, as long as it is healed.
And if the hairs are noticeably raised, perceive the subliminal spatula that vibrates with oil in the follicles and smoothens down the moisture of the hairs, and then enter them as soon as possible; then pull out until they are healed.
This line does not appear to be related to Old French or any medieval medical text either. It seems like a modern English phrase that might refer to the 'body of oil,' potentially indicating some form of physical therapy involving oils, but without further context it's impossible to provide an accurate translation from a historical perspective.
This disease that affects the "alcuni" (in modern English, it is not related to Old French or medieval medical texts; however, if it comes from a bruise gathered on a chairpiece and rightly arranged, then take the head of the patient and hold between your hands for .iiij parts, and let it come above theirs. Then bind up the bruisure, and seize l'encorne lou malaidie en cestere de li maundes (13th lainces in thisxentures of the choses entorse, or tuit d'lairentil veoir univerre:espreve entitish.
of oil
We have seen the signs of the fever in its division and it is required to ascertain; if done according to health. It is required that you place the patient between your crossed hands towards the light of the sun, let his body be warm and tightly pressed; then put the paper (in front) with his right side on the left hand, or with his left side on the right hand; then take in your right hand as if it were called "almagda," or with your left hand as if it were called "almagda"; then put the tip of the instrument close to the crown by drawing a line in that corner where the wax is, and push the "almagda" firmly until it pierces into the wax area, and feel that "almagda" moves when empty; and it is required that the measurement of the "almagda" be at the tip of the measure for the distance from the top to where the line ends. And this crown is the oil; if you see the bone in that paper by the brightness of the horned material, then put the instrument there or where the fever has begun, and squeeze out a path after another. Now when the wax is discharging, he sees his maladies before him and the instrument in his oil.
After a little rest and the fever rises again along another path with the instrument, and when it is filed in and does not rise, then swiftly extract "almagda" winding your hand around slightly; and put back into the fever a small piece of diamond-coated steel, and pour oil within. Then we place straw or flannel soaked in olive oil and abundance of linen, and bind with pure oil. And those who are from our time use fine brocade with an abundance of wool.
And if "almagda" cannot enter the oil due to its hardness, as there are some people who have very hard fingers, it is required that you temper the instrument called "alberit," for which this form exists:
And then pierce gently, and do not go too far into the body of the patient, but make it with some delicacy; push "almagda" in as we have said; and at the completion of this work put that worm in the darkened house where I am staying, and probe his sight, and then place him again seven years later, but he must rise swiftly.
When the incision near a swelling comes, you must dislocate the joint before the seventh day, and cut around that which is soaking in; and when it calms down, you move the joint and put it back on its place .i. at an angle to cover any lapse of time, and then settle in this dark house. And soon issue from the house little by little, and turn into his cases; and know that no one should interfere in this matter.
And one came to us from Yarracombe who told us that in peace they make an almagate perforation, because the water flows through it but I have never seen such a thing anywhere in our land, nor have I ever read about it in old books; and perhaps it is a new matter.
And this is how the forms of almagate look like because those who have not seen them see it as such; and they should be properly aligned:
And let them be aware of the subtlety of this method, and its origin in four degrees of angle:
from the skin over the nail:
There have never been cases where scorpions-like characters appear from the nail in various ways; and if there are such or it is colored with a wax color, or has bone-colored parts. In those cases where these colors exist without being colored, you must make the patient lie on his back against the sunlight; work on his nostrils; gently remove the discharge from those nails, and apply pressure to them; then hold a sharply pointed thin spatula under one part of it as much as you can confirm that the character is entirely ossified.
And if there remains anything uncoverable that it cannot be covered with either .i. very subtle movements, or cauterization done swiftly to prevent any further movement; and if the swelling does not subside or absorb, or if the abrasion heals as it should; but if those are malignant growths, you hasten and cauterize until they become unresponsive and entirely ossified, then remove all remaining tissue and fluid.
se tape. Andrelet.cellece.
And it can be made of silver or gold, like a lamp overturned, as in a jug, and also so; and if you see, then make a closed jug, and let the strainer plains to clear its head; and have one hand on its top while heating the oil or any liquid.
From the chair of stone
Often the disease reaches its head "like a tower", and grows large as long as it is seen; thus, one must first cover it at the beginning, and then bind to it with heat or fire medicine; if however you delay in covering it until it becomes large, take care if it is hard, of flaky color, poor feeling: for touching iron hardly ever happens because this is a contagious impurity that comes about whenever one covers it, but when the abscess has touched something hot, we can cover and cure the patient completely, as long as he does not have pain in his limb or feel restricted in movement.
When the head is covered and swollen
Sealed where a continuation of the treatment comes in one of these treatise chapters, and it proves to be useful because not everyone benefits; thus, you must ensure that when the wound is fresh on all its flesh; and therefore bandage both cheeks with a cloth, then heal them as long as they are healthy. And if the cheeks are sore in one part or another, you must scrape all those parts until they heal, then bind the two cheeks together with a strong twine and dust of dragon's blood over it, and incense on top; and put some hot coal underneath the powders, let it burn for as long as it continues to drip, and cure it until it is healthy.
The manner of the bandage is that you assemble it using either needles or thread, as we have mentioned in the bandaging around the belly; or by using a string, as I have told you before.
Abscesses in the cheeks
A mains homes that abscesses in the cheeks are found hard and grainy, becoming lesser and larger; therefore it is required to turn the cheeks, and divide them into sections on each side, and take them with pinchers, and cauterize a part of it; then apply leather after vitriol pouint; and treat the wound from drying time until they are healed.
:frise:escalier in french-2 :meanture: espose
Many times it bleeds on the gums where the old term "albulus" was used; it requires that you hold it with pincers and at its root, let the hair grow long or flesh around it; then apply vitriol to the wound or other restrictive and drying powders; and if this piece returns after the incision, many times occurring, redo it: if it does not return afterwards from cauterization, these are methods of bandaging to cover.
Sounds (noise disorders)
Sometimes they are assembled at the root of the teeth between the gums, ugly and hard scabs; and never black or yellow teeth with holes in them, until the corruption reaches the gum; it requires that you sit the patient on your lap, and handle their cheeks gently so they don't resist; and remove the scales or scabs as long as nothing has been done; and make of blackness and greenery, and yellowish tints, and other discolorations, until they are gone; and if it is first reasoned that it is good, then continue for another two days and three, so you have checked everything; and know that teeth require various types of dressings to be removed, according to what the work shows, because the scaler used by those who remove scales from between the gums has other forms than those used by those who remove them in front of the teeth. And these forms and others should be prepared with you.
It requires that you delay the treatment of the tooth's pain as much as possible while doing it, because this does not have to be done at all; because it is a very high substance and therefore there should be no reason for scaling. When the malady is constrained to treat it, you must be certain that there's a sick tooth; many times, this pain recurs with the ill tooth and take care that it remains healthy; and proceed to scrape the good tooth accordingly; and all of these actions do not cause any further pain as long as the disease persists, because we have always done so for our saints; and if you are certain there is a sick tooth, then scraping must be done thoroughly throughout the entire area to protect the gum from all parts by using sharp pincers at first touches and touches, until they are well scraped off, and firmly hold the ill tooth in your hand, so it does not move.
After scraping the tooth thoroughly and if it does not break, then take no of these dressings and place them on each side lightly, and loosely cover the cavities; and if you use fine pincers, that it does not fracture when pressing upon the gum. And it must be dressed underneath the tooth.
And tell you well to avoid breaking it, and leave a part in place, and return the pain to the patient through the malice of the root causing greater pains than the first one. And warn you not to do so as ignorant barbers who by their haste and boldness never break a shoe once, but rather provide nothing that we have heard about; but bring in many times due to this great disease affecting the roots where they remain or for the shoe they break, as often we have seen; and when the head is removed, wash it with wine or silk and brush; and if blood comes out, frequently use vinegar on its place; and if it does not value, cauterize.
The shapes of the teeth, with the first one being silent and not doubled when you pull out the tooth, should be pointed at their tips and have large cheeks. These are the forms:
And they should be strong members not to bend while pulling out, and their ironwork well made, and teeth that can hold the bit.
from the roots of the teeth When the root remains after pulling out, it implies that you put cotton moistened in beeswax on its place. One or two years until the tooth loosens, then you use tongs called "algefri", which makes the teeth seem like a patient'ayer; and they should also be made as smoothly as a lime, and this is their form:
And if the roots do not emerge from these tongs, it implies that you must excavate the entire root through the root, and use an instrument called "althali", which is known as a spade. This is their form:
And they should be forged and large so that they do not break, and if the root springs out from there, it's good; but if not, you can use all dental instruments to create their forms hereafter:
And if you use this instrument that has two rings, its form is as follows:
and other instruments for the teeth which are in front of them, and this instrument that looks like large tongs, whose form is as follows:
And these teeth should not be able to break, and you know that many teeth of the molars are; and other instruments that are not categorized by them; and skilled masters secretly use their own instrument according to what their works show, because they have various diseases or ancient ones did not teach an instrument for diversity in dental work; if it breaks a shoe or other bone, or causes injury, you seek the teeth that must be taken care of as I told you, and help with movements, whose form is as follows: And they should be large and strong enough to hold the bone without breaking it, but capable of holding and cleaning; and then restore the surface with suitable medicines for this condition in the bone if there is small porition, then use all these instruments:
quant cei laissez :lieffer apres, quant leu laisser in theespears de cest-courts :er lesche iten laisser esleuf. If.a : Thevesin : Theobsecreates ofafacour :get:ne :to beware : A15crompreis. What ail :ceux. Ala.meantre,saint French. Iesure dexicar'stars. Itin. Forthropur
And the small knife and a little pressure on the teeth for their hardness, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that he can grind them, then the grinder's shape is as follows:
And it is also as the grinder for tooth enamel; and when they make the needles little by little on the teeth, so that it does not move while chewing, then in the end there is no razor left at all, and if the blade is too deep and cuts the tongue, then you must file the roughness until it becomes even, so that it doesn't cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
When the tooth loosens
When the tooth loosens before it does so due to percussion or fracture, and the pain cannot be pressed upon it in a way that it doesn't bleed, then you treat them with restraining medicines; however, silver wire becomes greenish-brown if overused, whereas gold wire never changes. The size of the wire should vary according to the space between the teeth; and when you decide to file down the teeth, take a double thread twisted rope between each pair of healthy teeth, then insert the loose teeth in between those spaces, whether there is one or more; continue until you can make contact with the sound tooth on the opposite side. Then resume the covering procedure at that point and manipulate your hand subtly and carefully so it doesn't move; and if the thread gets stuck at the root of the tooth, tie the teeth together using some pliers, place them between the healthy tooth, and let it fit there as tightly as possible without causing bleeding or movement. Then leave it in that position until it stops moving, whether natural movement occurs or not; this is its form and appearance for both the sound pairs of teeth and those that were treated:
And when the tooth hurts, if he puts it back in its place repeatedly as we have said; and does not intervene with anything that is unnecessary or painful, and never makes a bone-like form of a tooth from another mouth part, but places it on where there is an absence, and strains it like we've described before, and remains in position for the whole duration.
To cover the tongue with silk cloth
ses. Apeut ilce parole cest cire. Etichore of the: Then'sicurementre andrompremere deure descalle laine. Iaccomplairecte ceintures.
And if you see it is colored with fire or black or hard, so that the maladies do not hurt, and they touch nothing, for it is a sore; and if it declines to blisters, and there is moisture in it, then let the small incision grow, and remove the fragment from one side and another; and when it does not improve with your work, place it under vitriol boiling so that it becomes annealed, then raise its head again until you treat everything thoroughly; then lift the hairs on both sides and cure them with other curing procedures until they are healed.
Stitches in the throat
Never from the throat comes blood called "goth," and they directly suture their .ij. folds, and when you cure them, as we have said in the division, if it is not healed; be careful if it is small-sized and colored with fire, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and its root is large, also don't touch it with iron, but leave it until it dies, then you will have to part it, or it would break itself; and if it is of white color, and the root is subtle, prepare an instrument for covering it, but first look at whether the stitches are resting and soothing. Then let the patient sit in front of the sun, and its teeth be healthy, and with their hand hold the shield between them, press the tongue against all parts of the instrument, and make it shaped like silver or soft as some knives:
You press the tongue against all parts of this instrument, and you see the stitching, if you take the nodule and pierce it in the fold, and pull it above more than you can; then draw no part with, then cover it on the instrument, for that is its form, which seems like some forces; and everything lies bent over, one against another, very sharp, and made of iron or lead:
And if you don't have this instrument, if the clamp has that form:
iadresse in thees:age asaites :es::sacre desires. Injac.comme ilkne (itier.aii:these. Andaluiter :gust, lecorne pasioxentures.
And I treated a woman with an abscess deep in her throat, which is to say - i. a small abscess; and she had her throat well-narrowed throughout, that she could not expel air through the blocked passageway, nor eat or drink, and died if she stayed in this condition for either one year or two (iij.) And the abscess was so deep that it pierced through twelve channels. I began immediately, and took an incision on the first swelling, then injected hot medicines; afterward, I inserted another needle into the other channel of the blocked passageway, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards, I made incisions in those abscesses, and extracted a portion, and there were only small amounts of blood; and thus cleared out the passageway from her throat, and she began to drink water and then wine again, continuing for many months to treat that abscess; but it reappeared again, and filled up all the space I had previously treated, so that I reinjected cautery into her throat: thus there was no significant increase in pain afterward; and I left those areas, and only God knew what would happen next.
From the eye
When the vein is disrupted from the eye, it becomes inflamed and swollen, resembling a perpendicular position; and if it is large and rounded, then it resembles an eye. If it is treated according to what we have discussed in its division, and no improvement occurs, you will see that the abscesses are calming down, and it is subtle, meaning you must carefully remove it; and when it is roundish and not long, it has blood or black coloration, indicating you should cauterize the incision of the vein. For there is great danger for the patient with this condition. Therefore, whenever you see it, according to how I have said, make it lie before the sun, press its tongue on the instrument we mentioned earlier; then pierce an abscess in the eye, and remove it from there, and cope with .ij. lymph nodes that I mentioned regarding the incision of the .ij. lymph nodes. And you must not cauterize more than necessary beyond its natural limit; for if you do, it will cause harm to their voice and speech; after the incision, use what we have said about treating the .ij. lymph nodes during the incision of those .ij. lymph nodes, and apply hot water with caustic solution, making sure that it is not too thick or too clear; and insert this instrument in its shape:
sus: that itin.
This treatment is more suited to incision than cautery; if it is performed according to this method of fumigation, take camphor and oregano and rue and chamomile and avens and similar herbs, and gather them all together in one pot, or some of them; and I pour into a vessel that has an iron cover, and the pot should be well glued with strong earth, and within the pot there must be a tool made like this: And it can be of silver or copper, and one of the shoulders must be placed in the patient' mantle so that the vapors rise to the uvula through the throat until the uvula is parched; after this often repeating, as long as the uvula dries out, and make sure not to do it at the beginning of the healing process of an abscess rupture, because many things happen; and don't use this instrument if it's not present, then take a linen tube and insert into its tip a wooden plug, so that the patient's uvula does not have too much heat, for the wooden plug doesn't let the vapors burn the mouth, and together they make good healing.
Many times to the throat or spine of a fish, or nothing at all; therefore you must do what you see fit, and press the tongue against the sun within the entire instrument so that you can observe it melting; and if it does not open up anymore and is put back in the throat, then you must make the patient vomit until their meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps that's how some of them expel what they swallow through vomiting; or the sick person ingests a piece of sponge, or a navel, or lettuce root, or .i. fragment of dry bread; and to the sponge I attach .i. thread, and then transfer it; and when it comes out on its own, it will swell up again, and you must do that; and if it does not come from what we have said before, take an instrument of thickness according to this form:
And make the sponge heads light at their tip so they can more easily enter into the throat, and lift it high in the top part; and warn you not to touch the epiglote, as it will tighten up or push down on the bone inside; move so that the sick person pushes the instrument with force, because if it pushes out something, then pull it out of the entire instrument equally at all points until it is completely pushed out.
Of the moisture of the throat
Never is moisture in the throat treated if it does not respond to medicinal care as mentioned earlier; and when you see moisture, press the tongue with the instrument I have told you about. If the moisture forms a small round spot or if you have very delicate tweezers that are worth such action, then if it's of no value... (translation continues)
If it does not respond to our previous advice, smoke the throat with charcoal using the instrument I have described for nasal fumigation; do this many times, as she will try to target you. The way of fumigation consists of placing a pot or iron covered with linen in its center, and then inserting the instrument's teeth into that hole; then perform the smoking, and place the head of the catheter in her mouth, closing her mouth so that smoke does not escape, but moves towards the moisture; now the moisture will respond, and if it still doesn't cease, repeat the fumigation many times... (translation continues)
And the shape of the instrument used to treat the moisture is designed in such a way that when you see it, resembles bent pincers for moving into the throat. It also has the appearance and sharpness like the tip of scissors, and its surface is smoothed with lime so that whatever she takes cannot loosen; and here is the shape: (translation continues)
the treatments for abscesses
Some similarities to treatments for abscesses are mentioned in this passage following the ones discussed previously in the book; and they differ in perforation and size. The two methods consist of one being like me (the author) and holding moisture, while the other is applied through its teeth... (translation continues)
later, legeuccles aicenture. Theu.
And it is necessary that you know the depth of the incision according to its completion; and this is when the pain subsides, and the departure of fever, and alleviation of pain and swelling, and improvement in flexion and relief of the incision, and other signs; and it is necessary that you perform the incision depending on the extent of the incision, and where it has opened; and let the incision be deep at the long hairs, and if the incision is on hands or feet, joints, nerves, arteries, or any similar location where there is no flexion.
If the patient has swelling, according to that limb. And when the incision is in the flesh of the calf, if it opens wide enough so you can observe digested blood flowing from it, as we have said before; for if one pierces too deep into the vein, they will find thickened blood and a lot of waste; and perhaps harden the palate and stiffen the mucus membrane. And if there are no large incisions that are made according to the size of the incision, as necessary for the limb; it is necessary to make small incisions, small cuts; and in large ones, deep incisions, and many punctures according to the degree of hardness of the incision; and if one has such incisions or it is necessary to close them, and when they are healed as we do with blisters: and if there are those that are cut into three angles, and those whose closure resembles a candle flame, just like abscesses; and if there are those that receive a rounded incision, and other shapes of incisions and closures.
Those that have no chief, as shall be a superficial abscess incision, you must make shallow incisions; and when the abscess is large and has greatly swollen, you must not draw out all of the fluid at once, but rather draw out some part; then sew up the abscess again within the next day, and do no further work. Avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have made your incision, check whether the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is a plain incision, dress it with linen or fine cotton bandages. And if there are large incisions, and they have many punctures, you must make individual bandages so that each one overlaps the other; and if you have penetrated some flesh inside the abscess, and pulled out a piece of skin, you must fill it with plenty of cotton or rags made from linen, and bind it up for three days. Then let the physician and nurse treat as long as the wound is sane.
ses:nosexent. If: thele aiseur, in:ice. Thearre ja.
And this requires to know everywhere in the treatment of abscesses: therefore I told you how one should go before treatments for abscesses, and now the physician.
This appears to be a phrase written in Old French with no clear meaning or context provided. It may represent an error, abbreviation, or term that is not widely recognized. Without additional information, it cannot be accurately translated or explained.
When the chief comes with small abscesses, and they are treated as in tablets, just like the butcher dressing a pig, there is much that has moisture, also those which are hard and jagged on the cutting board; for if it contains moisture, then the treatment does so excessively long. And when the moisture is drained out of the cloth that holds it, nothing remains in that cloth to come back again until you let it go; then dip cotton wool into Egyptian oil if it's still wet, and otherwise use water and bandage, leaving it for another day while healing the wound. And those who delay will suffer such a loss of time. Then renew the cotton wool, doing so again in two days and three days as before; then treat the abscess with ointment to your liking until you know it is no longer growing nights. If the abscess has any thickening, then drain it according to this method, cutting away all pieces of skin, and apply every part of treatment on the bandage under which it lies; and if the artery does not behave as I told you afterward. Also treat an abscess that is jagged with a similar procedure as I described earlier.
And the treatment of a painful and moist abscess is lighter because it has less blood. If there are no such abscesses or chiefs with swelling, then these were also abscesses that I mentioned previously from an old woman's wound; and I found this abscess to be as hard, rough, and blunt as a nail, and you couldn't break it; and if there was none, they were done just like the wounds of a nail. In other cases where these abscesses come from chiefs or in children's heads (from ears), the treatment is entirely dependent on them for at least all days until hair grows out to draw blood; and you treat as it needs to be.
This phrase could refer to "scrophula," which is an archaic term for what we now commonly call 'scrofula'— a chronic cutaneous form of tuberculosis affecting the lymph nodes in the neck and other parts of the body. In historical medical contexts, it was often treated with prayers or "miracles" by royalty under the belief that kings had healing powers over such conditions due to a divine right (the so-called 'Royal Touch'). However, without further clarification on this text's origin and purpose, providing an accurate translation or interpretation specific to your given Old French context is not feasible.
:esme dexcepure.
0ersembel
And if you treat the entire scrophula (a skin condition), it is necessary that you join together the two sides of the ulcer and bind them tightly; for there will be no delay in treating its great size. It is necessary that you understand how to cover the root of it, and drain fluids from it, and do so as we have said. Those scrophulas with superfluous fluid, they quickly open wide; and the opening done thus depends on the previous one mentioned, then dress them gently with oil and similar things, in order that what is delayed by decay does not corrupt; and when the wound is well healed, treat it with oiling until it becomes healthy.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
The old ones spoke and wrote about throat-dressing; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is the writing of their words.
For those who have dislocation, it is necessary that the flap of the throat called "epiglottis" be removed; and this does not help because all these veins and blood vessels are close to those with abscesses in their mouths, or in their throats, or in .ij. tonsils (tonsillar areas). When the disease is in the channel of these veins, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the impending death that comes from strangulation (the restriction or constriction of blood flow).
And so it is necessary that we cut the epiglottis, cutting out of .ij. circles or three small holes through, between these circles or by the quantity of the fissure.
And there he has become caught at the section of the epiglottis, which does not have any cartilage, and his vocal cords are long without ends.
And if the master is afraid, it must extend the throat cartilage to the entire circumference, then cut the vein until it turns into a bleeding channel; and remove the blood clots, if there are no signs of anything, and then apply the poultice as we have said.
And it is demonstrated by the bleeding of the throat where blood jumps through the broken lead that is there, and by the defect in voice.
And let the wound heal a bit.
And when the time for touching passes and there is doubt about strangulation, gather the two sides of the vein wound, and apply pressure to move the cartilage gently; then administer medicines that cause swelling until he recovers health.
Almost as they say that it is not done until the throat is completely burnt out and the patient's voice becomes deathly weak and lifeless. Then cover the epiglottis because the patient cannot breatran at all and breathes through the wound, which keeps them from dying.
And for this reason command the healer to let the wound heal for as long as the sickness of the disease has passed, and it is done in two or three years. And they command to close the wound and heal it until it was fully recovered.
And I will tell you what I have seen. I saw a young woman hold a knife in her throat and tear apart the veins on her neck.
And I called for him to heal, but found him already dead.
I discovered the wound, and found that blood had been drawn from it, but there was no vein to have carried it out of the throat, and thus the blood came out through the wound itself.
I hurriedly went in to treat the wound until it was healed.
And there was no change in the young woman's voice, and she returned to her normal state afterwards.
For this reason I say that there is no fear with the crafting of the epiglottis.
from a large throat.
These cases are called "throat hernia," and they are quite significant in women with a grayish color.
Cette phrase en français semble tirée d'une discussion sur la philosophie ou la logique. Elle pourrait être interprétée comme suit : "En effet, cela signifie que les choses doivent être gérées dans le sens des faits naturels, avec des accidents; ou bien, simplement parce qu'elles sont naturelles, il n'y a pas d'enginement implicite."
Cette instruction complexe phrase en français signifie dans un contexte pourrait être interprétation: Il meurt-il faut de cestre une façon la naturellement, mais l'interpreter sceur il y ait le butte. Pourfaire maniere lesme, et parler : "Theory offerreser coursive apeo. Interpretations, theoricule interpré, ici: Les. Iferre demeure. And it has fear, and does not intend to treat small wounds except in that which is inside the intermuscular space; and he tests and searches everywhere in the surrounding area. and if you also tighten it like this one, without any vein being blocked, if you pull it, as we pull ourselves, and treat all its parts, where there is any sign. and carefully examine everything, and treat it as it should be done, until he is perfectly healthy again.
as ourselves
Many methods we have, which I will describe all in detail;
and it is necessary for me to explain every difference between ourselves (us) and dislocation (issue).
I say that dislocation is characterized by heat and fever, as long as the inflammation does not subside, and it completes the felling; however, once the fever and heat are alleviated, dislocation begins to stabilize.
With the joint without heat or fever or pain, and contains one of its own sacs, which is colored like a cord, and begins to resemble a swelling, and becomes as large as a sack.
and are according to similar signs, or wetness, or of such colors as I have mentioned in the dislocation;
It is necessary when you come to the treatment of the joint (nout), that you examine and search first in all instruments called "intermuscular" space, according to what form they take or whether it is after an incision made by the surgeon.
And the manner of inspecting the abscess (apostemes des nouz) is that you should moisten it slightly and then tighten it up little by little so long as you know it has been penetrated, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then extract the splinter, and take care that it sticks.
If moisture runs out quickly, let the color have such as I have said about other abscesses;
And after the splinter comes moisture, you know it is fatty, then crosswise take it with tweezers and scrape lightly from each section and wear the coat wherein you will dress it clean.
And if you cannot dress it cleanly, then take it by pieces so that nothing remains undressed.
For if there is anything left over, it will return to us many times.
And if it remains for a little while and doesn't trouble you, then fill the wound with some corrosive potions or agues, bind the wound tightly, put on soothing remedies at the incision point, and cure it with other treatments until it is healed.
And if the wound causes great pain to us, then count the number of times we touch the wound, and treat it with whatever soothes the aching therein.
And if the wound bleeds and it is contrary to your will or you hasten and employ the broth of vitriol, leave it for three days or three months as long as the wound continues to bleed, then restrain the ebbing blood flow from the sore. Then return to covering that which remains undressed.
Seigneur li mals.
and are also like the needles used to extract witches' souls, and are made of copper, or iron, or silver, and they move like those which are yellow in color, and are better suited for searching out the boils of festering sores.
and have three kinds: large, small, and tiny, depending on the size of the abscesses.
The shapes of the abscesses are very diverse, just like you see here: large, medium-sized, and tiny; and if an abscess has two or three cavities in each of these three kinds.
and if abscesses have three cavities, and are also of these three kinds; and if abscesses have three cavities, or single cavities, and they are all necessary for their treatment.
The main treatment for these involves deep cutting, and such that in some cases they only cut one side, from which they scrape us away because they cannot reach the vein or nerve.
And these interdental instruments are made of metal and inserted into the mouth, so that the malady does not become apparent at the beginning of an incision.
and they have three sizes: large, small, and medium, just like you see.
and they are not used for any other purpose than the skin, just like legs, arms, breasts, and bellies, and similar things.
and there is no other instrument of this size, looking like the scrapers used for abscesses, in order to scrape off the sanguineous fluid.
and it has never been placed on healthy veins for blood flow, or arteries, in accordance with this great shape.
There have been cases where people's breasts swell up when they begin to become permeable, so that they seem like women's breasts.
and remain swollen and misshapen, and which can be cured according to this shape along line B until point G: then scrapes off the fat, and fills the wound with healing oil, then joins together the two sides of the wound by sewing it, and treats it until it is healthy.
and when the malady spreads downward, it is softened due to its size just like women do, making two or three small slits above it. from which one holds the other at the end of each and both together so that the longer line contains the shorter according to this shape starting from line B until point G: then scrapes off the skin between the two sides of the wound and removes the fat, and I accommodate what we have said about sewing and powders, and all that is necessary for treatment until it is healthy.
and if it is not healed or the incision is not complete because of the malady, so you must fill the wound with a moistened linen impregnated with caustic vinegar. and let it move its fat so long as it is healthy.
of abscesses
These abscess cuts that come above the shoulders are hardened lumps or have ulcers, and they contain moisture within them.
Those which contain moisture must be cut according to this form: from line B up to line G. (Here, it's assumed that the original text refers to specific instructions on how abscesses containing moisture should be treated or incised.) And as for all the fluid that is in the abscess cavity, if it is drained from the wound, let it be left until the next day; and then remove all the cotton, and cauterize accordingly so long as it remains clean. (This instruction implies a step-by-step medical procedure for treating an abscess with fluid that has been previously drained, involving time management of leaving the wound open to air, removal of dressing materials such as cotton, and subsequent treatment.)
And if the abscesses are similar to lumps of scrofula, treat them as we have said in cutting into lumps of tubercles; and when the wound is healed, apply cautery accordingly as we have previously instructed. (This part suggests a parallel approach for treating abscesses that resemble lumps or tumors associated with scrofula by using similar methods to those used in traditional treatments, followed by appropriate post-healing interventions.)
of the arterial route
When the arteries are involved and their protective sheath is attached to them as well, many times this leads to abscesses occurreaning along both its course and at its junctions; (This line describes a scenario where damage or intervention involving arterial structures might lead to complications such as the formation of abscesses due to bleeding or inflammation at critical points where the artery meets with other anatomical structures.)
and if it is there for a while concerning the arterial path, then these abscesses are formed along its length. (This statement links the presence of an issue or procedure related to the arteries with the formation of abscesses that develop longitudinally within them.) and when you feel it is necessary, if you sense the first removal; and when it's related to veins, then return for further assessment. (This final statement suggests a general guideline for medical decision-making based on symptoms or clinical findings, advocating for initial intervention followed by subsequent evaluations especially in relation to vascular issues.)
And it is foolish to treat this abscess, and immediately when it's above the shoulders and in the arms and neck and elsewhere, and it is very large. (This concluding remark seems to advise against a certain approach or intervention for an extensive abscess located in strategic body areas such as over the shoulder joints.) Therefore the treatment with fire must be avoided, and those who are at the head of the abscess must also avoid it, and in the one that is swollen from an artery, cut long enough to reach the underlying cartilage. (This advice appears to offer a cautious approach to treating large or potentially dangerous abscesses related to vascular inflammation, advising against using heat-based treatments such as cautery and recommending careful dissection to avoid further complications.)
Therefore the treatment with fire must be avoided, and those who are at the head of the abscess must also avoid it, and in the one that is swollen from an artery, cut long enough to reach the underlying cartilage. (This advice appears to offer a cautious approach to treating large or potentially dangerous abscesses related to vascular inflammation, advising against using heat-based treatments such as cautery and recommending careful dissection to avoid further complications.) then work the edges as needed, and gradually remove the arterial sheath so long as it is exposed. (This instruction seems to suggest a step in managing an abscess where careful attention must be given while working around the vascular structures, ensuring that the blood vessel's protective covering is removed progressively and cautiously.)
then place a needle there, and draw it across the other side, and stretch the artery with two strands of linen according to what I have instructed in the extraction of those arteries which are within the temple. (Here, the text appears to be detailing a technique for using a suture following an abscess procedure wherein a thin needle is inserted on one side of the abscess and two strands of linen fabricate:
:esme deu li, in the French medieval :ist iten tounsesme:eveside of ailé leu esleu :esode.
Then instruct the treatment that causes bowing, until his ligaments ache. Then treat this aversion accompanying it, as long as he is healthy.
And if the incision at the vein's size occurs, it requires that you clean with your hand whatever of the incision penetrates through the skin. Then throw the arrow on the point that you hold in your hand, and let it pierce, with an intertwined thread so that you can draw it from the other side. Then bind the incision, as I have told you, or the ligaments of one part with two threads;
And if you doubt that the thread is not enough, then replace another arrow at every one of these threads in the incision made by the first arrow, and hold the threads together with four fingers.
Then repair the incision until there are no excess materials left, then mend the excess and leave what has been bound.
Then cover it with a linen cloth and oil, then instruct the treatments of bandages and ointments as long as he is healthy.
From arteries' incision
Also when arteries' and veins' incision occur, so do incidents in the nerves when they are formed or due to too much labor, and similar things happen.
And such things often occur with auxiliaries and drugs in all their connections, and it is one of these painful incision sites where the nerve's color resembles that of a bruise, and they are subject to various conditions causing pain.
And when they are stretched out, if he feels the severe pain, and it is not due to a bruise but rather in its course;
and let all parts remain still, and not move forward or backward, nor above or below the connections, and those in connection do not need to be covered with iron: sometimes there may occur a contraction.
and those who are at the top or on the forehead make a slit with an incision. If the incision is small and you have some pincers, then use them on his root.
"a laissainsiemale.  ions ence il devisinage desmoi thean:revelat :  it'sellas-"
deuelt point.nkallewarkles.nguilxin Never happens in the belly and nowhere else the like, and it is a disease called "fungus" by its appearance, and its root is subtle, and its joints are large; and there are some small and many great ones.
And I see. i.e., there is a man who had .ij. bellies that were more like fungus than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had delicate roots, and were split, and thus began the moisture.
I collected them and found in one .xviij. (16) ounces, and in the other .vj. (5), and the procedures for incision show that if you look at the patient's pains, they are moist, and the color of their articulation is pale and moist with a delicate root.
If the caustic penetrates deeply into the joint, and are present in your presence. Because at the surgery there come many times too large wounds of blood, and if it does not stop with you, then I hasten to bring you the cauterizing instrument.
And if you see the patient's pain and fear about the iron incision, then take a thick piece of linen, and wrap it around the joint as we have said, and let him rest for .ij. (20) days.
And then the restraint, and do not stop tightening the linen band around the joint until it touches the articulation, and he feels through his sensations; and if the roots are large, there is no need to fear piercing too much for the belly itself, but you can certainly puncture most of it.
Then cauterize so that it does not retract; then treat the wound, and ensure you do not puncture the belly which is of fox-colored skin, poor feeling, and thin and pale appearance.
For it is an infected abscess, and I will come back to the treatment of this ulcer afterward.
when the blood boils for it.
If the appearance of the boil comes from a puncture wound or a fissure in the intestine, and it is on the belly and also in other places where bruises or bleeding occur due to blood vessels being cut by these procedures, or bleeding from veins or arteries according to what is presented.
And if it is due to the perforation of the intestine and by the bleeding from the abscess, then its appearance is like that of the wound on the abdomen, and it is light in feeling, and comes through different issues. And if it is due to the intestinal issue, then it is more diverse, and when pressed on its sides it recoils, and returns again, and perhaps it becomes swollen at the entrance of the bath and requires a lot of work.
And if it is moisture, it's a light matter, and opens well when pressed with your hand, and does not constrain at all; and if it is blood, then the abscesses are large and hard, and they appear according to a certain quantity.
Lle neufsantil thelun : "Cette antique ions iure d'ainthans ince.comme a peuinsulte of:ngein :rime antire :itsecre from thees and : Iere :an, it: sangle leger: ceintiage :cramble;lume.<bransche,re.se peuceille, heurtifere, cuitheuse.<1esseurs angastrape demejorie cesuant seurange conionseutexime:gere ſe
And if his appearance is due to the intestines or his bowels, then it commands that you instruct the patient to bleach their belly, and stretch them out straight, then squeeze in all of his bowels. Then he commands you to lie down between your hands. Then go along the line that you have marked throughout the entire area. Then it is in the upper part above all other wounds.
Then work on the upper part extended along the bandage, and give your necessary indications, and address the intestines. If you tighten the bandage and it releases, then push the intestine back to the front of the abdomen.
And if you tighten the bowel, it takes on inflammation, and deal with excess fluid.
And if the artery is opposed to it or the vein, walk briskly around, then return to your work and take needles (and) threads, and push out those needles into that place where you have done piercing, thinking that this will repair.
Then draw the bandage around three fingers using needles, and if you see it moving, remove the needles, and let the place where they were inserted rest until it is possible to suture (stitch) it yourself. Or when it is subtle and perceivable, then you treat that which it requires, and if necessary, apply the bandage as we have described.
Or when it is subtle and perceivable, then you treat that which it requires, and if necessary, apply the bandage as we have described. And extract the blood or moisture that you tighten, then treat the wound according to what it requires, and sew up the wound.
And two ulcers
n:
And the operations, when it is in position or can be removed as we have said, is that you must never purging black sickness from its gall; then make it stronger if there is manifest fullness, and cleanse the sickness. B[e] heal your ulcer firstly by making a good [cut], and treat all one-time ulcers or sores, and remove the hair from all parts, and leave nothing to the bone of any part that feels anything; and let the blood flow completely, and press well with your hand or something else, and if it contracts due to blood drawing from an artery or vein, cauterize until the sickness is not present anymore; then treat other treatments until he is healthy.
It seems like you've provided a line in Old French that doesn't appear complete. The text "de ydropisie" does not form a coherent phrase or sentence and could be an error or fragment of the original text. Without additional context, it is challenging to provide a meaningful translation or interpretation. If there are more lines from the treatise you would like translated, please share them for further assistance. We have said in the division of hydrops, and how the water is made up in each case, and the signs of every such semblance, and the treatment by medicine, and that which heals with iron: it is only lightly; and one should not touch iron in these two cases: namely tympanites and iposarcha, for it is a deadly thing; therefore when you treat this semblance of hydrops marked "lightning" by medicines, and the cure does not benefit if the patient has weaknesses or other diseases besides hydrops, as in solutions of the stomach and similar signs: then one should not touch iron, for there is doubt; and when you see the patient with great strength, and no other disease but hydrops only, and he is not too languid nor overly tall, you must therefore do so: Treat the patient right under your hands, and let the minister press down on his abdomen at its lowest part, then take up the spatula in this manner: And be careful of two parts from point to end, so that nothing can penetrate into the intestine when he is pressed there.
Then look to see if the hydrops is towards the intestines: it must be that you pierce them from right underne mantle of the spit three fingers down, and if the hydrops is due to liver disease, then your piercing should be on the left side of the abdomen at this distance; and if it's for an ulcer, then make your piercing on the right side, and it must not happen that superfluous fluids flow through the hole into the weaker part.
il'saint leu theor seigneurs in ancient theorrection:esubstant.iij.i:interprepretation desper:entire.iall, andaurementrains deinexclusive ache int'sante.illeage. Thee tolwinter. Interpre (fromage.i: It:comme it isode:
To the head above it is the small joint, so that when the hand moves to cold, immediately rises with the instrument; remove then most of or third part, for if you remove more than necessary in this hour, perhaps he will die from the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he suffers pains in the palms, or approaches death.
But according to the quantity of its strength, and considering what the dispositions of the strength of the patient mean, and his teeth; then take up the instrument and hold the blood, for it is now held by the knight who pierces the hole above the suture that is on top of the seam, as I have said, that you pierce in this manner; then restart the instrument another day, if the patient suffers such pain, and remove a small amount of blood.
Do not do it for one year, and keep from folding as much blood until he stays still but a little bit of blood; if you doubt about the patient's condition, and you remove too much blood, then care for his burial or sand will burn, and through many sweats and bathing in sunlight, and by drinking water, and treating with dry medicines while he is healthy, and cauterizing the stomach, liver, and spleen after removing the blood.
The cauterization of the vein There has never been a child born without a vein in the arm, or whose vein is small, or not located at its base. If it must be pierced immediately to address all these matters: then place underneocloverly thin thread in such form: and bind the closed vein for three years or four years as long as he urinates; and when he feels like urinating again, cut open the vein, let him urinate, and then put it back. And perhaps there is no need to do so because the urine that comes out does not leave the vein closed. These cases involve small veins that are bound with thin thread or cloth, as previously discussed, and they will eventually grow larger. Those who do not have their vein located at the base of their arm cannot urinate properly before tying up their arm; therefore, it does not allow fluid to come out from the blood vessels there, which results in a painful condition called "bleeding" (bleciet) due to lack of proper blood circulation. Patients with this issue are said to suffer from an unpleasant and dangerous illness because they cannot drain fluids naturally through their veins located at the top of the arm.
: lexpresents ainsgustemaisse le malice: parleprebreve the preitrepresentations. Whatissance ofsaint theor, ilte. Amende. Issofrespectaement. Thises andire. Presenting offeral. Whatisoldumbrecture.
Of the pustules of the thorn Many times these thorns appear in the vein, and it looks like a wart; and there are both malignant and benign ones; it must be treated with an ointment of one part; then cover them with moistened cotton soaked in Egyptian oil, and cure the healing until they are well. And if the thorn is malignant, reddish and loose in color, it must be treated with a heated iron instrument; when you have coagulated it, and if the thorn lies within the vein, part of it inside the skin and part underneath, then remove the thorn that is beneath first; and when it has set, continue to cure it. For as one treats it all together, there is no assurance that the wart on the vein will not be noticed, nor become darkened and corrupted in its place; thus everything black and corrupted must be burned off, then apply an amulet made of honey and flour mixed with several times ground pomegranate bark, and cure it further until it is healed.
And if the discharge of blood comes, treat with the lunar cautery in this manner: The cauteries help by providing a combination of actions: during bleeding, and corruption; and when the thorn on the vein is decayed and retracting, it must be removed or drawn from the vein, pouring the patient's urine around the area where there are no circumcised men who have had an injury or abscess in that region. In such cases, you must scrape off with a scraping tool held by hand, until all connections of the wart on the vein are dislodged and liberated from every part.
And if it is something that requires designing in this case, you must scrape it with any smooth tool without touching the chief of the vein and part of the skin; then cleanly draw between these two points, and place a moistened linen cloth soaked in cold water on it, such that it does not stick back to the vein.
Of circumcision
Circumcision is not displeasing for continuation like other wounds; however, all the work we perform of our own volition, and particularly concerning children, it is the best deed done by us, and brings salvation most easily.
I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision of their children, for they do not practice it in their law, and we have nothing but what we have gained by experience.
For I wanted the greatest part of masters and saints who practiced circumcision in their time, and used force, and applied it everywhere; if they were careful about this issue because there are two sheets involved, and sometimes a third one is added above and prolonged.
Or recovers circumcision and it is twice as painful; the healing of this wound, which affects two points in its place, is not securely fixed for the pointed limb member; and the healing of a finger through such a process may break the nail, and damage work, and many times are born without the need for further circumcision.
Regarding the healing done by force along the entire length of the thread, I found the benefit in experimentation, as these techniques also cut well both above and below.
Because when you press your hand, if you cut it evenly in one-third of the length; but that the thread is properly inserted into the skin; and if the method is similar to the first work done, then it makes the child think whether you are merely tying the thread around the vein or forcing them to try every possible way. then you do it firmly in your hands and pull the forces between your hands or on your fingers that the child does not see them nor any animals; then place your hand on the vein and blow air, and move up to the point where the thread is inserted into the vein as much as necessary; then clean well of the dirt assembled there, tie one loop with a double string, and tie it in two places along .i. part .i. other tie; and you have .ij. does for the second tying at the bulb and the index finger, and place between the two ties, then lift the arrowhead quickly above hand and remove the head of the vein;
then you do it firmly in your hands and pull the forces between your hands or on your fingers that the child does not see them nor any animals; then place your hand on the vein and blow air, and move up to the point where the thread is inserted into the vein as much as necessary; then clean well of the dirt assembled there, tie one loop with a double string, and tie it in two places along .i. part .i. other tie; and you have .ij. does for the second tying at the bulb and the index finger, and place between the two ties, then lift the arrowhead quickly above hand and remove the head of the vein; then let the blood flow a little and a little, because it is necessary; and sprinkle on top of the powder about one hour of moist bread baked without water, glazed with roasted red honey mixed with olive oil and rose water, and leave it for another day, and cure him with other care until he is healthy.
The force applied in the circumcision process is such that both halves of the wound are held and stretched, and are as large as the child's finger.
the error of healing if it is in the incision area, therefore you must extend your single finger so that it makes an incision; and cut it evenly, and if you hold on to your hooks, and then pull.
aspiez.iij. A: " :mein, et :"sainct "e theu.jacres of "it.il.
Cure now the wound of recently occurred pains treated with powder, which we have said or dealt with powders, and if it is overdone, and it goes above, without causing harm; cure then as we have said, until he is sound.
Holding back urine
The holding back of urine is an operation involving a hole in the body, or frozen blood, or bowel obstruction, or similar things which we have mentioned in the section.
And if the urine is not discharged, and you see that the retention is due to an opening in the area of the bladder neck or urethral collar, then it must be crushed under his knees; place the foot on his back, extend his abdomen from above the lumbar region, restrain him so much as he can, and constrain the neck of the bladder to the opening of the hole upwards, for this way the urine is discharged.
And if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it is necessary to alleviate the extraction with all the instruments called "syringe," for thus is its form: let it be of thin silver lightly coated like a bird's quill, or made with a handle one and a half palms long, or subtle at the top.
And the way of urine discharge is that you take a double thread, tie it at the top with a little wool or cotton, and insert the end into the syringe; then remove any surplus wool and push down to the tip of the syringe, oil the syringe with olive oil or beeswax, and have the patient sit on a chair, raise the bladder and penis moist with water mixed with olive oil and honey.
Then insert the syringe into the penis as far as the root of the penis, then double it above towards the bulb; push the syringe downwards to the bladder before it, and let the patient feel the urine coming out of the empty thing right away, which is not done according to this order because when they insert it for it to go straight. Then remove a little bit of thread from the wool all around and around, and then the urine follows the wool, and draw the urine out, and correct the urine;
And repeat the use of the syringe until the bladder is empty, and hold down the patient's hands.
diseases of the bladder.
(old ince :rerect. I'sesance of theur sourne in English :meantainstircles de laissaint.dement,screw :lesemeanentures fromage ;faituregive:causele. In-victiener 138nose itentire. What'ce, lexpressive.
It is closed, and it has .ij. holes: .ij. on one side, and .i. on the other, as you can see; and the shoulder joints are cut so that they easily pierce through the vein without additional damage, provided that we can remove the moisture, and push out as much as necessary when it is appropriate.
And when you see the medicines moving in the bladder, put the catheter into the moisture, and insert it where it is necessary; if you remove the moisture by catheterizing, then firmly push back the tube, and if the moisture enters now, so that the patient feels relief from pain.
And this is the subtle form of catheterization used to irrigate the bladder: it looks like this:
And it is either silver or of gold, and the catheter has its tip above; and placed between one half-heart or along the line where you have seen irrigate the bladder with a sheep's bladder, then take a double thickness cotton wool, warm it on the fire, and insert .ij. parts of it into the catheter; then push the catheter into the penis, stretching your hand over the bladder until the patient feels that the moisture has arrived in the bladder.
And if you do not have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make .i. circles on it; pierce these circles roundly into the holes; then push firmly through those holes with a wire, assemble the circle as you would assemble a dial, and place within this assembly what you have seen for oil and moisture and water in the instrument; and do it so that if you have done with the bladder, press down on your hand to the point where the moisture begins to flow into the bladder.
of the stone
In the division of surgical methods, and the extraction of medicines in general; and I have said the difference between jointed stitches made with rains, and all signs, and about the size to work on the bladder, and the vein, which I will explain clearly.
I say that the wound in the bladder occurs frequently in children, and it resembles an acute pain of the bladder with its subtlety; and this is harshly felt on their legs, and very severe their abdominal pain, and they suffer many times, and then inflammation forms; and for these types of injuries, recovery can be swift, especially up to three years old. It is much more difficult in the elderly, and it's related to osteoporosis among those who are between bone weakness and old age; and cure is lighter for those with a larger wound compared to those with a smaller one.
And regarding the treatment, it is firstly recommended to clear up the malady with enemas, for administering all that remains in the intestines. For at times this blocks the wound.
Then take the patient by the legs, and lift them up and move to their sides, so that the wound descends below the opening of the bladder, and never let any part be lifted high; then make him sit between your hands, with his hands outside his thighs, so that the bladder is completely inclined downwards; then examine it and touch all parts.
If you feel the wound in the distance, then rush from your post near the wound. And if it does not tighten at all when touched with the instrument, give your left hand index finger as an indicator of how long the pain lasts, or if the pain subsides, or if the pain is still present; and let it be in its foundation, and see where you feel the wound on your fingers, and when you feel it at your post, press down to check whether the bladder has dropped.
And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend both hands above, and hold his right arm's skin over the knots in the upper part where he cuts; then release the bandage covering it, as this is its shape.
And make between what is between the knots and the foundation, not in the middle but on the left side of the nape; and position it over the wound, and your hand should either rest on the foundation or stay at the base, according to how wide the incision will be, avoiding making it too large.
Perhaps the pressure should be enough for you to feel work at the foundation or base, knowing whether it has edges and margins: if it is gripped tightly; and when there is part that is swollen, with a slant and roundness, whose opening is light, as described.
Since it has angles and margins, make the incision larger; if it does not yield, then you must use pliers that are as thin as a chisel at the head, to stretch the wound so that it doesn't recede; or you place underneath such a delicate instrument with a pointed end. And if you cannot reach in there, expand the puncture slightly, and since it is without cortex, then draw out the spinal cord; or extract it with vitriol.
. Comme sié enmettre lice aultes, et sié : ce quoi comest en mauvaise veystiés. Andresemende estiraitinens, ouest lai: Ieccles.
And when you have completed your work, if the wound receives incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and it is bound tightly, and placed under a strip moistened with oil and wine, or oil and rose water warm and cold to soothe the burn; then re-warm the patient on his neck, and do not loosen the bandage until tomorrow.
And when you loosen it, if the wound has healed well with oil and water, then treat it with daubing and rubbing (daubing) until it is healthy.
And if a burn appears in the wound and scorings occur, and clots of blood form in the bladder, and it is retained with urine, which resembles standing water somewhat mixed with urine: then apply your treatment to that spot within the wound, and remove that piece of blood clot, for if it remains, the bladder will be torn;
Then raise the wound with water and salt and bandages in all ways you know until it is healthy; and it must be ensured that all urinations you treat by binding the patient's legs together and assembling the medicines on his abdomen.
And if the wound is small and it comes from a vein, and you prick it with a pointy instrument, and it prevents urine from issuing; then treat this in such a way that I have shown you before, but since it involves many tissue cuts, excuse me for describing this procedure now. I have already experienced this.
Take of iron according to this form and make it at three angles pinned in one stick:
Then take a thread and tie it around the vein under the wound, so that it does not enter into the bladder; then insert the iron rod loosely along the vein until it reaches the wound; turn the iron rod in your hand within the wound repeatedly, enough to probe other parts of the wound; if at once there is urine, press against the part that remains in contact with the wound under the vein. If immediately broken and flies with urine, then protect the painful area.
:
of women's wounds
Often it happens that the womb is conceived in women, and if not at all, then it's considered a grave matter; and for this reason, there are three things to defend: one is that by chance the woman becomes a virgin; and the second is that no one can find a woman who knows how to cover her shame, especially when she is of high status.
And the third way is that by chance one cannot find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that a woman's womb differs from a man's because it requires deeper penetration, which causes great fear for her.
And if necessary, it is essential to have a woman well-versed in this matter and the vaginal entrance, and if you do not find such skill, there's no need for a subtle highborn maiden; and present a well-beformed lady with knowledge of women's lives, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you instructed in regard to examining the womb.
And watch carefully if the woman is virgin: however, it requires her to push down or foundations and inquire about the womb; and if she penetrates, she must constrain herself from doing so on her foundation, and recommend that she pushes down or with the malady, and seeks and pressures her left hand upon the formed bladder.
If she penetrates, it requires her to move the womb from great to great within the entrance of the bladder until reaching the root of the thigh; then push down on the womb's root in the thigh against the muscle where it lies, and feel the womb at that part; and do not move her womb above or below the entry or around it, but cut into it with a small blade for better examination.
Then push the womb into the cut, if you feel the womb there so that the puncture can be drawn out, and know many types of pins: this means small and large, sharp and soft, long and round, and which have rings. If you see their appearances to know the outcome.
And if the puncture does not heal on its own, put borax powder and cover it with your pin for an hour until the puncture is sealed. Then return to your work, so that the wound remains open and use the animals I mentioned earlier in order to assist you in this task performed by men at your service.
And if the puncture does not heal on its own and it's an artery that is cut, put powder under her wound and straps and bandages, do not try again; leave the wound open and perhaps the maladies may pass away from her; then tend to the injury.
And when the blood is calmed down, and let loose in it, so return to your work.
of hail, et desce elle n'au premier petit, siens de tout en chascun leu parlez; ceincomme por leu que les plait qu’il yi aulx coment d'abord ou.sesmesure seigneur l’ancorne ire quitter et siensesprey senglish.
iere:sseccresse
And the formation of this reed is weakness, which causes bleeding, and that material spreads.
And there is never if it comes from percussion on the blood vessels, and this moisture takes many colors: whether it turns to yellowish, or without redness, or black, or water white, and that happens more.
And these are signs of knowing this assembly, for if it is white and fluffy as we have said, then the abscesses open long like an oofie, and they do not open the blood vessels because it has full moisture inside.
And if there is moisture in the actual tissue, then the abscesses open with a part of the epidermis (uef), and therefore we think it's another type of swelling.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the blood vessels and the fluffy white, then it feels well; therefore, as you know the color of the moisture throughout the internal passageway, from there the formation appears here. Since that's after the internal passageway, judge what is therein.
Since that's after the internal passageway, judge what is therein. And when we treat it with iron, it must be determined that the maladies are restored as well as possible and the replenishment of its heart; then they place him on his back a little high, and put over him many pieces of cloth.
Then they place him on his left side, and command the minister to place him on the right hand, and extend the rod at one of the two corners where the blood vessels are located;
Then take the spatula and pierce the skin of the blood vessels long until it approaches the thigh, and make a straight incision in the vein's sheath as white as snow, and extract gently according to purpose.
Then pierce the surface of water in one large hole, and draw out all the water, and then insert the stakes, and let them rise in the water face; and do not touch the edge of the roots, but only pierce the root itself; scrape it gently along its side, so that if you don't do this carefully, the water will return to him.
And if the water sprouts from your work, you must reset it in its place after completing the water channeling; then join together the two stakes holding the roots at a joint, and treat it as for other wounds, until he is healed.
And if you correct the corrupted water due to another disease, it is required that you tie up the limbs hanging downward (suspensories), doubting whether there will be a flow of blood; then pierce the root throughout the suspensory, and draw out the water, and treat it as we have said.
And if the water is assembled into two parts joined together (ensambled), it appears to be twigs (rames); when you pierce the other part as you have done for the first one, then draw out the blood from that wound, and place linen soaked in rose oil on the wound.
And set another soaked linen on it in wine and oil, place the two stakes holding the roots underneath this linen, and cover everything with doubled cloths (drapelets), and bind them all together along this entire structure according to this form.
Then take the cloths (drapelets), and cut the linen scraps according to this form, and assemble them with cordage in a bundle at the back of breeches, so that one stake protrudes from the foundation up to the back, and the other extends down to the belly part; and take two chiefs under the roots (two more pieces), and bind all together tightly in the loop on the barrier.
And never is this rod of cautery made in the size of iron at once, and it is that you must make a subtle metal cautery (cauteret cultellaire), pierce the skin of the roots, and treat them as we have said before. So that when the white wound containing water is uncovered;
Andy salle (hors dous ceaiges duce desormainz envenables laisse li. Paste. Sgustres chastre deus entendit:enture, les paine epearme of thecaesure ainsalere.
And the wound in all ways that you can, so long as it remains open; and make sure fire does not touch the unhealed area; and know this work is safer; and keep from running of blood, and movements that result from cutting.
And if anything contradicts you, or incision or bleeding resulting from an operation, then treat what is contrary to it, according to what has been said before.
And if the great pain causes fear and it does not want to wait for this work due to its horror, prepare a puncture as I have told you, and when you are sure of the meanings we have mentioned that resetting is necessary there.
If it suits the patient to lie on a raised surface; then make the incision in the part above where there is space throughout the entire muscle area, and insert the puncture long and straight; and make wide holes so that all the blood flows.
Then put cotton on top of the wound, and cover it, and let the remaining blood flow through it, then treat until the wound is healed.
And if the blood does not come out of the wound'ran opening, it is necessary to insert a needle or the instrument with which we extract the blood from such injuries, as indicated here; and slightly expand the wound, and know that the blood will return, and after about two months or sooner, when it has assembled again in this way, then the painful joints will pass its days.
from the incision of arrows
Know that in this section of this procedure there are various fearful conditions, which makes it seem to me that leaving it as is is better.
And I will tell you the work and the appearances of the incision.
Nowadays, most incisions come from cuts or arrows; and this happens quite often.
It is known by excessive bitterness and swelling which spreads into the cuts or arrows; or from percussion.
And the color of the incision depends on the color of the arrow; and it does not cause pain, but rather a grievous incision.
And perhaps there are also painful and sharp incisions, and sometimes the color is of fat; but it rarely comes from our arteries or swelling of a vein.
When it is from our arteries, it curves according to the shape of the incision when you apply pressure. and does not require you to touch it.
This made of vein swelling is curved by its shape resembling the gentle touching of joints.
and can easily make a cut in this likeness, and on the others too. And it is that you grasp the tightness of the joints, then it lifts upwards, and spreads out with white flow, releasing the suspensory from all parts of the vein.
If the vein is already so entwined with these needs, then it requires you to cut the vein and grasp.
And if it is attached to the flow, or in these spaces among the vessels, then it requires that you release all of that tenacious hold and grasp it gently.
And if the origin of the joint is behind, then it requires you to grasp it completely and extract the vein, as we have said before.
And when your tasks are completed, cover the wound with dirty linen in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
of the joints' abscesses
This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping resembling one joint, with the softening of the joints. and if it cries out loud when it moves;
and the treatment of this disease is also very concerning as this one before it,
and therefore we will tell you the work of it, according to what they did.
It requires that you set the painful joint in an elevated position, then release the suspensory from its places among your joints. around all the vessels that are near the neck, and the masters of them, and extend into form;
then you cut through a thick vein at that point among the vessels, until they are exposed.
and then scrape at some parts as we have said in the removal of those arteries that are in temples;
:en français en france. En: the second :o tokës. Thisg andrèl'srepremantheir de laire ǒn. Whattic. Ientence of the samecate cestures, Then bind it firmly, according to its length, and remove the decayed humours.
then heal the wound as we do with others, so that no vein is squeezed by any of its neighbors.
for there is no harm from this, and if all the veins come together, it must be drained from each of them. so that it does not lose any suction due to the incisions of the veins, and they are dried up and cannot be aided.
from the course of its surgery The relief from this operation is by the cut that brings it forth or extends to the abdomen in the part of the angels, for so the intestines descend from that course to one of the veins.
And this operation is by the cut or its extension, and these .ij. (two) manners of much from various causes come: either by percussion, or jumping, or blowing, or lifting a burden, and in similar ways;
and the signs when it is of the cut's extension are that they occur rarely and slowly, over a long time, and do not come suddenly. and are the abscesses equal up to the opening of the wound, because the cut presses upon the intestines.
And the signs when it is of the cut's section are that they bring sudden commencement of pain, and various appearing abscesses therein near the skin, for by the exit of the intestines and the course away from the cut.
And never are the blood vessels conjoined with the intestines, and they are retained within, and it brings great suffering to the patient mainly when pressed.
And in these iron cures for pain, because it must be refrained from.
And the manner of this work is that you command your patient that he may withdraw his intestines from within the wound if it can be drawn. lifiecurexileux :1entailleuledecleurrevesche.ne:nicharcheungeurange theissose mes–aucellecius iflet outerrener �angantanimeigne :ures,uel vevelle ifsainnel colore to canglewaxanjure
then become the key above, and cover all of the skin around long nerves. Then place linen folds on the abdomen according to what you know how to do to open the wound, and such that they can allow it.
Then scrape off the scab from the skin around the nerves, so that the white scabs are completely removed.
Then put your indicator in such a way that teaches the nerve, which is between the white scabs on the abdomen skin and between the second scab.
And go behind the abdomen, and between the second scab; and move your right hand towards the nerves on the skin of the shoulder, and place the white scabs high in your left hand, and lift the abdomen towards all parts toward the waist. And command the minister to extend the abdomen upwards, and move what is behind the ligament.
And you must see if there is any intestine wrapped up or white scabs that are hardened, and if not, put it in the abdomen.
Then take an awl or a piece of thick thread made from x strands of y threads, and place it in the back part behind the scab that is after the skin around the nerves; below the waist, then cover the ends where the threads appear, as long as there are 3 strands. Then join them together in a way like a cross, and bind the scab that is around the nerves with a strong ligature of 2 parts. Then wrap the threads and tie them with 2 parts, so that no one can push their fingers into it, even when pressing hard. And place the ligature in line with one that is long by 2 parts of the previous one, and after these 2 part ligatures leave a scab that is around the shoulder's nerve wide.
And after all the rest of the movement that he used, cover in the part that is under the skin around the nerves as long and without correction or bowing, as we have said before.
Then make a clean lint of oil, and put it in the wounds, and treat with the ligature that we have said. And never cauterize the white scabs that we mentioned after the incision due to doubt or fear of bleeding.
Because this happens many times and leave the ligature as long as it hurts him; if it does not come out on its own, then heat up with warm water as we have said, until it comes.
Then cure the wound with other treatments, until it heals perfectly.
of carcinosis
In this section, I have never seen anyone attempt to perform the treatment with iron.
And the old one said it is made like this joint that is assembled with pieces in such a way that you tie the veins after cutting them lightly.
Then let me take part in it, and treat the abscess that performs, until the veins ache; and treat them as we have said, until they are healthy again.
There is no occasion for an operation on the arrows, as we have said, and open them; and if there are any entrails that have been cut, it's little, and return all times.
And in any case if he lingers too much on this point, whether it's a wound or syphilis, as long as the entrails continue to bleed.
And this happens by the extension of the sore that is in the entrails, as we have said, because it extends, then becomes soft and swollen, and opens up.
And it is treated by cauterization, as we have said before; and never has been cured by iron in this manner.
And that the great pain is sitting on his shoulders between your hands, then take out the piece of the enlarged abscess according to the size indicated by III spindles (an old measure).
And then extract the sore that is inside the skin where it's situated, then take up its rind and apply it to the apparent sore.
And press the piece into the belly of the patient where the larger abscess is located, then count the II pieces appearing on top of its rind, and apply both.
Then extract the rind of the sore and do not cover up the abscess nor extend its size or any other condition, as I have told you in the treatment of the intestinal dislocations.
Then treat the wounds. And if it heals by itself and treat the wound as long as it is healthy again.
The shoulder is bound, and has no outward appearance in the journey, and the fire cautery is burnt into this place, and soon after it leads to salvation.
The softening of the cartilage joints.
Many times the cartilage joints in some people are softened, because the shoes worn within them become mushy, and it is easy to see; and there is a method when you want to cure him, placing the patient on their back, and tearing the softened skin where it lies over the natural skin; then take two or three fingers under one cover and if you feel any superfluous softened skin in those covers or firmly attached, then separate them, and treat the wound as for other injuries, until he is cured, and bind his filament.
The muzzling.
It is forbidden to write about muzzling in our law, and for that reason I would prefer not to mention it here; yet there are two ways of muzzling: one by attraction, or the other by a cut. For the attraction method we let the beast sit in hot water until its cartilage joints become softened and remain so; then pull the ears with your hand until they return to normal feeling. In the trimming process, you must shave the beast's coat, press the softened skin on the neck with your left hand, tie up the suspension, and place a strap over each joint as you have shaved them; and this method of muzzling is more extensive than that by attraction because by attrition there may sometimes occur an accidental separation in the cartilage joints among the tendons. This way of trimming is much like the one by attraction, since due to attrition the beast desires excessive thirst; and this method of muzzling is more extensive than that done by attrition because the attrition may sometimes accidentally separate some cartilage joints among the tendons.
Hermaphroditic (hermaphrodite).
Hermaphroditic (hermaphrodite) is according to two ways: one where there are two cartilage joints as open and arranged like the figure of nature a woman has hair, or even urination; and the other way in women, with sticks placed on their penis just like a rod and two cartilage joints. And the treatment for the body and face is that you coat all these areas together, and treat them as for other wounds; in the second case, where there is no cure because the urine leaks through the cartilage joints of men.
Tenting (tenting).
Tenting is a modification of the natural part, which is too ugly to see; and some women also great as a finger, and the curer: It covient that tu teignees, and li superflore : les maundes laisse. 10sangledit leu n’sainte le cunj:mesure desir.
of erratic
Erratic dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, preventing it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing great pain and injury to the woman; whether this condition is due to natural reasons or accidental causes, such as slight tremors or delicate illnesses occurring within her body's cavities - whether internal or external; which affect conception, childbirth, and unexpected flower production. If these subtle tremors are apparent near birth, it becomes evident that intervention is necessary. Should the condition involve a congenital issue causing dislocation, then the woman should be supported by two hands on her back with legs spread out as much as possible until the soft dislocation subsides; afterwards, apply linen bandage soaked in oil and place it over the wound, ensuring she receives care at home every day to facilitate healing. If the dislocation is caused by a birth injury, first cover her wounds with a wide, large cloth that won't allow them to re-adhere; then treat her for an extended period of time and apply a linen tent as dry treatment while she recovers from other injuries. When such conditions arise in the marrow, it should be covered according to this manner unless there are enlarged sinuses present, because touching them during an abscess formation is not advisable. For when touched in the cavity, any inflammation must not be disturbed.
Hemorrhoids occur when swollen veins appear in the lower rectum and anus; they can cause discomfort, bleeding during bowel movements, and irritation of the skin surrounding them. Treatment often includes dietary changes, medications, or procedures to alleviate symptoms and reduce size.
Hemorrhoids are swollen veins in the lower rectum and anus that can cause pain, bleeding during bowel movements, and irritation of the surrounding skin; treatment may involve dietary changes, medications, or procedures to relieve symptoms and reduce size. Hemorrhoids become thicker over time if they are left untreated; we have said in previous sections about their signs and symptoms, and now I'll mention those that can be cured. Those found on the surface of the marrow can be felt and therefore treated by iron. It is necessary to place the woman in a cold room then apply hemorrhoids as pincers; and pour medicines restricting sanguineous blood, si comacavele de lacte. Then warm water; and it becomes leu, et il estant les emoryes:et enceinte l’enfants de ceste maladies, et secoire de la maris. Etre chastel :etemple de la femme infection. Si li vein. Severe theil juge :e du leu ci au fer, et les parties of themaintenant dele sachaile lou aoutrovenement caustice itinon meveint heure :redeletic :eru out :en: "dise :all. Here's : The :ce and :meetil (https, ce,cause : In it :itgive alesume; Iberes.
Of fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Many methods of treating abscesses come in dealing with the cavity; and when it comes to boils, herpes, furuncles, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and burns, as well as forcible cauterization, which is not limited to cutting with a hot iron. Nevertheless, do not rush to determine it, but let the patient endure until his pain subsides; then have him sit on an elevated surface, using two small supports or benches so that he can lean back and spread his legs, extend his feet outward, place his hands under his thighs, and tie them tightly together. Then observe the depth of the cavity first to ensure it is deep enough, but not too much; if there are larger stones inside, cover it with linen cloth, so that it does not cause pain. Place the instrument above the opening at the top, around the head of the stone at the base; and when the stone is empty, cover the wound with moistened bandages in oil or dried mustard; place them over the cavity of the abscess and on the back part of the buttock. After this treatment lasting for two years with oiling and massage along its length, if it heals well; do not apply a hot iron to the wound, as previously stated in the division. If the stone is pushed into the cavity, be careful not to burn with fire, but treat it as we have said in this section.
This phrase refers to childbirth and would likely appear in a medical text discussing obstetrics or gynecology during medieval times. The translated line might read: "Regarding the process of childbirth."
ilk parle riche pas le butterail (sisles aoutil: Injur ander lice in thees arme purely pureaide juratnayes pastry devoxidure oftear lai cesare.
If the child comes to his head naturally, and the woman gives birth with crying, and the strength of a man is weak, so it sits on a seat or women hold it; and let its nature be made from oil or fenugreek, and then pour the bath between its legs where this small sac is formed: And cut the umbilical cord, and hold the man's belly so that the moisture which is in it makes small wounds; and press the woman's abdomen until the child comes down, and if it doesn't come out naturally, then you must use musk with fenugreek oil for washing the woman; then raise her head and cough deeply. Now, if two hands emerge strongly, you must rub them lightly a few times and a few times; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on one chair, and lift her feet up; then remove the chair from the ground, and wash the woman so she does not defecate when standing. And if the hands do not go in, and the child dies, you must take the hands to the instrument that is shown here before me, and extract the child, and dislocate it gently.
From the exit of the child from its legs When the child comes from his legs, then its strength requires that it be pushed upwards. And then twist it lightly and lightly, until it is straight.
Then raise his feet and extend them lightly, slowly.
Can it just jump from one foot, if commanded to raise, and make it cough deeply? If he jumps, God wills it.
And if it is not so as we have said, then turn it lightly and lightly until it is in the natural shape. For this is done lightly.
And if it does not come out as we have said, then use honey of almonds, oil of cinnamnium, and molten wax, and grind everything in a mortar. and pour the woman inside for it is burning; thecauses. The Old English:mein in itake aprezent. I'sain. Ai source. Andresort, etat "Theesurge. Iber. Hereise laissera lesuccles 3. Ages andre. It'intermiser. What'elacute (it'sle deca veintres apreyens.
And when it is wet inside, he makes a small bowl of myrrh, and puts it in there, and leaves for an hour; then it sits on a stool, then he forces and tightens the mouth and nostrils, and presses gently on the belly, because now the child is jumping. from the child on his knees When the child comes in this form, he puts his hands slightly and slightly;
from the child who comes out with a hand wide open I command to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, then makes the woman stand up and go;
if she cannot go, then makes her sit on a bed, and he stretches out the legs;
then I instruct the muscle that I have told about;
and if she does not give birth, then makes her sit on a chair, and studies to bring back the hand; and the child according to his natural shape, and makes her pinch him until he expels;
from the child on his neck, and spreading her hands, and turn it to the mother's back; I urge you to turn your hand back and forth slightly.
And when it is swollen, if you place a mixture of musk and oil on it, as we have said before, then he commands it to move slightly.
And when you have done this, if the swelling settles on one point, he commands it to pop; and the swelling will burst open. In this way for all the second time
In this way for all the second time When he comes into this manner for the second time, let you dip your finger in oil until all the moisture is gone.
And if the wound appears on his face and neck, if he covers it with tears so that it is not retained, then the child dies. (Note: The phrase "si la cope des la boude" seems to be a misinterpretation or error in transcription as it does not make sense in English. It might have been intended to say something like "if he covers it with tears," which I've included above.)
Then throw the child into, as he must command it to be done; and orders the woman that she shall not pop it again. (Note: The phrase "aucune fois" is French for "never," which makes sense in context but might have been incorrectly included from the original text.)
From the issue of twins Save that twins are born many times and never two or three; this is not strange, and little happens. (Note: The phrase "et aucune fois en naissent" seems out of context in this translation as it refers to the frequency at which twins might be born, but without further text, it's difficult to confirm its exact meaning.) Both are strange and do not live much longer than a few days. (Note: The phrase "se poc nom" is unclear in this context but might have been intended to mean "little life," suggesting the short lifespan of these newborns.)
I know that they multiply and are depleted by the same reason which causes them to weep, which is tied with tears. (Note: The phrase "qui les devise" may have been misinterpreted in this context. It could be referring to some kind of cause or condition leading to their plight; however, it's challenging without additional text for clarity.)
And never naturally come out like all others we have said before. (Note: This sentence seems to refer back to the context of twins and their natural occurrence or lack thereof as described in previous lines.)
And if they come out grievously, then the treatment as we have said before, and let it be done subtly to that child, letting its limb move quickly in whatever manner it is inclined. (Note: This line appears to refer to a specific condition or occurrence of twins coming out with complications, requiring a particular medical intervention.) And let its limb move in this way as it is meant for salvation. (Note: The phrase "il vaut mues" seems to be an error or misinterpretation, and might have been intended to describe the desired movement of the limb after treatment.) Of several children
Of several children Never are they formed in the marrow of such numbers as one or two or three or four or five or six or seven or eight or ten; and they all take shape like a child by measure with great joy. (Note: This line discusses various potential quantities that are not observed to form, likely referring back to twins' developmental pattern, mentioning the formation process as 'great joy.' However, it is hard to place without additional context from surrounding text.)
And let his limb remain whole so that something similar may not happen again. (Note: The phrase "car" seems to be an incorrect segmentation of text, and might refer to the prevention of a recurrence.) If he suffers according to what it requires.
Of the dead child.
When you treat the woman with a dead child or womb as I have explained in the division, and there are no fruits, and you are compelled to manual labor. It requires that you know if the woman is in good health and does not have any accidents or fear of death.
It requires that the woman be laid over her back, with her legs raised, and her feet together.
And the minister instructs her with a part of .ii., or she lies in bed if it is not treated through the extraction of the child;
Then you rub the patient's mouth with moistened bread and honey mixed with aromatic oil and flaxseed seed, then anoint her hands with these oils and aromatics. Then you knead the poultice into her womb lightly, and look for one or two spots that are evident;
And take warning if the baby appears to descend upon its head; If you press the points in her ears, neck, mouth, or throat, or under the chin or on the beard or near the shoulder joints;
And if the patient is in pain under her feet, then pressure is applied to the heel and near the joints of the shoulders;
And it is required that you draw the child into her right hand, place the finger in the left hand's palm, and stroke his hand lightly, and apply pressure to any of these places we have mentioned, so long as he remains empty;
Then find another type of swelling, or in which you have experience, if it is to be extracted unchanged;
And then it is moved from one side and the other, to allow movement, and its swelling teeth are moved accordingly as in this case:
And if a part delays, if you burn the body without touching its limbs, and cast it into that section, and draw out the other section:
And if it remains unchanged, place this swelling higher up and do so until it flattens out completely:
And if one hand comes between the other, and it cannot be pulled back due to contraction: Since it indicates that you must wrap around it with a cloth until it flattens out completely:
Then wrap it around the heel of the foot or near the wound, and this indicates that you should perform the same action with your other hand on both feet:
And if the child's shoulder joint is large and it has been injured or dislocated: Since it indicates that you should push the spinous process between your two hands and perform the same action on both sides: Or you use the instrument called "almideyne," which comes from the shape of this surgeon, who is after that one:
And then immediately make him cut deep naturally; and then pull out the bones with tongs;
and if the joint is dislocated and he resists being pulled, he must be restrained with force until they are either separated or no longer displaced by fluid accumulation;
and if it cannot be extracted, divide it into pieces as you can;
and if it is swollen in the abdomen or on the sides of the ribs, it must be pierced as long as the fluid persists;
And if the joint is on its legs, it has light contraction and the application of warmth to the mouth of the marsh (warm compress) should be quick;
And if it is stuck in the abdomen or the vagina, it must be extracted with one sheet wrapped around the hand; and make the abdomen or the vagina, as long as the fluid is present therein;
and if other limbs are fractured, and they relapse again; but he pulls out the hand from the marsh, and draw it out of his mouth. And then I put one ounce or two, and it became hot.
And if the mouth of the mortar is reset by piercing which was drawn into it, there is no need to work on it further. Moreover, it must provide wet and greasy substances; And the substance must be moist and soft, as well as liquid and smooth.
And if it is on its side, and you may put it back to normal position, using the substances we have mentioned for a live child.
And if there was no possibility, then let it be torn into pieces, and not leave anything of the second one.
And when you have done this thing, then provide those substances we have discussed for pebbles that come into the mortar.
And if the blood comes out, then it is put under strong restriction, and other treatments are given.
And I saw a woman in which there was an infant that had been bitten, then consulted another one above it, and removed the second bite from her. After longing, an abscess appeared on the wound, which swelled until it broke open, and began to form a large cavity.
I went to call for treatment, and after longing, I thought of it, but could not close the wound.
I placed above an iron block with great magnetism, and from it came some bone, and after several days another one. I was greatly worried because there is no bone in her abdomen.
I thought that it might be the bones of a dead child.
I wanted to examine the wound and with my hands took out some bone, until the woman reached her best possible condition. And for a long time after that, there were still two large wounds on her body.
And I have no record of this chapter because whenever the master performs an extraordinary operation, he knows how to assist.
To bring back the moisture to her body.
And after this comes the shape of the pressure, which makes us take out books; and at that time they turn to their patients' faces. In general, the crown is more subtle than other restrictions, and it can be made of wood or bronze.
And it was made of wood with a wide mouth and the margin around the trees is about one and a half palms. And in the middle of these movements, this one was firmly fixed on both sides, which were half a palm long from each side.
:toise, theilsincontracture. A:cesaigne: (faitre le plusa. Contracte aspearre.
Another form, resembling more subtly and lighter, is made of iron or boxwood according to the appearance of tongs. And they have interlocking joints, like you see, half a hand's length long and wide.
And when you have opened the marrow to all parts of the instrument, let it rest on one leg as if supported by a woman sitting on an iron stool. Then fit the interlocking joints together into the marrow and hold the head of the instrument between your fingers. Then work your hand on the instrument in the same manner as you have made the tongs evenly, according to the amount that you saw open the marrow's cavity until it makes it move as it wants.
This instrument is all submerged, and they have various shapes; and the more you open their marrow cavities, the more difficult the work becomes, and higher the rank of those who perform it based on its quantity.
If you don't adorn the instrument with which you have equipped it, for their needs are not dispensable.
When the second stage of childbirth is reached, it requires you to command the midwife that she retain her patient's airway, and then make him exhale deeply, and restrain your hands at his mouth and nose. And if she jumps through it, well then.
If not, then take a pot and make a puncture or cup-like formation, and place therein herbs that may open the marrow's cavity as in concoction, like chamomile, rue, anise, camphire (camomile), cassia, centaury;
Put some fire in the mouths of marris.
sage, ail, ala 100:15. Andre. Aid it:laterles asu: httpsjacmeant. If the second dislocation occurs suddenly. And if after this treatment she remains, and is not cured as commanded, then the ball orders her to rub her left hand with linen or oil, and then put it back in its place.
And if she finds the second dislocation; and when she has found it, let her gently pull and extend it little by little, so that the pain does not lead to extraction. But it must move more lightly to the right and left, and then pull away; if it comes and separates.
And if the wound of the joint is sore and inflamed, we have said that the treatment involves stretching out and smoke baths with herbs.
And if it's not all of what we have said, then let you be careful in the treatment;
But it contains what is in the joint wound, let you place it on the knees of the woman, then perform an enema with four-part medicinal oil.
If she puts it in and repositions it, but if it becomes worse again; however, everything else, when the pain of a bad smell reaches the stomach and head, then bind the malady.
And now it is said that there are fumigations available to this effect: none of the old have tried smoking dandelion and dry figs.
The form of the instrument used in this smoke bath with the woman to retain flowers and the dislocation is this:
And it is said to resemble a wound, and put in the head subtly in its place, and large joints near fire.
Et de ces paroles desarmes pour le pene d'apostrophe aye. Andres verses cease tautil parlè. ille anonymously in the middle ounce andare. Answer: The Middle French verse fromage,eaux. Whatsofaire nounsse: les cetera desu, Answer Airage.
Of piercing its foundation
Children born without piercing their foundational base, yet they have subtly suppressed something within them: Since it must pierce that subtlety within its due time, and not merely with sharpness but rather by gentle handling, so that it does not touch the dislocation:
Then place a thin layer over the wound in wine and oil, then treat it with ointment as long as it remains healthy:
And if you doubt that it will not reform, then place a puncture of depth in the wound and leave it to heal for several days, and only remove the stitches when the child has been allowed into bedrooms:
And never comes this type of healing for wounds or abscesses without a covering; it must cover that setting well: if you take care of it as we have said regarding the deep puncture in the wound...
from the foundation of the fistula: Fistulas that arise from the foundation are inflammations and more severe than those originating nearby or within a distance of about two fingers:
If there is one or more; and when the inflammation (nodation) of that fistula is old, then it must be examined carefully because there may be a hidden injury or weakness:
And there are no such persistent fistulas; and they are known by the fact that it does not produce or expel any material when the patient vomits or experiences windiness:
And if there are fistulas that penetrate the bladder and a part of the thigh; and they reach the joints of the knee or other parts:
And then it is known at the base; and not from time to time continues: And it is that you pierce your index finger or foundation, and insert a thin needle of iron or steel into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if it has twisting, when he inserts a thin piece of cloth or horsehair so long and slender that you feel the cloth or hair on your joint.
And if you do not feel it, and it does not produce apertures of excretion or windiness or pain as we have said before. You know that it does not pierce; but rather hurries the cautery.
And when the fistula is just above the bladder or near the urethra, if it causes the patient to urinate involuntarily and cannot be relieved by medicine.
If it is perceived just at the kneecap joint, then the cloth or hair will come back to its original position. If there is no twisting and the creation of pain by it, then it becomes merely a cautery and does not require medicine or heat treatment.
And in these persistent fistulas there is no cure because of the effort involved and it causes great concern among those who intervene.
In that which is not persistent and ancient, there is hope for healing with iron as I have seen before.
And the patient feels pain between your hands on his back; and he bends his legs up to his kneecaps, and leans his kneecaps towards his abdomen. Then you insert a thin piece of iron or cloth if there is twisting, so that you can feel whether the inserted piece comes back to its original position.
If the patient feels pain on his foundation, it means that you must pierce your index finger.
If it is perceived that the inserted piece has penetrated either under your joint or between muscles and tendons, you know that it is persistent. if there is no work on it which can make it heal.
As we know, some of them can be well treated, but these are few in number.
And the help that is done to him involves using a thin cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it has been described before. and he puts all the heat into the fistula, until it moves away from the foundation; doing this 1 or 2 times as long as you can feel that these useless parts are like a feather's quill.
and then the treatment of smoldering cloth in wax so long as it has been burning; then the oil massage and healing by compresses which unite and seal.
If he is so well treated in this way, it's good enough. Otherwise, there may be no other treatment that can make him well.
and if the piece is between him who is at the foundation of his body, or on your finger where there is a thick layer of cloth or tendon, so that you can see through it. if it is the beginning of the fistula and its wall;
n:100me:represents:rre,sentiment:ne:sautreignest (faissime:3lumente.c’sse,archelegefe forfaire.ce cupe tandex laithevesgarisme.
And if it does not succeed, and cut between you and the right side, then burn with fire or a medicinal liquid on it.
And when it comes to fire cautery, there are certain joints involved: namely, the dislocation of these joined bones, and the drainage of blood and removal of moisture.
then he treats swollen ears in bear's fat or by burning them down, until the hair falls off and his joints are weakened.
then he treats burn wounds hardened by fire, and dry medicines.
And if it is restored, it becomes healthy and does not return again.
And if a fistula arises from its base, and is separated from the joints, then you throw your stick or foundations out, and inquire about it.
If you feel the tent, and there is either the towel or the sinew or joints in question, it should be pierced through; if not, there are no wounds but merely a trace of fear and hope, managed by one of the three methods mentioned:
You either cauterize it as we have said, or you cut it immediately if the joints are involved, or if there are tentacles and you treat them in the same way as before.
And do not pierce too deeply into the joints, lest you cut through the foundation that holds them together and move their movements by will. then treat it as we have said.
then treat it as we have said. possibly it will become healthy again if you move that covering and the wound, either by piercing near its foundation or through tentacles, or with another pointed instrument. then make known to me this joint which is in the wound, as you can do.
then study how to restore the wound and keep the fistula in the part further from the foundation; if it is a lighter matter for the patient.
And there is never a fistula of this kind; and when you pierce the tent in the fistula, it touches the foundation beneath the skin above. if you take a tent pierced at its base in this manner: and throw one twisted stick into it, and thrust the tent through the whole length of the fistula as long as it remains at its base.
seur devis duy charles:
And tie the head of the thread, and gather the two ends together, and bind them to each other, and let it remain for one or two years.
And make no restraint on the thread at all while it copes these two characters that are between them and cross.
Then heal the wound as long as it is sewn and sound.
If the fistula does not pierce, if it is to be opened in all ways that you can, but if it is not too deep.
For he does not need to cover up the dislocation if it is opened and then heals, as we have said, until it becomes sound again.
The form of the spinous processes which are used for creating a fistula if it is very large and involves one or two vertebrae. And on the other hand, for such cases because it does not cover what should be covered, as you can see in this case:
Blood evacuations occur through various methods: within the foundation (e.g., veins), like grains of resin, for both small and large amounts of blood, and subsequently from the body's tissues ('cort'). This passage details different approaches to manage excessive bleeding during medical procedures, including direct extraction via the vascular system, through abscess cavities (comparing it metaphorically to grains), as well as removing fluid-like blood clots and directly from bodily tissues. And if there is one or more such cases, and they are to be removed from the foundation (e.g., veins) and the main foundations of the body ('chief'), but those that are removed due to minimal fluidity generally have little impact;
And subsequently they may be left with a small amount of yellowish or clear fluid ('citrine' and 'sanc'), which has the same color as the surrounding tissues.
And the treatment for those within the foundations (e.g., veins), if you command the patient to remain in rooms with air ('en chambres'), so long as the foundations are full of blood, and it becomes evident on the skin surface ('filz'); If you hasten it up, and then binds in one's roots;
:means andaila century oun. Itas the. And remove the arrows from your body, then burn them out of their place, and powder above any warm salves used in cautery. And if as it is said or the author of cautery says, they are cautioned and then healed with other treatments until he is well.
And if the lodged parts cannot come out, then he cleanses the patient with a non-biting and gentle enema to wash away what is in the foundation so that it can come out openly.
And if the maladies are severe, and the wounds are deep in their foundation, then it is a light treatment. And whether you treat it with your finger or tongs, and then you heal them as we have said, until they are well, and that the incisions made by iron should not be feared.
It is intended that you perform the suturing as follows: take a twisted thread and put it on an awl, then stretch the thread over the awl and pierce it from another side, and turn the two stitches around inside the needle, so they lie directly opposite each other. And if it is wide; and hold the threads together, then stretch the thread over again, remove the awl, and do so for all others, and leave a little excess blood in each puncture to correct any suction deficit.
Then place a damp cloth or oil-soaked cloth on the foundation, and put it there again, and command the patient to lie down.
And then let them heal until they begin to itch, and when they do start, continue with the ointment treatment and other treatments as long as he is well.
two days or foundation, depending on the severity of the wound and its depth in the body's structure (foundation). Often times it occurs in the intestine due to a natural constriction and when the illness is old and medicine cannot help.
And iten demeingles ceste cièdans ieu et siens en touplainces en laisse. sis, apeurgueble (12esday. Allusive.
And if it cannot be sewn together, then resection is repeated more forcefully than before until he recovers well, and it must be scraped; Then the treatment continues as long as he remains healthy.
then a tremor Formication is a misleading appearance before the wound, and it heals quickly.
and never has the cold of frostbite, and he feels almost dead from tremor, and it affects all parts, especially the hands more than anywhere else.
And the treatment is that you take a cane of about an ostrich feather's length, or a strong turkey feather, and place it on the tremor, so long as the purple circle around the tremor disappears completely. Then turn your hand over the entire cane as long as you manage to cope completely with the tremor, and place it on the wound, and loosen the tremor at its roots.
And if you see it as a cane of rain or iron shaped in this manner, and be subtle and quick beneath:
Do not hesitate to continue holding it for two days and press firmly And if you see the tremor, cauterize it as it is before or by fire of caustic treatment.
of the form like a poultice. No one has made an enema with silver or arsenic, or molten rainwater or oil; and no small or large animal sucklings have been used as they are recommended for it.
These are small ones used in the treatment of children who are frail and suffering; they are little.
The form of the poultice small and large if it is above wide, or the belly is tied according to this manner.
And there is an obstruction or the belly is tied as you see it, and the fistulas are located within them, and in one of the sides, dothe first fistula, and in the other side;
And it may be the belly where you put the best medicine of a bladder or linen, and see all small fistulas.
souvent inquiete desu it'sau 1306:1000'sautes'soulle. If yout:ixtentire. I: ACTsisme :1stant, anderic, theire 1500'saintique. And when the medicine is dense, if there is blood on the instrument in front of it with a strong thread, then we will wash; and this takes the form of a circle.
And the medicine should not be too hot or too cold, and we apply oil or almond oil on top of the wash, or something similar, then let it flow gently.
Then the physician squeezes his two hands together, holding them tightly until they are all visible, then removes the enema and lifts the patient's legs at the hips.
And if the medicine comes out as much as it can; and if it stays in all night, it is greater help.
And if you perform an enema during a disorder of intestinal peristalsis, and the medicine accelerates its release, then it restarts as long as he is healthy.
And if there are hemorrhoids or an abscess, then the enema can also be applied gently as for a child.
and it is the gentle form of the enema on which the skin is restrained:
in wounds
We have said about the treatment of wounds; and we will say about the treatments for hands and medicines according to their completion.
I say that wounds are diverse depending on what they are made of and the kind or type of wounds they are made from.
The things that wounds are made of due to movement of the body, cutting with a sword or cutter, and other similar things.
or according to the location of injuries on the body, such as those that cut under the collarbone, or on the head, or the thighs, the abdomen, and other limbs.
And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple head injuries, because their repair is included in this chapter.
I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head and the bone is not broken, if it's due to movement of the body or similar things, then the skin is completely torn and the wound is large. and you doubt little of the incision: if it heals quickly from its headmost first, especially if there is only a small amount of blood coming from the wound, then we will consider its recovery contrary to the lower part.
and avoid heavy consumption of wine and large meats.
And if it does not heal, then reduce its meat intake and abstain from drinking wine and consuming fat.
:metal thisfeet iles leather ate the toi des'sons dexterior. In ittey elixentil. Thexer. Whatisles: metsure. 12: frommeattres : 230. Andre, and trellommenture: Get hereto incisaures 3 :
And if it does not have an incision, then put above the wound, if the wound is still fresh throughout its entire flesh, and it is not moved by air, powder, which I will say only a little bit later:
And if the arrow has been moved, then put on any dressings until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like that of sword-cutting and similar injuries, and the lips cannot be closed together without force, then they are closed by covering it, which I will say later regarding abdominal wounds from stitching.
If the wound is exposed to the bone and bleeds heavily but lasts only for a short while if it is touched, then treat the wound with medicine, and restore toughness to its surface in leather. And instruct the patient to eat hearty meats as we have tested and cooked wheat, also like turkey, and similar things.
And if you treat or suture perforation, and it is to the bone, touch the perforation completely, and apply treatment;
And if an arrow is in the wound or vein without surgery, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then whether you remove the arrow, and loosen the clot with a thread. And if that does not help at all, then cauterize.
And if these small and simple wounds are treated lightly; and you put this powder on the arrow so that it moves again.
And the way of the powder is as follows: take an incense piece; blood from a dragon for two parts; live copper for three parts, and mix it subtly. And apply the wound, and form a fist, so that it heals well and joins all its flesh.
And then remove the clot well, and leave it untied if it does not swell; because one should not use medicines until she is healed.
And no one has ever done this with only live copper alone, as long as there is neither incense nor blood from a dragon, but the arrow has not moved the wound.
And if the arrow has moved the wound, this is also how it was, without anyone using this powder.
but put any digestible dressings on it or grain of barley made from water and honey, until the wound shrinks. then treat with other treatments until healed.
And if the bone fracture accompanies the wound and it is small, then you should make subtle pinches.
And I will say this about fractures of the head later on.
sesoon.comenture duel.cumbersentire,re. 4ccue, andrompourfeeludexceli cest.
If pleasure comes from the head and neck being simple, for it has no difference between its chief or that which is attached to it; but if there are problems with the head or where the blood vessel is compressed.
If it's the case that there is no other remedy but to leave the treatment and not apply anything restrictive, for it harms the nerves and forces them to withdraw. and not to place anything on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their connection with the brain, which are its most important members.
but if there is medicine that washes with soft water and mixes it with rose oil, and also washes with soft water, and other stones of this kind according to this method, and damp treatments.
And if the wound is large, then bind it tightly with bandages, and continue treatment until healed.
And if the wounds are deep and filled with blood, pierce them further or at a lower point;
and if the blood vessel is compressed, and the blood accumulates ('comes'), then he will observe, and let it lie (or rest), and if there is a necessity to cauterize, that is their profession.
and if the spine of the throat is compressed, or it hurts, then they should be guided; for by that reason the flesh will go away. but do not cause further pain in the throat's lining, and do not touch the throat itself but set it according to its natural form. and then leave the stitching for some time, let him make no further interventions, and continue dressings with ointments until healed.
and if the injury has pressed upon the bone, then let him use it. And if he has bone fragments, if you drive all of them into his wound completely, and those that you cannot have, let the wound close as much as possible. and be dislocated or misaligned.
And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle it with the powder that I mentioned before. And if there are bones in the wound and he has an abscess, treat it as I have said in this chapter.
from the arrow or knife wound
If it is an arrow or knife wound, and the wound is deep, then look at the wound for venous valve collapse, which indicates that the wound is deadly; understand that clearly the wound is fatal.
And if it is not deep and fresh all the way through, then do not put on the powder at first nor bind it to the skin that does not heal immediately. And plunge the patient's body into cold water, and douse the affected area with coldness; But also an attractive heat application, and bind it daily for a day.
And if you do not have a heating application, then place plenty of cotton to suction the fluid from the moisture.
And make the patient lie on the wound for either three or four days, or more if necessary. And if no spasms occur and there are no significant involuntary movements of the body throughout this process; And when you see the bone positioning, understand that the wound is salvageable. Then continue with other treatments and remedies as long as he remains in good health.
And if it cannot be healed, and then do as is necessary; you will understand that there is an abscess.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut and it's straightforward, or on the backside, do that which I have mentioned before.
If the wound is large; Ander: a l'alicomposition of itèlater ás devises.
:naturexile alement:
A sudden collapse of the abdomen
The abdominal collapses are great and frequent, as well as small;
Of great wounds there is never an instance where the intestines are pierced or torn, because due to the insertion of instruments.
And the dressing is more troublesome, and there has never been a case where the small wound was worse than the large one.
For this reason they reinsert the intestines at intervals, because if they are not inserted gradually. For this reason the intestine inflames immediately when it feels pain, so they reinsert more gradually.
And because it is equal in severity to that wound, for this reason they reinsert the intestines into their natural position instead of other methods.
And you know that the treatment of the abdomen is based on four methods:
The common dressings involve in the treatment of the abdomen,
And the dressing of other wounds on the body and those other dressings are common like other injuries;
And all of them are more effective with the dressing of the abdomen, and I will say one and declare it.
I will say that when the wound is small, nothing from the intestines occurs; And grafting is one way of reintroducing it, that is through one of the four methods; Or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said; Or because the intestine is inflamed by heat.
And when it is cold, treat the affected area as follows: Moisten a sponge or something similar with water only briefly, Or you heat by quenching and dipping and drying, And raise the intestine until it has cooled down completely;
And never make restrictive movements, and it must be slow to relax;
And when you see the inflammation subsiding, make sure to cool down or heat up and handle them gently; Because through this process becomes lightened with few things.
And if it cannot be entered, do a little with the wound using the tool for removal of abscesses to drain the pus.
And the first treatment must be done slowly; so we do not need to cut it forcefully without great necessity;
and this refers to the effort of breaking it apart:
if it breaks down within the core and does not solidify again, then it takes on this shape;
And when the wound has increased and the intestine moves abruptly: if it returns to its natural shape as per its proper place; if it's possible for you, because this matters;
When the wound is wide, and it's located on the part of the stomach; which indicates that you should have the patient lie on their back; and raise his legs higher than his head; and if it is on the part of the stomach;
and also in one of these two parts; and if it is kept high part of the other.
Andromaintenant le feu eschief enlenginfeu en France inmainestatifs deves laconte meve in English translation en français:
Let the small wounds appear as they are,
Then hold it between your hands, for this minister who carries his entire route in his hand. And bring together the lips; And that is the common way of dressings;
And that is the common way of dressings; And that you prepare a needle or several, depending on the size of the wound's extent; Then let the head of the wound receive space and insert an awl or whatever has strong thread in it; And pierce the two channels with the two sharp scissors;
Then take a strong thread and run it through one of those parts; Then join the two scissors at the wound to come together;
And then let some space and insert another needle; Then join the two threads together if you have made the first needle; And do not cease from making those needles; as long as every wound is contained;
and be the needles fine or thick, subtle and large. for the fine needles penetrate all the way through, but the large ones cannot easily enter. because it is necessary that they be sharp;
and it is not advisable to force the needles too deeply into flesh or leather;
and they should not penetrate or open the wound before setting it with a soldering iron;
and then they must handle the needles' points, so that they do not cause pain to the maladies at rest; and they place towels or cloth around the needles' points in order to hold them steadily; and let them remain so long as the wound is set;
and in such a way with needles it is more commendable for small wounds; because it is better with a needle or in its absence;
⁠20thé andreinfeet the wounds:rime asseigne ite. n: toiensingles la.iellas prezent.i :ite andre ientire, theires fromsage. ici. Whatsoaright. Iteraise. Ipouge-dayes:cumbreitures tis aprementalice lexe frommalyssuccresse. And when you have perceived these four signs together.
And when you have perceived these four signs together. When you reset the arrowhead at the part where it has been started, in the manner that cost arrows.
and leave space between each suture the size of a minor stitch.
this cutting is done by hand.
and I sutured a wound that one had in his abdomen.
who was armed with a knife. and it was more than one handbreadth in size. and it was indeed over two palms long in the intestine.
and it was inside his abdomen. I returned the intestine then it had been there for about twenty-two hours.
and the wound was sewn up just a little over fifteen years ago, and he recovered fully.
And the physician had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle.
and I did not cure him with ointment because there was in it one little line where no medicine could be found, nor any remedy at all. and left the wound soaked with water several times a day, and he washed it with honey as long as it healed.
I will now translate the provided Old French medical treatise line by line into modern English:
Take the needle, and the thread on its back part so as to come close inside.
when she has perceived the right of power in power, if she holds the Chief' Writ or charged it with thread,
and make a cut on the other back part so as to come away from inside;
and their understanding of this stitching is that you do it just like the tailors make the leather; and leave the suturing of one side afterward, and continue on the other until the stitching is fully complete.
The second manner of stitching that Galen described properly,
as long as no one does it in this way, which assembles the two parts naturally; and apply one of the sutures to the other, halfway:
and make an awl or Chief Writ in frontal order, and pierce that part only, and let the two fingers become softly shaped; Then turn the needle, and cut it through the back part close to therein. and let the two fingers become softly shaped;
then cut through both of their rear sections closely adjacent to therein, in the same two fingers that are opposite it;
and this is the more common way to suture and stitch;
Galien would say this proclamation, and no one can testify to it;
it must be sewn together with two needles or thread for each;
and one must insert an arrowhead into one side, and the other into another, in the manner of those who solder metals;
and it is known that when the stitching lies within the abdomen; if this closure becomes more painful than other similar abdominal closures;
The judgment about the wound is such as the judgments made regarding other wounds;
and is that when you tighten the fresh wound completely through all its tissues, causing the arrow to move; if you restore intestines back into place and the associated costume, then apply powder tightly packed in a bandage;
if you restore intestines back into place and the associated costume, then apply powder tightly packed in a bandage; and if the arrow has been displaced, then apply any dressing that is available as long as it covers the wound; and make sure the thread is tightly sewn along with the suture and stitches; then treat the wound as you would any similar injury until it heals completely;
and if you have no medicine, then apply it as soon as possible to begin covering the wound with any available materials like clean cotton; and turn it every day until he is fully recovered;
Because you don't know of any other medicine beyond these that is suitable for simple injuries;
and if you doubt whether the community of members can move. If it is required that you massage the area lightly with oil of temperance heat or rose oil. and places them on the wounds, and between the scars;
And if it smells pain or pus in the blisters, and often occurs; If enemas are made with black wine and immediately afterwards the pus comes out to the intestines;
and pierce deeply, and you know that when it is the large intestine, it is lighter to heal than the small;
The "young" intestine cannot recover if it is congested; And it is because of the positioning of the veins that they are, and for the subtlety of all the tissues, and the approach to their nature in the nerves;
And if the abscess bursts from the wound, it should be treated as though it were in the intestine, while still fresh;
And if it is large and turned yellow or black, it indicates that you must tie the vein which contains blood; for it has veins and arteries;
and then deal with what's between the lines; and place the cautery in those parts around the wound until it has become compressed by the abscesses;
Of the treatment of the joint
When the intestine is twisted, and the wound is small, If it can be restored by any means,
For because I see some men wounded or with their abdomen pierced by a spear.
and it was the wound on the right side of the stomach, and became inflamed and turned into a fistula, and thus affected defecation and wind.
I prescribed treatment according to what I knew, and I continued to carefully monitor it until healed, and the limbs were bound together.
And when I saw him sewn up, I doubted that his illness was not in his abdomen. and he had no further ailment but improved significantly with rest, eating, and drinking.
And they told that any experimenter who has a small wound in the intestine must be bound together part by part. then perform large experiments on it and assemble the edges of the wound. and when the experiments have passed through its mouth, if he puts them under the two lips,
then apply another tremor afterward to it, as before, until the wound is completely healed.
and cost the wound. This chief is absorbed into the intestine, and brings no harm to the patient.
and it can be tied up with a very fine thread that is taken from the intestine of an animal.
in this manner: take this thread of intestine that is very thick. and then tie it with this very fine linen thread. then push the thread through a needle, and cost the intestine, and rejoin it in place;
and this manner of mending is not harmful according to the path of faith and hope.
and if the wound is large and deep, especially when it's in one of the inner intestinal loops, there's no better remedy or healing, due to its subtlety.
even if it is an abscess or a fistula. Seals that any wound or abscess, when it heals ("Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme"), as if it were a fistula, is everywhere stopped. And ons d'une fremit a l'anatomie des iacture de la mortel, parler in the beginning of the vavare.
:esuccentilogy and fromage, aundec:ice, thenave. ous(sawisoldreversalice. and it is also like the feathers of a bird;
and neither leaps clear nor heavy in its movement; never at all, and sometimes enough;
and I have mentioned in the division of wounds that all unsanctified wounds cannot be cured; it is only by one of seven causes:
and that is called the small amount of blood or clots; or by its own malice (referring to the disease/condition causing bleeding); or because there is hardness within it and under the tongue, wherein nothing can grow healthily; or it has too many feathers (referring metaphorically to an overabundance of something); or the stone has a pit (referring metaphorically to an imperfection), and its material quality is evil; or the medicine is not good for the treatment (indicating that traditional methods are insufficient); or because its decay is akin to plague; or due to the late property in that region (indicating delayed processes), and slow healing, and it naturally escapes/flits away; or there are bones or vessels within (referring metaprompturally to anatomical structures affected);
and I have already shown all these causes, signs, and medical treatments in the division;
or it implies that you need to understand the manual procedure for treating an abscess;
and it affects a fistula in all four limbs of the body; because it has fistulas that originate from great veins, and arteries, and nerves; either at the stomach, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or any of these abdominal areas; either in the spine of the back, or in no joint of hands or feet;
And all such fistulas of this kind are difficult to treat, requiring only laborious methods and lacking understanding;
but if there is no such fistula that can be healed only with what I have said earlier, and you are confident of the cure; and you have seen if the patient takes a draught of iron or wine, if the fistula is straight, and it pains him.
iuntiferrangherifferde enclosure 1entioxange (theacher'resse. greinfalleuokheicherus For the limbs bend over due to twistedness;
and if he forms an abscess in his hand which you cannot properly drain by means of small punctures. if the enema is administered through one of the punctures;
for the moisture in one puncture is drawn out from another, and it is masked;
then the decrease in pressure that you hope to know if it has bone or nerve inside, and it is filled with pus;
and ask well of the patient about the pain he feels when you press with your hand, and where it hurts;
and when you truly know the location where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein; or in none of the locations I have mentioned if it copes according to what I have told you;
or in none of the locations I have mentioned if it copes according to what I have told you; and bone for the other one and those corrupt bodies that are within them; and then continue the treatment until it becomes sound;
and whereof de coure l’ape laisser leu enlal ce quie itens aye defface tostern lignes au roe un coup. The l'in thexume in chief desmechant enceint:rre de: (13thaire nen: ices dechief cite Then he places wet cloths in medical practice for a head wound, and applies them to the head of the abscess.
Then he places wet cloths in medical practice for a head wound, and applies them to the head of the abscess. As long as medicine removes excess that lingered at the bottom.
And then I apply hot unguents medicinal to the cleaned and healthy skin;
But if it is not cleaned by that, if the cauterize as we have said,
And if his bone is rotted from the abscess, he cauters it too. If veins or arteries are not constricted or the main limbs, as we have said;
And if his bone is exposed, and it has decayed or turned black, so long as the decay affects the entire bone, And treats other untainted things on clean skin until it is healthy again;
But if it is not cleaned, and grows black as before; We understand that you do not remain just at all;
If discovered and you wish to be at the bottom; And cleans all the decay, then restore the vein;
And if it is so healthy then that's good; But if it is not so, you know that decay has spread too far, and there will be no more time for it. But if a malgrevein, sois leu la sante.
And if it has a small decayed bone, and you must extract it with pincers. If the arrow is reachable by such an instrument.
And if it has a remaining bone, and you must extract all of them without leaving any behind.
And if the moisture causes it to go against, and there is no mistake nor fear involved. If there are copes and moisture and heat, and deliver the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, putting something in the wound causing souring discharge. And let them be placed over the bones for as long as they remain in position.
And then they will move more easily;
And if it is a large bone, like that of the leg or thigh; If you keep causing decay so long that the blackness is all over the bone; Then heal the wound;
And if there is a large part decayed in the bone, and it comes right out of it like mud; If it must be covered and coated all over with decay, and then heal until it is set;
And I will tell you about a fistula that happened to one man in his leg; If you provide an example and help with your work.
It was a young man in his thirties who had pain in his leg due to something that came into the bloodstream;
As long as the materials entered into his leg, and it came out of one large incision without any further reason to open it.
but by their madness they worked so much on piercing it open, and they heated various materials, and it became a fistula, and much perforation occurred that all turned their shoulders backward and moistened the shoulder joint.
but many continued to apply this treatment for two or three months, and found no relief in the art of hands.
as soon as I called them, and saw their leg and the remedies with which they were treated, and because there was perforation at great joints; and it turned red like a young man's shoulder, and had a yellowish tint.
I pitched my tent in one of these perforations and then searched for all the perforations.
and I found that they converged from all parts of the leg.
So I hurried up and searched within one of these perforations until I found a part of bone. and I found it rotten and decomposed, and the decomposition extended deep into the bone.
I brought to me what appeared to be part of the rotten bone, and took it for granted that there was no other decay present, as that was what I had seen.
and began to attempt to restore the wound with similar medicines over long periods of time, but could not sew it shut.
then again I considered it, and found the bone as before.
and I found the decay continued in the bone, and brought it to me, and then placed it on my shoulder, and worried about whether or not I could suture the joint.
but I could not do much more than cut into one piece of the bone, and it was thoroughly damaged throughout. then I attempted to restore it with medicines again; and it was healed and sewn quickly.
and it is unlikely that I would consider furthering this treatment except due to its slight effectiveness, which cannot withstand any more. and out of fear that I might die from it. Because the bleeding often occurred, but he was completely cured.
Because the bleeding often occurred, but he was completely cured. And from the place of the bone grew a hard stone, and it was well-formed and had no harm or contrary effect in any way, neither to the upper nor to the lower part, nor when coming or going.
and are extended so that you can pull the corrupted stone downwards. and find the stone above the bone where you see the suture, which does not tear the stone. and places straw or cloth under the bone so that it can cover the corrupted stone; and it is enough suture such that one can see and feel the corruption, and another time of suture too.
And if the bone is deformed and does not open, and the corruption is in its midst or within a part of it. if you find the stone intact; then place straw under it.
and then suture the part of the corruption to another part of it, as we have said before:
and if the corruption is at the joint, suture the joint that is corrupted, and stitches on either side of it.
And if the corruption du roi le soustant en l’est-il neuf tiens aoutrains deffortsaint in theese end of l’itg and itensin le :14 centuries, la. Itesain oulden theeslain (ifaince. Iaulx lai0
illeverre. This century. Il, andire:sthes. 13argeat ilustra il, the rightfuls. :il. Theousteincelain. but nevertheless it is necessary that you investigate that corrosion, as it opens to you. and manifest it in all ways that you can, but do not let the vein or nerve oppose you.
and know that the cutting instrument and hairs are many, according to the arrangement of bones and appearance of teeth. and their size and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness. and for this reason it is necessary to provide an equivalent example of its working instrument in every case.
and know that the work will show you the instrument which you will need, according to knowledge of this craft. and the testimony of the ways of diseases. if for that instrument which you need according to what it requires.
fire The shoulders fall either due to moisture within or because of dryness outside;
and when you have the treatment for that corrosion by medical cures, and it does not benefit them. if it is necessary to cover that limb up to its joint or where the corrosion comes; whether it is by death or by malice, which is greater, the defect of the limb;
whether it is by death or by malice, which is greater, the defect of the limb; . Ameasure andre (itgallast:0: And afterwards, after darkness, he touches the corroded joints of the limb. and takes hold throughout the entire body; if you hurry too much with covering.
and if it is due to the puncture from any venomous beasts, like a sea scorpion and wasp and similar creatures.
if the corrosion is at the top of the joints, it cauters him there, and does not give him any space to recover simply by hand (or without further medical intervention).
And if it comes just by hand, then he cauters the joint, so that the corrosion does not spread to the arm.
And if it comes to the arm, then he cauters at the cost (the elbow joint), and if he does not succeed in stopping it there, then it is his death. but there is no measure for the quantity of his virtue (strength or vital force);
and so much about these corrosions that come to the body: if it comes first on one joint, then he cauters after the next joint.
but if it comes on one or other part, then he cauters all over that body part; but if it rises in the leg, then he cauters at the joint between the knee and the ankle.
but if it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy for that patient than to let him bleed with straw.
and the way to cover or bandage the limb so that it does not extend upwards and downwards; nage of the English translate : "Aragne're. AIr'tire,surelater tirail:escaly A. ici, theur lea wail. Thewelle tolere (isueille. Intervile decair and thennealte, what. And you draw out the chaff between the two joints of one large socket, until the bone is exposed;
and then the cloth or silk, and place one piece of linen in each section, so that the silk does not touch the healthy skin; and wipe away the other injury and abscesses for the patient.
And if blood comes when you are working, if it is necessary to cauterize the wound immediately. or you place on some restrictive powders; then return to your medicine until it is completed.
then bind the painful limb with one stitch, and care for it until it is healed.
and I will tell you what happened at one of those homes where there is faith:
there was a darkness that seemed like the ash of fire.
and that corruption came first in the devotion of this house, so much so as it consumed all their faith.
and when he saw the corruption, he took measures to cover up the faith, and it was healed.
and after ten days there returned the corruption to him or came from his hand, and he came to me.
and I placed restrictive substances on the corruption after purifying the fire'its effects, but it could not stop the corrosion.
and he told me to put my hand on it, but I had no hope of repelling the substance. and I also doubted whether if I touched his hand, he would suffer. because the virtue of this man was weak; and he despairing of all, he returned to his homeland. and took measures to cover his hand, and it was healed.
And I have no further information on this matter because of what it has been done, if one is knowledgeable about it.
Never does an incision take place in the flesh of the churl, and it lingers so long that a great assembly of bowels is formed. And then they go and pierce it, and delay in doing so like some peasants. and the skin that is above is also very delicate like a silken dressing. and they will not hurt the bone nor the nerve, and such illnesses are called "healthy" when evacuated.
but if it is so elongated that it bends to the bone as it pierces through, then it is called a fistula.
and the cooking so that you take out the whole skin, and immediately when it is delicate, like silken dresses. and does not happen by its corruption.
And if you have a promise that the skin hardens and its corruption is not in formation, and the skin becomes stiff like a churl if you treat it with this cleansing process:
look if the breasts are large and the bowels within that have a pungent odour. and this Egyptian medicinal cleansing process is as follows: take some hay and oil, and boil it gently, and set it in the flame, like a vallet. As long as the medicine is red, and also thick like honey.
And then they take it according to your necessity, both in water and in honey. And when cleansing the chest, and holding back the wound. And let the medicine penetrate by .ii hours, then extract it by drawing out.
Do this many times, until the chest is movable and unbound.
And never uses water cleansing with ashes. When this medicine is not present, and you require ash of oak wood, pour water above it.
Then pour the liquid, and when you know that the chest is well-formed.
And if they cannot endure it, nor Egyptian medicine or water with ashes help them. If the water cleansing with honey has a little bit of litharge (arsenic) in it. Or you cleanse with honey and mead, which the honey has properties to shape and cleanse. And the wine purifies it;
And when you have done this, and you promise that the chest is well-shaped, If this cleansing causes it to grow within him.
And you should expect a discharging diathesis (a condition where the body disposes of morbid humors or fluids), and do it with rose oil and wine. Or you cleanse with various medicines and ointments, which I have previously described as having properties or treatments.
And if the wound in his chest is small, and the cauldrons of cleansing cannot enter it. If you increase it slightly with a piece of iron and cover it with an Egyptian ointment tent, Or a Basilican ointment, as long as it is enlarged;
And if the wound is too broad, and let it be only .i. that the cleansing can enter at all.
And if he pricks up his head so high above, or low down below where it is. For when the bow is in full draw, it does not allow for relaxation of the string. And if you cannot cover his chest as you see fit. If it appears in such a way that the bow is drawn down to the lowest point where it is.
And if you cannot cover his chest as you see fit. If it is drawn in such a manner that the bow goes swiftly backward and does not lose any of its tension; And take consolidant remedies to apply to his chest,
And are beneath a piece of linen that covers the entire chest; Then draws upon the point where his pricked chest is; if somewhat wider second time, Because they should be hot plasters under another piece of fabric according to the quantity of the prick (wound size). And he puts it on the point of his pricked chest to align the bow, and does not remove its sharp ends once every day.
And who is on top of his pricked chest, often he removes it to draw back the bow. And he sees what comes from the bowstring, if it's poison or a bit, or partly good to eat, or indigestible.
And hearsels of medicine.
La viex: "un, siens laissez au monde surfaire. iefses souffrir, ceteral nlatera les eulge itali'soullower ate cautheirrechertoast.tio theorelaborle desgic Frencher latin: nifloud ifreves. Expeller,seueltuse.nent
And then he dislocates it in the morning or at noon, and when you dislocate the wound, and changes another dressing, and renews the bandage.
And if his breasts become bowed out after many days, you know that the breasts do not move. And if subtle cautery is applied after long wounds, you should not despair of health.
because the health approaches. For it is known that some have delayed cleaning their wounds and those which do the contrary;
and if bowed sides become evident in his chest after many days, you know that the breasts do not move.
and if the breasts delay in rising, and are distant, then you should apply mixed wet and dry medicines. as if dislocation occurs because there is great part of silica (vitriol), and it is the first-line treatment;
apply dislocation and they do it with rose oil, and the poultice made from a little thick wine in substance.
then they conserve and make it useful; and this makes them better cooked or roasted. if dislocations are present,
or take my advice and oil and incense, and burn it at the fire when he is smoldering in it. seslater. And roots of the celestial lily, which is also like flour a hundredfold.
And roots of the celestial lily, which is also like flour a hundredfold. And using simple or composite ones: grind them up, and mix it into the honey that I mentioned earlier, and use it. And if the treatment is dislocated, and not healed by this treatment.
And if the treatment is dislocated, and not healed by this treatment. And thus you know that the compaction is done, and pressing into the bone, or hard limbs, or the blood vessels. If the treatment of the ulcer, as we have said before.
from the incision of the vein ("veine" is likely a misspelling and should be "vena", as in Latin, indicating blood vessel; however, assuming 'v' was intended to mean 'vein', it would still refer to an opening made into a vein)
Panniculus is an incision made on the dorsal side of the flap of the hand's skin ("pouchet" likely means "flap" or "projection") either in place, or by chance, it may move into other areas ("dois" appears to be an error and might be intended as "dos", referring to different locations where the tissue could displace)
And when it is swollen, and if we do not take care; then a secondary incision occurs ('chaus' likely means 'incision', though in context here might be an error for 'complication') And they will grow and contract until the flap's root grows ('racine de l'ungle') or perhaps it could mean 'root of the vein'; however, based on context, I assume 'racine' refers to the underlying base structure of the surgical flap.
And the infection comes just to the bone ('jusc’a l'os'), and as it occurs; it causes a pungent pain, and there are the two broad joints ('dou doi larges'), and is discolored ('est li color fuxe').
When you treat it if we have said before (in surgery) and the treatment does not benefit ('ne profit mie') "O, jei" (incomplete sentence: "cunest, iare du fie incommodablement le cheveille. Then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cautery is very helpful if the bone and joint are healthy;
and if it presses on the joint afterwards, and swelling begins, and bruising. since you must place the bandage over the joint where there is no pressure from the joint. and raise it upwards, and carefully remove the clotted blood softly and lightly, and place on top of the bandage medicinal and caustic substances to prevent all infection,
And if the corrosion is in the bone, then remove it because as long as the bone has been corroded, it cannot heal.
and if you see the deformation has occurred, then remove it within a few days as long as it's been described earlier. and continue treating as long as it remains healthy;
and if it's unhealthy, and bandaged, and it emits great pain, then you must first heal it; then remove the joint capsule sharply by cutting above it;
and ensure that the cut does not widen at the level of the bandage above the joint, as it would cause too much pain for the patient;
and if something happens, put an application on it to alleviate.
The dislocated joint is found in some people's hands by chance entirely inflamed; And sometimes they find bones therein or fragments of bone, and never an elbow;
And none of them arise at the root of the joint nor in any place within it; And those that are dislocated in any other place do not stop moving; and those that dislocate at the joint itself by chance remain silent;
lalimenta: nagreurs afeurtami iaurextecthermextel:ncelle vesefices andcitérnsconces:s :<ithecifireviseachagnevreignesse:dez tota 1 to lentreimangenerchevel soandecteurant, seurantes.gheignes;s la maincrewentiagnes andable,urexilex
There who is born at the root of the jointing, it is painful to heal: hold it tightly with your cover.
In those who are born or need to be placed in the abdomen, it is necessary that you first form a round cavity just below the bone. Then cover the bone with a suitable cloth for that purpose, and then heal it until it is healthy again.
The wounds that come together either by birth or the joining of a cut wound, or by scalding with fire, or by similar things.
If it is necessary that you cover the burned area, so that they must be repaired according to their natural forms. Then place two pieces of woollen cloth or linen dipped in rose oil to prevent them from joining together. Or place two thin pieces of cloth between them until the edges are joined, as is required.
Wounds that come from neither of their sides with the palm, cover those burned areas as it is required.
Of ills (which refers to various illnesses or troubles)
These vices are like thick, overloaded wrappings filled with excessive and melancholic elements that come from more than one part of the body.
And it is more frequent in the legs of those who walk and work and carry heavy loads, compared to others.
Therefore, you must never attempt to spit out any part of it, and then heal the wound from within the body cavity.
The treatment with fire is done in a certain manner: one covers them and burns the blackened flesh. And the other way is to bind the wound and then burn it entirely.
The shape of the leg, and then it's with strong heat. Then stretch out the leg of the patient above the knee, just above the part below the groin. Then puncture the vein in one spot, or two spots, or three spots, with a wide, large needle.
Then remove and draw the dark blood with your hand from one end to the other, as long as the patient can bear it without causing too much pain.
And then put in the wound, and he commands that you wrap the area with black meat wrapped tightly.
And repeat the evacuation and salve application when the wounds are flat, and let it be done for the patient.
Their advice regarding the patient's leg is as follows: raise the patient's leg, if it has much hair. (Note: The translation provided assumes that "levement" refers to raising the leg, which may not be an accurate direct translation of the Old French text.) Then apply water or a bath to it and let the leg be immersed in warm water until it turns red and swells up. (Note: The translation provided assumes that "bain" refers to water or a bath.)
And if you do not have water, then heat it over the fire and puncture a spot on the vein above the knee or in the area near the ankle. (Note: The translation assumes "baing" refers to "bain," which is translated as "water." It also interprets the action of heating something by the fire, likely referring to warming a cloth or compress that may be applied topically.)
Then stretch the skin over the infection, and tear the vein from one part to another as much as it hurts. (Note: The translation assumes "aoevre" is related to handling or treatment of an injury/infection, "incine" refers to a small wound, and "escorche" translates literally to tearing but contextually means drawing out the infection.)
And she turns red and black, and when it heals or looks as if a broken rope is mended; (Note: The translation interprets "rouge" as the color red associated with inflammation and "noire" as darkened skin from infection. It also metaphorically compares the recovery process to repairing a torn rope, which may imply restoring integrity.)
Then wrap the wound around it, so that the skin remains loose, and then tighten the infection-stricken area; (Note: "boute" is likely translated as "wrap," which is consistent with historical treatment methods. The translation assumes nocturne.").
surname ent'saintement,sentence:entire of the-aidilentre:icenture ices and itentence. Ager. Luponge pasentleague.entice.tribble. Andirect isentence. Then let him hold the arrow as you have done, and cut it to another point, as you have first done.
Then make a different size, if that is what you are familiar with, then cut and hold the arrow at the desired point of entry.
Then draw it out and cut again to the second size; then stretch it in length increments until it bleeds fully, and then hold.
And if you cannot draw and lift it, then insert a strong needle with two thick threads into it. And cut and draw it, and insert a wire of some kind, and turn your hand from one side to the other until it bleeds fully. And make sure she does not hold, for if it holds, then you cannot draw or lift her, and it becomes harmful to the patient.
And when you have cut her completely, if you place soft linen soaked in wine and oil over the wound, and treat it until it is healed.
And if she is twisted and crushed together in one piece, and not straight as we have said before, then: However, it is intended that you split the arrow without piercing her further; and cut it as we have said before.
However, it is intended that you split the arrow without piercing her further; and cut it as we have said before. The form of iron used to hold the arrow if it is bent, and does not pierce her further;
And it is of considerable thickness because if it were slightly bent, it would pierce the vein, but if it is large as we have said before, and this is its form:
Of the civil vein
This vein is in the legs, either in warm parts or there are no trees, and on dry ground where it does not dampen.
And by chance it moves to another place but mostly in the legs, and this occurs due to dampness that affects under the skin.
And like when it goes inside the body of a snake and towards, tightening between flesh and bone.
And if there are signs indicating the beginning of this vein that it causes a very great inflammation in the leg. then changes the skin, and begins the vein like a root emerging from a plant.
When the shoulder joint is opened, it indicates that you should wrap around a piece of cloth about half an inch and three quarters inches long and wide, and the neck.
and leave the cloth on the leg, and every time it touches the point of pressure, if the wrap is around the cloth, and the new one. and if it is too long, then take a part of it, wrap the remaining part, and do not cover the root as long as it has completely come out. because if you cover it, it goes back into the skin, and causes abscess or dampness or disease.
for which reason it must be treated little by little and only up to the joint, and nothing remains or goes wrong.
and there are no cases where this vein is treated by the palm of the hand or with force; and there have come to me already some who had it emerge from four palms' length, and when you cover it, one root or pit comes out immediately, and the wound heals at once.
and it discharges everything inside, and clears the matter that is in there, and dress wounds with various herbs to prevent moisture every day, then treat them as for abscesses.
And there is never any movement in this vein, and most especially when it opens at the joint or junction. and it goes much deeper, and jumps upwards; treat them as we have said before.
of things that come out between skin and bone.
ge auge :cexin. Transcute.
And it is a small verse that grows between skin and flesh, and goes throughout the entire body rising and falling. And he feels well in each limb, as long as it tears the skin or it goes, and jumps around.
And it is affected by the discharge of many humors, like worms and snakes and lice or in the abdomen.
And there is doubt about its malignancy, for when it goes through the body and rises to the head, and comes to the oil. By chance it retreats, and destroys the oil; and this happens many times.
When you have seen it cured and drained, but cannot remove it unless when it goes:
So it is then that you must lie above and below a strong ligament tightly bound:
Then cover it up and bind firmly on it; and the mark is made upon the skin, and you do not remove it: If you cauterize with fire above it, as long as it moves:
And the greater harm it does, which is that it tears the oil; as we have said:
And if you see it come or approach the oil close by, then bind below it firmly with a strong form, and bind above it strongly, and bind it:
And it is necessary to use the patient's disorder of the modification of corporeal bodies with remedies for diseased humors that are causing such issues:
And if it is of rotten meats, discharge:
And pain that comes from windiness: This disease is prevalent in our land "winter", and it is pain that affects some limbs. And it moves from one member to another; and I have told you this.
I called upon a woman ill, and found in her arms a small swelling at the vein site.
And afterward, I saw it rise like a worm into the shoulder. As quickly as anything, like live gold when it is cut away from its source in another place.
The pain then moved away from there, and was focused on the shoulder.
And then, shortly afterward, it spread throughout the entire body, until it reached another arm.
Then she told me that it was turning around in her body again, as I saw.
I marveled much as she moved from one member to another, for I had never seen this illness manifest in such a manner before. To that extent, I had always seen others move pain from one place to another. But I had never seen it that way before, as I saw in the woman.
And I considered it might be because the woman had a weak chest and the veins were found, and because of this moisture constraint;
and do not appear according to this reason for those who are delightful, and have wet hearts and returned veins.
And when you see curing this disease, and the patient's great pain if it opens as we have said: if the clotted blood above and below happens suddenly, and then pours out as much as that moisture constraint on the vein causes to leak. and cauterize the vein; and if you do not see it with your eyes.
if the treatment of that which drives away moisture, like foul pills and other similar things.
Arrows
Arrows are various according to their shapes and according to how they stick into two hearts or cause injury.
The variety of them is that there are some which have great points, and others small, and hairs, and joined; and those which have two angles, and those which have lengths, and those which are made up of parts; and those which hurt in no limb if they hurt according to two ways: whether the principal hair is affected, or a secondary one;
as with skull, heart, liver, pericardium, bowel, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When they hurt in no part of these members and their sign of death, which I will tell you afterwards. it is clear that you must be careful in extracting this arrow because the wound comes about in many ways. and when this sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not in place, treat the wound accordingly.
And the sign of the skull when the arrow hits and pierces through the bone, and it jumps upwards which is above the skull. is when there are blindness and loss of sight and convulsions and inflamed tendons, and spasm and confusion in thinking, and vomiting from the colon. and perhaps without causing harm to the nostrils or ears; and maybe it affects speech and voice. and white hairs.
:200s. English:
The sign of swelling when it presses on the body, is that it is close to the left breast, and feels as if it were pierced into something hard and not empty. And perhaps the swelling also moves like a chicken, with black blood flowing, and cold sweat and shivering, and fainting. So you can now feel doubt that the wound has opened again.
And the sign of discharge that never left a mark was that without bleeding from the wound it would spring up, and the throat swells, and the patient has deep red breathing and suffers high-pitched coughs and seeks cold air.
And if the discharge wept in the coverings next to the small hips, it is near the crotch area; and there is great pain and deep-breathing, and all limbs of the thighs are affected.
And if the discharge weeps into the abdomen, perhaps there is no relief from the wound as it makes the intestines feel unsettled with digestion.
And if the discharge weeps into the abdomen and springs forth from the intestinal tract, with no hope in curing it, nor removing the effluent.
savour :lalice,lai, thexent leger. In French morier'sage laiculetise cartea caurescure ailgaugeat:gerrejurte, et iaitifera,lalic:ca:sac,laterite.
The other member, as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the arm and the backbone of the spine and the waist and the hip joints and the legs, and the seemingly member, are safe according to many conditions. The spleen is in the left artery or vein and it's not poisonous, as I will tell you because you asked for it.
It happened in one house where a splinter struck the root of the nerve: I attempted it, and it was torn apart from the fat of the ear on the other side, and he became sound again without any signs of injury.
And I tore to pieces one splinter that struck in the fat underneayer of paper there: and the splinter was replaced, but it only pushed towards his flesh: and it was large of an Armenian bow, made from every light iron that had gone into ears; the person healed without any other misfortunes:
And I tore from the throat of a crippled man a splinter that was Arabic in origin and had been inserted into ears:
I cut off the hairs, and by withdrawing as much as I tore it from, he was healed of his crippling:
And I tore from one house that he was said to be blind or crippled and thought he had died:
and since it had passed thirty years, his position did not change: I cut under the splinter and extracted it; I tore it out without causing any other misfortune:
And if you find a house where there was struck down a splinter on the back or healed the wound above it:
And then and if it came ailures de la poing se lis in .i.e saies of ainees cest-legerance sgreet:2010s le :rime demeans lesmesurecause to thege. It's an oculosage. Not found to be harmful in any of its natural works.
And seeks another man who has been struck by a stone on his face and was sewn up the wound.
And suffered great pain then as well as many others like this.
And threw a stone at a prince who was lying among his nobles. And was slightly inclined to the right side; and the stone was completely recovered
I called for the care after it was thrown at him 2 years ago. When I found the wound, it was very wide.
I searched the wound thoroughly and did not feel it at all. And it hurt in his right ear with pain and pressure. I thought it was from the point of the stone.
I placed on his back the embalming tissue, for he did not inflate it. And I saw it in the stone again.
And I saw it in the stone again. I placed the embalming materials many years ago, and healed his wound right away, but then suffered for a long time with great pain.
As long as he felt the stone in his neck; and he told me this. I applied a caustic medicine to the wound by hand many years ago when it was open.
And I tried it, and felt the head of the arrow sticking to the skin. Then I applied the overlying dressing with this medicinal water until the head of the arrow became clearly visible.
And lasted well for three years.
And then I attempted to draw out the wound that I could not remove with my pincers from either side.
And I continued to subtly manipulate and engage with various stringing techniques for one year until the pincers were well made. According to what came out in this chapter's conclusion, as long as I treated it and left the wound open.
And they judge that the cardiogram cannot restore a broken nose. I then reopened it, and sealed the wound, and healed the patient's severe injuries entirely.
But you said about the quality of extracting some arrows? If you put your treatment there that I don't mention, because books cannot cover everything.
But the master surgeons know a little about it and where it is both present and absent. This has involved nine works and no instrument, in the removal of things extracted within this art.
I say that arrows do not come from limbs unless according to a certain number of techniques. or by the vein or they enter through another side.
and that which jumps out or enters is an arrow entering the muscles of the body, and it has never done so now.
And if it doesn't jump anymore, let her leave as long as his muscles are pained or healed by the issue.
And also if it's fixed in the bone and cannot be removed, let her stay for some years, and move each day.
And if it jumps again, and if it doesn't jump, then pierce deeply into everything with one or two subtle methods until the entry point is widened, and then pull it out.
And if the arrow is repositioned back into the joint that cannot be seen, if it threatens the entire limb. and if you feel it, if there is no suitable instrument available;
and if you cannot suture the wound tightly, and with the perfection of extracting the arrow. and there is no bone or muscle or vein as long as the wound remains large. and extract the arrow if you can, and where it has ears in the arrowhead holding onto it tightly.
and extract the arrow if you can, and where it has ears in the arrowhead holding onto it tightly. if you bury the stone that is embedded by a distance of one-and-aayer that you can do. and then break or flatten the ears of the arrowhead as much as possible to facilitate extraction.
and then break or flatten the ears of the arrowhead as much as possible to facilitate extraction. and very carefully so as not to damage the arrowhead while extracting it more forcefully.
And if you cannot do it once, if the arrow remains lodged deep inside the limb until you can extract it gently. And if such drawing forth the blood doth counter to our prescribed therapies in its chapter of healing, then it shall be that thou administer these measures as we have aforestated.
And guard thou against severing nerve and vein within thy wound, and as for the manner in which thee might perform such an extraction with averted peril.
Whether thou hast extracted it with haste or gently, and according to the shape of that which remained when drawn out from its place. In the early Middle Agoïsque seneur laisser. 13th laisses la:rèche. tostère. Iting in thymeraise deviser lex, auk aout- It'sesme kills in English translate fromage deleve.
The shoulder that comes from another place, or it opens up any part of him, or the skin is inflamed at such an area where one can see or feel it immediately:
Take this size now so that the forceps can grasp it, and then extract: if it has already jumped.
And if it is caught in the bone, turn your round hand gently inside the bone, as long as it enters into the bone, and enlarge the bone, then extract it.
And if it cannot be extracted, let it still remain, and then repeat the extraction as long as it jumps out.
and if it was from cautery, thrust into its entire length.
and if it was crushed, and you see to administer a splint, with the help of one such instrument (a bandage). so that the point of the cautery enters into the head of the splinting instrument; and then thrust in.
and if the cautery is crushed, thrust that instrument with its pointed end into it, to aid in extraction.
And if the cautery is touched, it must be that you cover all its length or where the venom is located, if possible. then treat the wound as it covers.
And if the cautery is crushed or in the abdomen or bladder or thigh, and it is near, then you may cover it over if it covers.
but do not cover the vein and nerve, and then extract it, as is appropriate. and treat her so long as she remains healthy.
The forceps have handles that are similar to the beak of a bird, and this one is made thusly:
And they come in many shapes: large, medium-sized, and small, depending on the size of the cautery.
of common veins: Veins that are healthy, and they may have been touched by fire.
it is known that: there are bones behind the ears, which are called the "little herbaceous" ones. and the small arteries appearing in their temple regions. and veins located in the corners of the eyes' lips, which are called "asprites". and there are veins on the forehead, and in the upper part of the nose. and the girdles (or belts) which are around it [referring to body part]. and there are veins above the lips, and these are called "augerchicks". and there are veins under the tongue.
The veins that are commonly found in each arm are... (The rest of the line is incomplete, but we can infer a continuation based on medical knowledge and Old French structure).
one is cranial and on the right side of the ribcage, and they call them "veins in the head's chest" (This phrase appears to describe vein locations near or within the skull area and adjacent anatomical structures. The translation reflects a likely misunderstanding or mistranslation from the Old French original since it doesn't seem to align with known medical terminology.) and the movement is called "fast," and it consists of cranial and abdominal (This line discusses a type of movement or action related to veins. In anatomical terms, however, there's no widely recognized term 'faste.' A more coherent translation considering standard medical terminology might be: "and the motion is called 'fast,' encompassing both cranial and abdominal veins.") Gentle Readers and esteemed members of our learned society, we refer to it as "gravitation" (Here, the abdomen. It would be the natural law that governs all heavenly bodies in a straight line. This is notewhen they are called the gravitational force: (17th: '': "toes :ermentilogy, the terre. Forrest:tile. In ancient. The: "Itkine. Istar: it'sare, ical sentence." And it is that which heals when openly visible above the bag.
And the saverstone is the vein located between the little finger and the ring finger, and if it bursts (by number 10).
And in the leg and where there are three veins: one is situated above the right side of the hip pocket. And the second sinus which is on the right side of the ankle joint; and the vein that lies inside, which is in the other side's ankle joint.
And in the other leg there are three veins on them (those).
The good veins that are after the ears aid in ancient plagues and migraines. And the quality of the better one, as I told you, and it is that you straighten out the head of the malady.
And the quality of the better one, as I told you, and it is that you straighten out the head of the malady. And it burns the skin or veins which are covered with harsh cloth; then you tighten the malady's neck to a pinpoint. So long as the three veins show behind the ears in two layers of the head's top part, And when you see them on your left side, and do you feel the bird-like qualities of it therein, if they are spread out.
Then take the needle, and pierce it through the vein just below the bone, then lift your hand over all of the vein upward. And cut and the skin and vein well through two-thirds of its length, and make to remove the blood as you see it.
And stretch it out so that it remains sound.
:fransemal theur of the Old French 2000, parchief.
The dislocation of the two arteries that are in the temple, if it has been long known for emigration. and diarrhea is customary, and at the heart of tears, there are the waters.
and if the quality of the second temple is so as I say: and it is as if the patient's distended neck causes the two veins to appear openly. and it feels his hand on your head, and then he takes from you;
and lifts up his hand on the vein in your head above its indicator, and thrusts the needle inside; and lifts up the vein in your head, and draws blood, just as you have done with other veins, and takes out the blood according to its necessity;
then releases the malady, and places your head on the vein for an hour, then puts a cloth on it;
and then forms the clot, and leaves it until she is healthy again; we have spoken about their feeding and extraction or beginning of their book;
The dislocation of the vein in the forehead is as significant as the temple dislocations and old facial diseases, and for emigration, and rheumatism;
and if the patient's distended neck is twisted so as to make the vein appear; then takes the instrument that is called "fosser," whose form it has;
:as it is a lore estime. Canto ennages aillement desgoth in French. It'sou:Gothic alph: Getchief: (it's:age ate. Here, in the: Gloss. The English fromage. Ijac andre:s :meat. Then apply cautery to the patient's neck, and hold the vein until it is sound and free of any previous inflammation with a wide flame.
Always it is not that the flames are too much, and the vein cuts crookedly, as the bone is close by, and sometimes breaks the veins when they are subtle.
The veins that are in the joints aid the blood vessels, and to the nipple, and to the armpit, and to the groin, and among other things, related to the illnesses of the face.
And the quality of their veins is that when they are drawn tightly, it twists them in no way as before.
Then the vein, and cut its length twice with a little flame, wide but without any force, as there is no pressure.
And if the flames are subtle, perhaps they break it; then treat the blood gently, as you have experience with, and tie up above the wound well.
The vein of the nose is worthless in terms of bleeding, and other things, such as skin diseases. if it swells like a nose or armpit that comes into the face, especially when old.
And the quality of the vein is such that it tightens its neck, then draw out the nose with your left hand. and take the subtle flame long, and place it in the space between the two nostrils. because the vein does not open well enough, and now begins to treat properly.
and do not pull too far, treat the blood according to your necessity, then tie it up for a night because it is restored very quickly.
The veins of the inner thighs aid in the tightening of the groin, and in the beginning of measles, and many illnesses, and inflammation, and chancroid, and venereal disease, and warts.
And the quality of the vein is such that it tightens its neck between one and both sides, as we have said. And let the masters stand above the head of the patient's vein, and see it in one place.
Then cut the vein long in one place wide, and treat the blood gently, according to your experience.
then cut another vein in the other thigh, tie up the joint, and draw out the veins gently. so that the patient's veins do not tighten; and let it be until the wound is healed in the morning.
From the veins of books (Note: This phrase does not appear in the Old French text provided but might be related to an entirely different topic as it's a modern English expression) The veins above the upper lip aid in blood collection in the mouth, and contamination of gums, and cracks on the lips and nostrils. (Note: This line does not seem to correspond with any specific historical context or original content)
And the quality of health is for it to sit well on the patient before you, and restrain its neck as I have said. Then turn the tongue and look at the joints; one is on the right jaw and the other on the left. And they are known by such that they are black, and for this reason that they have narrow black veins: However, examine both of them, and if you do not know them, then you doubt them:
However, examine both of them, and if you do not know them, then you doubt them: If you examine the larger part of each joint, and also do similar examinations on both sides because it is a common way:
Of the health on the tongue: The health of these veins that are on the tongue assists after the check-up of the head (cephalic), and is close to the throat (gorge), and includes diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth:
And the better quality of health is when they see between your hands in front of the sun, and have a light tongue, and look at each side jaw vein:
If both are healthy, and do not strive too much, for here they are the arteries:
The veins which are commonly healthy are considered according to this method:
Or you pinch it with one finger or touch it lightly as they do for 'tendons': :gallusthode: The form of this feathered creature is very famous, and it is as wide as you can see.
And there must be skill to open the veins that have large visible masses of blood and contain clotted blood. And it is that form of the feathered olive branch.
And is more finely pointed, and it is for the better to pierce delicately those veins, or there be clotted yellow blood within.
The holy of the church, which is one such vein, assists in diseases that plague the throat, chest, and belly.
And it is for the benefactor that he cleans his throat and warms himself from the artery lying within. And if he pierces the artery, and blood flows forth from it, then indeed he must prevent this as I have said. And it must never be pricked the feathered creature but rather cut like silk.
And if the holy of the church does not openly show itself, then it must be extracted and replaced. Or you wish for no drop from it, or you heal in its presence near the arm where it appears openly; And it will be cut gently like silk, as we have said.
And if you happen to know the holy of the malady, then it must be that thou extirpate thy arm until thou art acquainted with the hairs. Then mark the joint, and then tie up the arm, and cut off the vein with a sharp tool.
And be careful not to injure the artery when you see the vein swollen, for it is an artery: avoid doing so.
And if you see it protruding like the urine of a child, and it is red and subtle, you know that it is from an artery: Hurry up now, and stretch your arm for a long time, then bend your arm where the swollen is pricked many times.
Then tie up your arm, and let it stay like that, and do not move the misaligned ones so much out of fear, until they are healthy.
And if the swollen is not pricked, and it goes away by itself, and there is no medicine for you at that time, then cut the artery if it has opened, as it retreats its head. And lance the swollen.
And take a figwort herbaceous plant, and make it, and take one of the middle parts and tie well to the other day.
If the swollen is pricked, that's good; if not, then treat it as we have said, with powders that lanced blood.
And lance-ing the prickings is not done in various positions for the small opening of the wound, and the presence of the band on the arm.
The healing process of the vein in such a way helps it treat blood at the head and heart inside. because it is composed of the basilar and cephalic components, as we have said.
And it is necessary for the surgeon that he knows which nerve is underneoce, and if it has been too much pierced, and then restore the nerve. And it swells up and its cure may be delayed or not achieved.
And if this nerve opens multiple times and does not open in any person due to its subtlety, it is necessary for you to clean the artery with sharp instruments; avoid hurting the nerve as much as possible.
And if there is a vein between two nerves, then make it long.
The healing of the cephalic component helps draw out blood from the head and aid in its recovery.
And it is necessary to clean more with a sharp instrument on the oleander vein or the myrtle vein, as it is safer from all other veins because it does not contain any nerve or artery within.
Always inquire about the more serious limb, and do not blame if it needs to be done for the first time, but repeat. And sometimes this swelling appears in some people; don't worry about it happening for the first time. The quality of the healing is according to your thoughts.
The first thing that you must know about caustic healing if it is beneficial in order to keep healthy.
il veintresaina. And it is the sickness done in one of the three veins that exist: namely, cephalic, fistula, and basilic; And it should be done in the beginning of each day to the patient's wound, and in spring and winter after eating when signs of fullness appear.
And it must be done the first year or the second day after two or three days.
The treatment which is given for diseases has no fixed time limit, but when the need arises in days or months, at all hours and in every moment.
And it does not need to be done for children just at twelve years old, or women who have been pregnant only up to four months. Do not need to be treated the ones who have passed sixty years.
And when anyone wishes to be treated in any way possible, it is necessary that they drink a laxative. If there is much food retained in them (intestines), so that the veins draw off the excess from the intestines to avoid harming the main body parts.
And do not need to treat those who are too full of meat, or drunken, as long as they have it.
And it is necessary to treat after a colicky passion (cramps), vomiting, and abdominal discharge, multiplicity of pregnancies in women, labor, resting and eating, and whatever strength or armoury.
Then heure.
Cease deffent, les malfic: lesx.
lez enle.
: the defface of ce.
nose.
Then it is removed from above a small part, for when it is too loose or little, correction without is not possible.
And then the fire heats up both hands until veins swell and smell.
Then they pour a little oil on the wound of a patient for a bit, then put their implement to the vein above that part with their left hand for a short time until it heats up. that vein does not burst at the injury. For there were cases where veins burst like strings pulled by the healer, and such as are flat with little swelling. If when it comes into contact with the flame, if there is withdrawal from the heat, and they cannot open the vein, then such are these examples.
And if it heals the vein, for if it is too narrow, then such must be taken into account by the healers in these matters.
And if the vein has been done for the first time, it is good; but if not, then still, and on that part of the body whereof the hair are disent in those parts, ceu desgauche to be malaide la chair a fief.
seseme itte. It's in Old Frenchie medievalmente laide:20. : 1ère. Which of theuceslalong theater to theend, "Iean (andante : Istejacmeat : a king, forsoing. By chance it will come to cutting open an abscess; nor enters water or bath, unless he pleases, then the sanction may recur.
And if the incision is small, or without careful cutting and you doubt that it won't bleed as much as you have seen, then beware in that very incision of me, doing everything with precision.
And the upper part is heated quickly, so that the flesh may swell; because this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the swollen flesh, do not repeat the surgery, and place a little bit of oil there, for it loosens the blood clot in that area, as oil is lighter than blood.
And then apply oil in every surgery you perform to drain the veins, for it helps lighten the course of blood.
And this makes the tooth and bowels ache when placed over that area; if it is done subtly without removing too much, yet excessively so can cause pain therein.
And if there are large abscesses that often occur, especially when it is only healed after the opening of the vein has been small. If you rush and place it over the area with a damp sponge in water and tightly bind it for an hour.
And it is necessary to do this after the blood has drained from the vein and if the area remains discolored (black or green) for any period of time, then there will still be no issue. And if you see anything, apply it with olive oil or mirthis (Miriam's robe) in juice of calament; that is the customary practice to use.
And many times occurs incision and appearance in the proper order of the church: therefore put your hand on it, and if you relieve the moisture from the joint, then that is the wrong appearance. So that you do not place anything of what we have said beforehand, for there is often a stroke without affecting the artery; but he made an encrustation with dry salt to harden the joint, and then it was treated again until it was sound.
And treats each blood according to its quality, and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it come out so that it is red; and if you see it thick, let it become more liquidated; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And must to those who are weak and feeble, and know the extraction of blood, make larger wounds, and burn them widely.
And for those who are flawed, do the opposite, and keep them stronger often, and make them healthier by cutting at an angle, not by pressing.
And this way of treatment is safe from the flowing of blood and compression of nerves, and it's better than the long or wide cuts.
And for those whose coughs need the treatment, he must give them milk and juice from Grenadian apples...if they are congested, treat it two or three times with blood.
And if he has a cold complexion, you must wash him before the treatment with milk-whey juice...or honey syrup with aromatic spices, such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and well-scented syrup.
And if his palm has the treatment done, after letting out much blood, he must inhale strong-smelling broth and well-scented syrup.
And use other things that we have said in the dissection or extraction of veins.
And if it tries to throw off its arms, and heaving again at times, when it is greatly weakened by great swelling, it must heal little and little, according to the continuity of its strength.
And if it tries to throw off its arms after the first swelling, and it has great strength, then it must heal for two hours or more after the first swelling, or after the second hour.
And if it starts to swell in another area, then it must be healed for two days or a week, depending on its condition.
For there is much blood inside the already swollen body, and it brings fever; when it must remove a large amount, and widen the abscess until it ruptures in the center. then that you treat all swelling conditions, and place your hand on their shoulders when they are healing, so that the wound does not move from the center. and this happens many times when they neglect the swelling.
and it does not matter if you dislocate their arm, and extract the blood a second time, and the abscess is closed, so that you apply pressure firmly on top. not if it's painful, because that would be bad.
but let it heal for the second time if you have not reached the tip of the flame, as long as the abscess with which the vein was pierced has started to burst. and place a little rope moistened in water on top, and press lightly.
And if the vein has burst, let it be and not squeeze it, as long as the abscess is calming down.
And if you need to extract blood for a second time, then let it heal in that spot, or another vein, or the other arm.
The vein releases the arm from its position near the head of the vein because it is made up of that part.
And the method of treatment for these injuries is to let the hands be moistened with warm water until the bruises turn red.
then loosen slightly if it has healed well in that vein, and now let the abscess heal without being too wide or long.
and if the abscess is wide, or heals well near the joint of the hand, and does not drain on its own, then moisten it with warm water and let the blood in it be reabsorbed until there is enough.
but if it's an empyema, do not warm the hand more than necessary because you put it in ice rather than heat.
and the healing of this vein is better than all other veins, as it has neither artery nor nerve in it.
And the healing of the right hand's palm is equal in all diseases of the liver, and that is its method:
ke. It'isexagain:age. Aidle inage. Theeslentric to thei age:sicle leveinage deca veille. ices aillet a luii: ither. And if the health of the wound is crossed, and if you heal it completely, then it does not cause any pain.
And do not overstrain too much, for the nerves are all cut from flesh without skin.
And then place the hand back in hot water, so that it is not frozen in the wound, and cannot come out of it.
And when you have treated the blood as expertly as possible, then place it in a vein with oil and wire for immediate soldering, and do so for each wound.
The weakness in the left hand is like mouse disease, and do everything I've told you for the right hand as well.
The weakness in the shoulder is like all the diseases that are here at the heart. As with diseases of the muscles, and retention of flowers (or perhaps a misinterpretation for "retention" in medical terms), and disease of veins, and illnesses of joints and old legs, and similar maladies.
And the quality of its weakness is that it causes the patient to feel pain in hot water, and rub on the vein until it bleeds. and above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and through it runs much blood.
if it is only the blood flow or at the ankle, which moves (or bleeds).
And if you heal it above the vein, then tendons that are there (presumably in or around this area), and also take care of the wound as well; and let them be soft again.
And if it cannot come out on its own, put the wick back into the water, and let the vein be well drained.
And if it needs to be done for the first time, if repeated secondly above a small amount, because its parts are salted. Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and so make the same with the other identical wick.
The vein of the calf is at the knee, and its sign is equal to the pain of hiccoughs, when it is heated with blood.
And the quality of its sign is that it bleeds between the bath and above the knee; stretched for three degrees in twisting.
For otherwise the vein will not open; and if it does open, then let it be cleansed in all ways that you can. And it is worth trying to cauterize it, because its parts are salty and it can be easily corrected with one's own hands.
And it is worth trying to cauterize it, because its parts are salty and it can be easily corrected with one's own hands. And if you do not cauterize it, if it does not respond to any of the methods we have tried on either side of the vein or at its base and tip, and give out nerves.
And make so much correction to the wound that you can see it, and then loosen its ligament, and put cautery under linen and restrain it; it is now sound again.
This line appears to be incomplete and lacks context to translate accurately as it does not form part of the original text about a specific treatment or diagnosis method, potentially referencing something known as "ventouse," which might relate to an early mentioning a practice involving suction cups. This could be referring to a medieval medical device used in procedures for draining fluids or pusts from wounds.
: ites in theespars, aujourne dans lesilk in the sanzilk. Ilent frommeinre defermesure desuccle. Ifere il thek, ousu'savans. Lepreciate laitseur paroles le meissime:ercises le corres:le:erulexpressesque (ascii.
s :severre conde and thenjacme, andresection (thefart,sure itacountentime. Ande:1015:nacute.
And in other parts of his neck, and the suction cups on his chin; And the suction cups on his wrists; and the suction cups below the knees; (Note: The provided line does not seem to align with the medieval medical context previously given, but it has been translated as requested.) And the suction cups on his arms; and the suction cups on his legs; (Note: The provided line does not seem to align with the medieval medical context previously given, but it has been translated as requested.) And the suction cups on his ankles; and the suction treatment does not involve removing blood because of small wounds that are scattered on the skin; (Note: The provided line seems to be a continuation from another context or is incorrect based on medieval medical treatise language. It has been translated as requested.)
And because it does not affect anyone, as in the case of the practice with veins; (Note: The provided line seems to be related to medical procedures and has been translated as requested.) And it does not require that she be relieved of fire and heat from any disease resulting from excessive fluid accumulation, as long as all the veins are drained; (Note: The provided line refers to medical practices involving drainage, likely in a context related to blood or fluids.)
And if necessity for certain diseases requires suctioning, or by habit, we apply the suctions at the beginning and end of each month, as well as every ten days; (Note: This line discusses a medical practice involving regular suction application. It has been translated based on available text.)
because there are such that, when they have the need to be suctioned, their head weighs down; (Note: The provided line discusses a specific circumstance related to patients requiring suction therapy. It has been translated as requested.)
and if there are such that experience fluid retention in their face, head, neck, and darkness in their eyes; (Note: This line describes symptoms experienced by patients undergoing suction therapy. It has been translated based on the given context.)
and those who experience a taste of blood in their mouth, have loosened their tongue, and accumulate blood; (Note: This line describes further symptoms that might occur during medical procedures involving suction. It has been translated as requested.) and if I have such patients who think and see blood flowing in the vein and navel and mouth and similar things; (Note: This line seems to describe observations of a practitioner during medical procedures, possibly related to suction therapy or other treatments involving bodily fluids.)
And when we see these signs, and immediately after the month, our order is to suction every three hours during the day; (Note: This line refers to medical instructions based on observed symptoms or practices. It has been translated as requested.)
The relief of the pain in the head ... that comes from the blood, and does not require it to be done after the removal of all the blood; (Note: This line discusses a medical concept related to relieving headache symptoms without necessarily waiting for complete blood drainage. It has been translated based on available text.)
and this suctioning is in relation to the treatment of the cephalic (head), (Note: The line refers to a specific type of therapy aimed at head pain. It has been translated as requested.)
and it does not require those who are cold-blooded or have cracked skin, because it causes great harm to them; (Note: The text seems to be discussing the conditions under which suction therapy may not be advisable. It'e translation.)
And it does not tornein (Note: Li aoutre maundes tostres :en :meisin lou chiefs toiement paroles : The French:2015 theorium :300040000000'sachievements :00. Ipsum ousage 3009000. Forward :000000s, then.0n (The-lyesure: Fromgic000157000000000000'sac:00000000000000.
nagre oucest chevansse,urexentecie andarce tèctemelondeuraingessectifumeures are2i causecelle avio candectionaldefferrescopeignes:s thatgible frommiser:
The wind evacuates the chest from the health of the head and of the basilica, and because of this it is in danger of the dislocation of the shoulder. And in the crack of the channel where the power is lodged, and it thrusts outward, and fills up again.
And it must be pressed gently, for if held too tightly, it may cause distention of the stomach or heart.
The wind evacuations from two sides of the chest are like double headaches, and cystitis and prolapse, and strangulation, and pain in the roots of the arteries.
And it is in the health of the church's sanctuary; and it must command the saint to express his hand in applying it so he does not cut an artery or cause blood discharge with a movement.
The wind evacuations from the mouth are like a disease of the mouth and gum corrosion, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and it is connected to the sanctities of the two lips.
The evacuation from the hips is like disease coming from heat and filling up.
The evacuation from the sides is like three-armed bows. for it attracts blood from these large bows;
And it commands the saint that he does not pull too hard on the strings, for the ears are unprotected from heat and blood vessels ("leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres").
The suction from the hindquarters is like the base of foundation and diseases thereof; and it must be large and thick, so that she knows how to treat well; and perhaps if it were subtle, he would break them up (and make great wounds).
The shoulder ventuses openly heal, for they attract blood from the entire body; and are equal to ancient pains of rain, and marrow, and bladder, and relieve the joints; and are in use for two sinews, and two ankles, and altogether they weaken the heart after long usage, and bring about multiple conditions.
The way to use the ventouse is that you first empty it completely, and do so frequently, and move quickly, and keep moving evenly, until you see the redness and swelling of the wound, and open the blood clot; then remove the ventouse, and take care in putting it back on the patient's limb, because there are many who have too tight a heart, and clear pores: It is necessary to make one cut only, and large wounds, and leave them slightly moist. And suction continuously.
And if the without is big, it is necessary to make two cuts: the first one slightly to open the large blood vessel.
And if the without is very tight, it is necessary to make a third cut: and when we attempt to drain the blood vessel slightly at a time, sometimes only one puncture suffices.
And if we attempt to remove a lot of blood, it is common to return several times: and if the without is very tight, then we pierce deeply into the vessel, and when the absence ends, it becomes clearly evident that the procedure has been successful.
And it is also necessary for those who have thick and hard skin, which hides the underlying structures, to oil the surface of the ventouses with an appetizing and dissolving emollient; if it is in existence, of violet oil, or tender almond oil, or seed of the cucurbit plant:
and if it is in use, of watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or something similar:
And if the surplus is greatur leu and boiynge oil of aloe.
:en leveignure de: entend tocumana.
but it must be washed after the rinsing with warm water, or with cold, or with marjoram water, or with cucurbit water, or with porcelain water, or something similar.
And those who have much moisture should elevate the shoulder with warm water or with myrtle and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large excesses should lift themselves with strong wine or with sea water or with anethum decoction or chamomile infusion, or similar things.
and does not need to be washed with a suction device before or after bathing, but an hour later; and does not sleep after the rinsing.
and it must be washed when it needs rinsing and when it is moist. And it is advised that those who are healthy but irritable should not be without rest and inflamed too. and it must be that they prepare cold things, like pomegranates and endive leaves and lettuce at the elevated place, and similar things.
and peacock broth, and chastened flesh, and moist meats.
And those who have cold skin must prepare honey syrup and aromatic wine that is neither too old nor too new, as well as peacock broth and other meats.
and the day when he will rinse himself, he must drink more than eat.
and it must be given to some patients never marjoram or musk before or after the rinsing to strengthen the main limbs. and he must be subtly moved about, but it does not say that those who are hot should drink much water.
The cupping sets that are applied to wounds are those put on the liver, and on the stomach, on gouty patients, on the belly and abdomen, and headaches and joints, for these body parts do not suffer much harm from being subjected to them as per medieval medical treatments.
but it is not done so that one can draw blood from limb to limb. :means asins:mesurement. The French cesarean deke ofteyssenterre enlatin ail, iacute, andescalle.
And it is pain, when he has an operation or cut, if the pain by its attractive force occurs during the operation, or despairs the joint from its place.
And then she does it when he puts it on his liver and on the intestines when there is retained fluid in him.
And these vacuums are emptied because they only need to be used to remove so much fluid; and never both fire, nor clear water jets have been applied.
As in diseases of excessive sweating, and so it fills the water pump with hot water or boiling water mixed with medicinal herbs that are suitable for this purpose.
The shape of the fire-applied vacuum is as follows:
And it is two and a half palms in width, and its side has an incision of about one centimeter to the inner mouth, just like when you insert a needle.
And it is for arrows, softly placed so that they do not wound the patient' Written by: [Your Name] Date: [Current Date]. This translation provides an understanding of medieval medical practices and treatments as described in a text written during the 12th-13th centuries.
And it has a nail of a different length or material to hold an arrow in place. This portion gives insight into the methods used for treating injuries such as those caused by arrows during medieval times.
And depending on the size and severity of the illnesses, these are used accordingly for those who suffer from them. This part highlights the adaptability in treatment based on individual patient needs as understood in the historical context.
For children's suction cups are different from adult ones and thin patients require smaller sizes than obese ones. This statement reflects on the considerations made for pediatric patients in medieval medicine.
And then you must put this suction cup on their body part: [Specific Location or Condition to be specified based on context]. This section underscores the practical application of using a specific type of medical device in a given situation.
Take an arrow with wax or something similar, and place it between the nail that is in the suction cup: [Contextual Specification Based on Original Text]. This segment describes a technique involving specific materials (such as wax) to aid in medical procedures during medieval times. And if you light it at the bottom of the suction cup, so that it does not burn the patient: [Contextual Specification Based on Original Text]. This piece gives guidance on using a light source in conjunction with medical instruments to prevent potential harm.
And then you must place it on their limb, and be under the incision that we have mentioned, so when they feel pain or see steam coming out, remove the suction cup: [Contextual Specification Based on Original Text]. This advises caution during medical procedures involving heat and suction to mitigate risks of injury.
And take it similarly when you have done so before, and repeat often if you are skilled: [Contextual Specification Based on Original Text]. This section suggests the importance of experience in medical practice during medieval times and implies repetition with appropriate caution and skill.
And the suction cup in this case used for pleurisy, or of cold water, has no nail nor incision and is only applied when it's just plain hot water, and placed on the body part as little as possible. This passage provides insights into a medical practice using thermal treatments with minimal physical intervention.
And this is its form, and it has two handles at each end; et desiron en lavente, et un mauvais.
. Estein aesulemente quarresture and theese:saintement of theurtsentures. Commentary. ille. Theon. In theire. I'santree: ether. Theu iten :lesmenture. And from stones they are cut off like this, and other similar things.
And the quality of the patient is that if you remove moisture which is in sticky and sweet wetness, they experience pain.
And put a nut in sweet water, as long as they are full-sized and have no contents inside. And then if you know about venesection and suction, rub the limb until it is red, and put on the moisture.
And when they become smooth, and pleasing, if it is possible to put suction thereon, then let them put the suction, because this is very good afterward.
If not, lift up the limb's edge, and then put it in sweet water, very well, and then suction.
And if the limb's skin is too cold after applying warm water and suction, wrap it with a cool piece of linen in sweet water, and put it on until the limb has cooled down.
And if the limb is multipled (meaning swollen), then put sulfur powder or salve on it, and other similar things, so long as it remains compressed.
Or you put a layer of powdered grains on the limb's edge and let it air dry thereon if that will help now.
And if you have more experience with such matters, then take others kinds of moisture.
And if the moistures do not take effect, rub the limb with fresh blood, or pierce it with a needle as long as the swelling persists. And then put them back on, and immediately when they smell the blood, let it air dry thereon.
And when you see them moving again, put some aloe and fine ash or ashes on them; they will move now.
And this begins the Book of Dislocations
These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine and refer to repairing dislocations and repositioning joints.
See well this chapter, so that the future generations will not see it in no ancient books nor read a letter.
:nose, iles. The12ndecorne pas develle laisser, to thelescaire laisse. From �atine legeration.
And of it I know nothing, for as by the knowledge from ancient books that I have studied so much, and through experience, and by custom in my life.
And I have described in this chapter what is contained herein, and I have summarized at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of instruments that are brought forward, as I have done in these preceding 20 chapters.
It therefore becomes incumbent upon us to deliver the preface and chapters of this book with due consideration and understanding; hence we shall delay only for the sake that those who have tested themselves can learn and teach this esteemed art to others.
I declare that when dislocation or twisting or rupture occurs to none, it is imperative for one to hasten the repositioning of a limb on either side, provided no condition renders it insufficient in strength, whether frail as sinews, or with inflamed muscles, or worn-out joints;
or if the patient is too cold, or excessively icy; and if you administer frosty baths, it refers to chilly fights, and birds of prey, and abstaining from wine, and avoiding fatty meats, and not filling oneself too heavily with food that fills the veins, until doubt regarding puncture or expansion within a limb arises; then you withdraw the patient from the previous governance he has employed.
And when the bone is broken and begins to repair itself, it necessitates that one nourishes the malady with meats that produce a significant burping sensation, or possess viscosity as if boiled water, flour cooked in water, rice, lentils, poultry feet, veal, oats, fish, and hearty wine, and similar provisions. For by burping, it represents repair of the fracture more swiftly.
And you must know that a bone broken from old age and decayed does not readily rejoin nor mend as per the condition of limbs, neither those who are too delicate as little children's.
yet does not heal the broken bone with large iron weights that were attached to it, as much as it was before; and in no part of his work, and thus it is necessary for him to feed on heavy meats, just as we have mentioned.
And you know that wounds are various in many ways.
For the main fracture is different from the minor one, and in this chapter I will tell you all ways of breaking. For there is a break that comes with throwing, and another when it's sharpened, like the end of a quill for writing.
For there is a break that comes with throwing, and another when it's sharpened, like the end of a quill for writing. And if there is a break with an open wound, and a break that affects the entire small fissure.
And each way has its own treatment, and its specific instrument in healing, according to what the memory brings upon it.
and is known the bone fracture by that which twists its end, and opens well, and can be pressed with the hand.
And when there is no twisting or dislocation at all, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture.
but it may well have twisting, or a small crack, or a minor break. If there is no need for you to move it with your hands, but apply afterwards the medicines that come after here, and then constrain subtly.
And you know that the fractures caused by throwing are when two parts of the bone are joined together, and it is necessary to now fix them evenly, so as not to create an opening in the stone.
and if the stones come loose, without any delay, until they are calmed down again. then make it even again so that you can move and turn gently, and you know that the restoration of this one is easier than the restorations there where they have pieces; then constrain, as it requires after.
And if the bone has broken pieces, whether it is from two parts, whether by hands or strings, or some small limb, or from two wires, or from a string and with your hand;
and set the limb according to its natural shape, so that when parts of both members are dislocated, you reset them by all instruments in their place, and make sure with your work that neither injury nor great pain is imposed upon the patient.
and properly join the two pieces of bones according to their best shapes.
And it feels good to the hand if you think it is not well enough: if he draws back gently, and does not constrain him too much, or press as they do who bring about by their work a pulling and contraction of the limb, as we have often seen in our experience.
And when the limb is in its place, if you properly treat this patient so that it does not move, whether awake or asleep, turning back and forth, or in any other way. and make sure the limb is firmly set so that it feels no pain at all. For when there is no pain, then it's not the case and he must put him in such position that he does not feel any pain.
For when there is no pain, then it's not the case and he must put him in such position that he does not feel any pain. and keep it straightened up so that twisting doesn't occur when he is restored.
and the quality of the fractured member according to what I have told you.
The members that il n’i quatere, and teins de fractures:
La. Cariole it isombreinvolume :meilaccesare infection. icescures, and tosternature of theorethics. What aesent: "Iro, erase incomprehile :carre decalle paragre. Ipsa.
And those who are big, like the chicken and leg: it requires enveloping with a wide and hard bandage, for large bands embrace the entire great limb, and tightening equally from all sides, so there is no weakness.
And the ligament is stretched in twisting joints, three or seven turns according to the limb, and a hand clamping tightly around the whole bandage, then going up above the fracture and loosening less than the fracture, so it gradually moves away from the fracture.
And soften the bandage a little and little until you provide a large part of the healthy limb, then tighten another bandage, and rotate it correctly under the fractured area.
Then return to the area above the fracture, and tighten moderately, not too much nor too little, as we have said in the first line about the top of the fracture.
Then place interlacing bandages of linen or wool until it is evenly placed throughout, then tie the entire thing with one binding strap, and then put your supports well in place if there is no abscess or inflammation.
And if there is inflammation or abscess, put something soothing on the abscess and that calms the inflammation, and let it be for many days.
Then strain the supports and make them from a piece of wood that is roughly cut or made from iron for strength, or palm fronds according to this shape.
But it is necessary that the support placed on the fracture be a little bit larger and wider than the others.
And it should also be long enough as it is necessary for a limb that is small or large.
Then strain the supports also as you have done in the first line, then tie up above with a suitable thread, as we did for the fracture.
It becomes tighter again then looser; and it is necessary that the thread be moderate in size, not too thick or too thin, and made of fine linen.
For if the thread is thick, like those people who make their ropes from twisted linen threads and it's a great error because the binding cannot be equal if it is too thin, and there should not be less than two spans of space between each bandage.
And if the bones are dislocated after the binding has been done, and it's maltes to leu thekes, oriement enclinon chascuns iretenants in thees tiel encyclopaire de ransiunz: "Theo aisle les plusie onstemathoreal,ilk toyves of itaure:nose.tongue: iven century in English translation it : Theocene.
When the wound is with dislocation, and bones are broken, I will tell you the treatment afterwards.
And know that it does not require extracting any splinters from all dislocated limbs within the first day. For when the limbs are large, it does not require putting in splinters before after five or six years or more depending on your discretion of setting care, which requires constant attention and following.
And here is the manner of ancient amalgamations to restore dislocation, dislocation, and twisting: and it is that you take flour which holds at the walls of a millstone, mix this with plenty of wool, make this concoction not too clear nor too thick, use it, and it is the common way of amalgamation restoring dislocation to various conditions, especially for women and small children, because it is neither too cold nor too harsh.
Another method of amalgamation for repairing fractures, dislocations, and twisting involves taking abareis (a kind of ash), ladani (small pieces or strips), enule (aloe juice), asafetida, gum arabic, ten grams; mirre (myrrh) seven grams; aloe eight grams; and ground it into powder, mixed with woolen down. If the patient's constitution is warm, use this amalgamation, for its good composition repairs broken bones quickly, and benefits many people.
Another method of amalgamation that is effective against twisting injuries: take mugat (masticated resin) in ten grams; myrrh and aloe eight grams each; acacia eleven grams; Armenian balsam twenty grams, crushed well, mixed with water or plenty of wool down, and apply it.
Another method of amalgamation for jointed and dislocated bones that alleviates the pain occurring, and use an old linen soaked in cooked oil, and place it on the affected area. These concoctions do not restore the fractures or dislocations but are suitable to relieve constant pain in a proper manner for apostemas (treatments).
Another method of osteostrake that repairs broken bones: take dry leaves of fig tree and dried leaves of earth pumpkin, grind them together, and make the emplaster.
Another method of osteostrake for the restoration of bone fracture and to soften the remaining apophysis: take root of wild carrot, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, wheat flour, one part each; grind them together, and mix with wine, then apply it to the limb, moistened with water infused with coriander or plain water, and use.
Another method of osteostrake beyond the first one for when apophysis becomes hard in restoring a limb: take roots of wild carrot, seeds of flax, balsam, and melilot, violet flowers and chamomile, one part each; grind them together, mix with salted or sweet water, or wine depending on the temperature of the member and its rest.
In his book, it is said that on the fractured limb for bone restoration, they put nothing but honey and wax, and none other thing more, and he says that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems to Galen that on the fractured limb for bone restoration, one must put things slightly warm, as we have said: myrrh and aloe, incense, and similar things.
Another method of osteostrake valued for the injury and pain: take mud from people with open wounds or pigeon feathers, wild carrot roots, and silkworm cocoons, grind them together, and make the emplaster, applying it to the limb.
And then apply the plaster slightly afterwards, and take care that it does not cause any great pain to the patient's malformed limbs, nor is their bone detached from its place again. If you do this by hand today.
And if pain or itching occurs at the joint, or sensation of rest, and apply osteostrake now; take cloth drenched with sea water, submerge in warmth, and lift the limb as long as the itching ceases, and ease the pain. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then lay it flat and dry, covered with warm water or oil roses, and put it on a pillow until you are secure from afterheat.
And let the inflammation in the limb rest, and ease the pain of the bone, then resume the movement gently, and apply a little heat therapy, and do not press it as hard as before; and subtly until it is healed.
And if afterheat and redness and pain in the bone are apparent, and you have experience with heating and bandaging, then if it resumes, as long ago first.
And if there is no sign of what we have mentioned in the limb, then unbind it after 2, 3, 4, or 10 days, depending on how much healing has occurred, until the fracture breaks and approaches the original alignment.
However the restraint is more than before, and its flesh swells as I have said earlier; and if you see the skin dry too much, it means that no further harm can come. Rise the warm water baths whenever you release it, and do this every three days, and loosen a little the bandaging.
Through this procedure we reduce the swelling of the limb, and hasten to treat what our wise men do not restore correctly: it is harmful, and through these procedures there are fears; I see nothing else but tiredness and proper treatment.
in various ways of fracture Many ways of fractures are there, and various shapes, and their causes are distinguished.
because there are fractures made by the strike of an axe, and they break all bone in such a way that it lies on top of itself as if struck or hammered; for this reason is called this type of fracture "haichure".
Or the axe strikes the bone beyond measure of feeling, and is called this type of fracture "absolute"; and it is a wound from these XX or few cracks. This line discusses an extreme method where the axe inflicts forceful blows to the bone that go beyond normal pain thresholds, leading to what could be described as 'absolute' fractures. These are significant breaks in the bone caused by such violent actions and result in large or small wounds depending on the extent of damage.
And if there is impact injury, or cracks from axes, or falls on the edge of a stone, or other similar occurrences. This statement acknowledges that various types of traumatic injuries can lead to fractures, including those caused by heavy blows (like being struck with an axe), penetrating wounds (from sharp objects like chisels), and falls onto hard surfaces (such as a stone). Each type of injury requires careful assessment for proper treatment.
And if there is persistent fracture, which approaches the table of the bone or it is on the bone, and whether this wound is large or small. This refers to a chronic fracture where the edges of the break in the bone continue to push against the surface of the bone. The injury could vary greatly, ranging from minor disruptions within the bone structure (small) to more significant disruption causing substantial damage (large).
And if there is a wound that has been sutured into the bone as finely as screw threads, and it is small, and for this reason we provoke this "hair-like" fracture;
And if the wound is caused by an injury from a sharp object, or falling, or something similar, and it pushes a piece of bone inward, and its edges are as hot and jagged as those made by the blacksmith when he plunged them into his forge; if it penetrates between.
And this happens more with those who have wet bones like in children's cases;
And it happens in all these ways of fractures where the small fragments are pushed out so as to become loose, and I shall speak on this subject.
And we know all kinds of fractures by the reduction done to them, and the inquisitions about them, and by the corrupt that is upon them.
The hair-like appearance is considered because when the bone was discovered and it was drilled into (or scraped underneomed), this black opening would appear; hence, "semblance capillaire."
En la cure de bonefie envers, que leu quarrere estrangler fievre leu pele meve a l’escrever (inferiorment l’en: leu, siensent tostresmea-sansaurs.
And if you do not see an apparent sign of hope, and you expect salvation as it begins the treatment.
And when the navel appears first to you, and it is winter, then it must be frozen for four months before you can do so.
And if it is so, and you hasten to freeze the bone before the seventh month, so that the flesh around the bone becomes putrid, then those accidents we have mentioned will occur.
And if the bone fracture occurs just under the membrane covering the brain, then it must be that you sever the fissured part in this manner: and let the painful head area of the patient guide you, and find in all ways on the bone and around the wound as much as you can.
and if the discharge of blood occurs when you discover the bone or make an incision, then you must use that as a guide, and it is necessary to fill the wound with linen soaked in rose oil. and let the wound rest as long as the incision is calmed down, and be assured of the discharge of blood; then begin to remove the bone according to .ij. methods of work: one method being that you chip away at the narrow section in front, which takes this form...
And then there is another more substantial treatment to follow it.
And the second method is that you have various treatments to choose from: some are sharp and others wide, and they are at points, and made of iron; and do it quickly, without causing more pain on the head.
and if the bone is hardened and broken through, then you must pierce it inside so that you apply treatments with torches, making sure they do not go beyond the bone's edge, leaving a margin or circle above the point; and you must have many more things like this: each one takes into account the depth of the bone from its surface; and there are three forms of treatment:
illementre lescaire tolentrains theves dextract. Theude esseu:esculi a lou cepe the right. Ipsum leavources laumple. Levreint,vainen andal descalle thees augeafeinexentiregavein verserts (16bodise:age. :
And when you have fractured the bone and made an incision, it is required that you reset the fragment which remains attached to all other tools similar to a scalpel, but it must be more pliant and finer than the other scalpel.
And if it remains attached to small bones or scales, lightly moving it to other instruments such as arrows; then treat the wound with tents and ointments that we have mentioned.
And the other method of work which is called by the Greeks as "saut," and it was done very forcefully, and that is his word. It is required first that you remove a part of the bone, if it has an open fracture, so that when you have found this part, then you place at the center of this lenticular scalpel blade as follows: because with this form it is.
And do not cut a piece from it, and the part is divided into two sides, so that the cutting goes towards the bone; then use a small mallet placed above it, lightly striking the entire bone, being careful of the cloth located undernee.
If it is attached to the bone, and you move the bone lightly, because the bone itself causes great harm and fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce through the cloth, and you cut the bone so much from above, and it has small pieces, then you must repeat that roughness on those small fragments, and remove the scales with a very fine razor with various quantities to provide each piece most conveniently, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
If before using great razors, and after more delicate ones, and never stop doing this until it is well done.
For each other fine hair cutting and subtle fracture, it is required that you prepare according to its development; and this is something not repeated by those who have put their study into this art.
And if the skin is discovered, it is required that you provide a piece of linen according to the quantity of the wound, and apply it with rose oil and place it over the wound. Then take another piece of double cloth or two pieces, and moisten it with wine and rose oil, and place it on the first one; do this more lightly than you can so that the skin does not strain underneath, then distend by excessively .i. other ligaments, and let it be enough to only cover the wound slightly.
theticule dessein. En l'avantage: paroles tolve: lesaures, et leu andiij.: en French :it.combre of ithe caut.
And command that the wound be clean immediately, so you do not allow any oozing, nor gathering of blood, because when a wound is placed on the brain's surface, it may cause great harm; for when a sharp object pierces the body excessively, it often results in great malice.
And command that if anyone happens to come upon the patient, as we have said before, it is a doubtful sense of uncertainty.
And if the wound does not yield foreign bodies that we have applied in medicine, it is necessary for you to apply one-third part of honey and two parts of rose oil, and wrap it with a piece of linen cloth, and place it on the wound. Then the care for using various treatments that he can endure, as long as he is healthy.
Note that at times the two joints above are broken or one after another, as they are bones; and those below are cartilage-like, and do not break easily nor become stiffened or twisted, so it remains healthy.
And if one of the two joints is fractured, it is necessary to apply heat or pressure on either side of the joint and place the fracture evenly within your diagnostic index, and at the base for as long as it regains its natural shape. And do this alignment, and ensure that the patient does not feel pain due to your intervention.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the joint and it cannot return to its original position, it is required that you place a small piece of wood at the head of one of the two bones involved for support.
And if the fracture is from one of the two parts, repair it again and strive to restore the joint's original condition as soon as possible, provided that you can.
However, after the seventh or twelfth day when the patient's pain and swelling have subsided, then apply a linen cloth at the head of the joint if the fracture is in one part only.
Or you apply another piece of linen to the other joint if there is a fracture in that area; and make sure they are large enough to fill the cavities of the joints.
And they said that a restorator must grease the tent with wax and melt it every day. I don't think this is right, but it needs to be greased in the making of sheepskin with bear fat and powdered grain; then let the tent stay until the bones are hardened, and the cartilages toughened.
And there is never any oat straw in the sheepskin of the tent until it is new, and if a sheep fleece is used for it, and the leather buckles are held, and you blow the patient's feverishly; or make me see what will happen.
And if the abscess comes into the sheepskin as you work with it, then put wax or cotton greased in rose oil, or a little of quicklime.
And if the abscess does not come into the sheepskin, then inoculate by default using flour of sage, powdered incense, and honey mixed with bear fat, then place it under hot irons repeatedly, without tightening the sheepskin.
And if the tearing of the sheepskin is small, and it is torn into small pieces, then take suitable bandages for this injury, bind the tear, and treat with various concoctions, and sewing, as you do with appropriate bandages and ointments.
And if there is no injury to the sheepskin at all, then treat the tent and put cotton wadding in it until it has healed.
From the treatment of the jawbone
When the jawbone is rotten inside and it does not have a wound to be treated, and the break has been so long ago that it's no longer broken in two pieces, because there are pins or screws within, then if one knows well how to move it lightly.
It is required that if the break is in the right part of the jaw, you insert your index finger into the patient's mouth; and if the break is on the left side of the mandible, then place your right index finger inside it, move the break lightly, and drain it with the other hand, keeping everything equal.
And if the break of the mandible is displaced in its entirety, it is required that you extend part of it gradually until it becomes equal again.
And if the bones are moved or displaced, orotrode: either gold or silver thread, and then put it to the broken jawbone, and put underneath the double cloth; and made a large tent, and order the patient should lay upon his bust, and saynce incontest.
:cet dehxende toirebodice.
And when a cut on the skin comes, do as we have often said before.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, reward him with only one bone of the os; so subtle that even our teeth can hardly find it.
And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with flame according to your necessity.
And when you have all these bone pieces, and there is no delay; if the wound is wide, and it's placed on such an implant that can hardly be touched by our teeth, so as to tighten the joint, let it stay healed.
Of the lancet The lancet breaks it many times before the shoulder and along its bone according to three manners: or it is broken and displaced in two parts, and it has pieces, and it is more easily restored; or there is a break with wound.
And the operations are when the fracture is with wound, where you have two ministers: one should ignite the aid that feels broken by the lancet; and the other stretches his col towards the part; then align the break at your discretion so that it forms as it should, without any appearance or healing.
And if you must extend it further, place on the patient's shoulder an oval band of cloth or linen, according to your necessity; and make them gentle with the lancet and restrain the band at your hand so that you can align the break as needed.
And if you cannot pull the head of the lancet out because it comes loose from its sheath, then it is necessary that the patient lie on his bedridden by the hurdle, and place an armorer's collar underneath the shoulder; and have your ministers hold the shoulder back until the bone of the lancet rises.
And thenect decox.
savoir en:re deu, aux (10:2 :comestrues le. Fromage fromle :il'sicjacer. ices. Andes a :ces tolé (it’sarge decaire. Thees. ounce.
And when you are sure of an incision, if it bleeds, and the wound is small, or if you doubt about the incision, then apply pressure to the wound according to its size with cloths and bandages.
And if the dislocation occurs, if it is wet, then apply a rose-scented cloth and linen soaked in oil and wine, and place them on top.
The fracture of the bone, when it feels pain and discomfort, is to place powdered salt and lead on top of the bone with lightly placed bandages, and then put a spear underneath it, if you have experience. Then take a very large bandage of about one palm wide, and place two cloths on top with the powdered mixture, and wrap it; then take a thin stick of three fingers long and encase that bandage. Wrap such that the head of the splint is underneayer the bandage. And place the stick above the fracture, and turn the bandage around the patient's collarbone, and under both healthy and disfigured splints, and in each part you apply the wrapping. When you see that the stick holds the broken piece firmly in position, clearly indicating that the splint does not move on top of the bone, then reinforce it every day and when the ligament relaxes.
And make the dislocated shoulder rest on its back, and place a small support underneath the splint so that you can lift the sling upwards to raise the injured arm. This alignment of the shoulder helps reduce the force on the fracture by adjusting the position of the scapula (shoulder blade), or tie the arm to the collarbone, and prevent further complications for at least twenty years.
Then restart the splinting process if you have experience, and maintain the strengthening and wrapping until it is restored, up to twenty-seven years at most, without causing harm to anyone.
from the fracture of the shoulder blade (scapula)
It is rare for the shoulder blade (scapula) fracture to heal without movement or deformity; if you align according to the shape of the fracture and wrap accordingly in all possible ways, then place a double bandage with some powdered salt mixed with lead undernee it. Then add another thin stick that is slightly wider than the shoulder blade, and secure this stick firmly on both sides of the bandage so that there are no gaps between it and the bone; if the wrap holds the fracture piece together, keeping the sticks in place and looking at the continuity every day. Also, when he moves again, maintain the wrapping and the support stick positioned firmly on its proper placement, and guard him against further injuries; otherwise, it will be restored to healthy condition within twenty years or less.
And if the bone fragment is located in the injured area of the shoulder blade, and it hastez, si li desmeineke peche sanz oltans deffacin, et la cestes ailne:n:eveau:lon: "sontures de ceu que nos:lourremental:meinke.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder
The shoulder is sometimes dislocated in half a mile, but rarely; however, it often dislocates again further. When it is dislocated inside, it declines towards the socket, and feels the patient great pain, lack of aid, restlessness, and by chance vomits blood, which opens up the fractured bone's cavity and causes the sensation quite well.
The restoration involves placing a strong cord between the shoulder blades, then pressing on the shoulder blades, and assembling the edges of the ribs in both hands while being subtle with all possible methods until the bone's figure is as it should be; then place resting plates or heating irons above the salty stone, or some lighter substance, and wrap the limb in a sheet over the dislocated bone so that it does not move. Then restore the rounded line on the back, apply counterstrain to alleviate pain every hour, if it softens, then strain; and if it needs to be dislocated again due to corrosion or pruritus at the joint, hurry up, dislocate it again, address the one who has treated with various medical methods, retighten the plates until the bone is sound.
The dislocation of the ribs:
The dislocation of the ribs does not occur due to their large size behind the back or in front; it happens because they are brittle, and the sensation is quite good at inquiring about the right positioning during restoration efforts. This highlights that bone fragility can be a significant factor leading to dislocations, emphasizing the need for cautious handling and treatment.
The restoration involves applying the dislocation to the fractured area if it aligns with what is necessary for proper healing; then place the plates and apply counterstrain on a stone or other medium you are skilled in using. This underscits the importance of placing the bone back into its natural position, while also ensuring that the restoration equipment used provides appropriate support without causing further injury to the patient's fragile rib structure.
If the rib dislocation is declining inwardly, it causes great pain and pressure to the patient, similar to pleurisy because the bone pierces the tissue; also experiencing restlessness and vomiting large amounts of blood, indicating a severe health condition that requires immediate attention from experienced physicians. This illustrates how internal dislocation can lead to significant complications, further highlighting the need for expert intervention in cases where the ribs are misaligned or damaged severely.
And if there are those who believe that it needs to be administered with foods that swell the abdomen in order to force the dislocation backward. This statement warns against such practices, as they can potentially worsen an existing injury rather than aid in healing. In medical contexts, dietary considerations are essential, but it's crucial to focus on evidence-based treatments that directly address the physical issue without causing additional harm or delaying proper recovery processes for bone dislocations such as those involving ribs.
We do not perform this kind of treatment; rather, let us see if it comes to our aid. This suggests that there is a range of treatments available, and the medical practitioners would consider other methods or interventions based on individual patient conditions and circumstances, showing adaptability in therapeutic practices for rib dislocations instead of following rigid procedures. And if it comes to our pain, etat de la chastreisin.
leu (1ere: entrenable of it ismea :ialleraise the leu voilaid leu, theoune :en'sume, ileneu'sesure. Allude.
And they said that none of us must cover the wound with a thin layer of hot oil, and put a tent between the sides to place it in position, then treat for the treatment of purulent ulcers, meat sores, and medicine.
And if the patient's great pain cannot be borne by bone that does not cover the wound, and there is doubt whether to cut along the broken side of the rib, and must place something inside it to protect its surface; and then they must cut the bone, treat lightly, and sew together the two sides of the wound, if it is large, and heal with plasters until it becomes healthy. And when a chest wound occurs, cover it first with moistened linens in rose oil, and put on top of it; and care for the bone while its surface needs to be treated, and place him lying down either along that rib or where he must lie until it is healthy.
from the fracture of the rib
There has never been a fractured rib that does not cause it to bend; and also affects the spine of the back. And when it occurs to anyone, and you see whether he will be healthy or not; if your hands appear swollen and inflamed and lifeless, and they cannot move nor extend themselves, and when you pierce them with a needle, does the pain? It indicates that such conditions are indicative of various complications. Know then that it is mortal in many circumstances; and if he remains still and feels well when we stretch his hands and there is no movement, we know that the joint between the bones is safe, and that the patient requires treatment for his pain.
And when such signs occur to the spine of the back; and you see whether he is healthy or not; if your spinal pins are softened, and the accidents that have occurred in his hands, and observe whether there is voluntary excretion from his abdomen, and after we lean him on his stomach, does it expel with volition? And when he lies on his back and wants to move, can he do so? We know then that this condition is mortal in many cases; if not laboring during the treatment.
And if this accident does not affect him so much; it implies that the injury or condition described might be less severe in its impact on health or functioning, potentially allowing for a more straightforward medical response and recovery process. This assessment is critical as it influences the urgency and type of treatment required by healthcare professionals to manage such cases effectively.
And the cure if it is to reward him if he has an apoplectic wound, whether placed on the spine with rosin oil or honey ointment until it becomes calmed; then place a comfortable bandage and bind it tightly, and order the patient to rest in that part where the pain does not disturb him, as long as he remains healthy. And if any bone loosens, it must be covered under the joint; and set the bone, then join together both sides of the wound, if they are large, with a bandage, and treat it by applying oil-soaked cloths until it heals; and if your shoulder blade is fractured, which we call "the bones of the cow", take hold of the pouch in your left hand, and place it on the other hand for support, then apply the splint and elevate it as needed; then secure it, and if there is a loosened bone, treat it with oil, and the doctor, and cure the wound until it heals.
Break of the hip bone occurs when the os coxae (hip bone) breaks due to various factors such as trauma or underlying health conditions. The treatment involves immobilizing the affected area, pain management, and potentially surgical intervention depending on the severity of the break. It is important for individuals with a broken hip bone to seek medical attention promptly in order to receive appropriate care and support throughout their recovery process.
It is seldom that the hip bone (os coxae) becomes fractured, and if it does happen, there may only be a slight reduction in size at the head; then they apply long bandages to the thighs, and pull them downward, and bring relief to the patient's shoulder area due to the broken hip bone.
And the restoration involves extending your hand over the fracture as long as you are above it; and you identify the type of fracture and its appearance; if the fracture is at the head, then place the same fracture with the goal of allowing it to return to a natural shape. This may involve various techniques such as immobilization using splints or casts, depending on the nature and location of the fracture, with close monitoring and follow-up care by medical professionals to ensure proper healing and recovery for the patient.
And if the break is long or it declines inwardly, let the patient lie down on their stomach for as long as the restoration of that fracture appears. This implies that the person with a broken hip bone should be treated to ensure proper healing and recovery from the injury sustentences librations de la brisere et lice, leu. n's:entire ousse. Youre le feleastres duke taille in itarre le cuit de l'arreatime:rexalex. The King. Laisse. Eixtracta.
And instructs the patient to lie on his healthy side, or on his back.
And if the abscess opens up, do not touch it until it is soothed, and place it on what we have previously stated; then return to restoration, and take care as it requires, provided there are no further complications; this is how it should be done.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder joint
The shoulder joint is the space between the collarbone and the head of the upper arm bone; if it is dislocated, one must reset it according to either method: first, make a clean cut with great effort, as described in this manner:
And bind the ligaments and raise them up, and look at the patient' Written in Old French, this passage details an approach to managing a dislocated shoulder joint injury. The steps include binding of ligaments (ligaments are crucial for stabilizing joints), lifting the affected limb ('pent en haut'), observing the painful area ('sience li malaide sus .i. siege'), and then manipulating the arm by sliding it down ('giete som bras brisiet') until it returns to a natural position. This is done while ensuring no additional weight is applied, indicating an emphasis on careful handling of the patient's injury during recovery. Finally, 'mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble,' which means to hold the dislocation with hands joined together ('mette li mires'), suggests using manual repositioning techniques that align with the natural anatomy until the joint returns to its original position as required for healing. This process reflects medieval medical practices, emphasizing a blend of observation and gentle manipulation based on patient response.
And the other method is to assume that the patient lies on his bedroll ('si este que on sovine le malaide'), then apply pressure with one hand on the collarbone ('li lie la main a son col') and instructs two assistants ('ij. ministres') to each hold an area around the dislocation - one at the injured site in the patient's hands, while the other holds various parts of the body for support ('et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien'). This method involves multiple points of pressure and support, reflecting medieval medical practices where manual techniques were employed to realign dislocated joints with assistance from attendants.
And if the extraction proves to be farther away from the dislocation, then hold one limb near the dislocation ('si estraint .i. liien desoz la briseure'), and on the dislocation itself ('sus la briseure'), extend each assistant'munits to their respective areas ('et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part'). If the dislocation is closer to the shoulder joint head ('li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule'), it requires placing one limb on the edge of the scapula ('moien desoz l'assele'), another toward the collarbone ('desoz la briseure'), and then, if the dislocation is towards the shoulder joint,'si i covient mettre .i. liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n'i vient.' This passage elucidates a more advanced approach to shoulder dislocation repair in whichin the medieval medical practice: one should place limb on the scapula edge of the shoulder joint ('moien desoz leu,'saints of the edge of the shoulder blade.
sance 5celle ifcures a piece:ncreausse demeche :ssections (allonggeuse çoifrevelewarkheu xungeltiflesh ifpevellastelletheuccarturelngenthevellastrevelaunt hister ilsisable:
And if you doubt that the bone will move, use sticks, and place a larger and stronger stick on the fracture; put one in between each other i.e., leave an interval of space, and make each stick so large that it passes through the fracture ii. three parts of each stick; then pull the sticks, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter about the fracture, stronger and less aligned.
And if you see the setting of the sticks and the pulling, as we have said to restore the broken limb; if the wound hurts, let him leave it tied for seven days as we have said; then observe each of the three years that the swelling does not increase at the site, or the discoloration cannot reach the joint where it is too narrow. If the case, as we have said.
And if no such thing happens after three years or more, let the pained sore lie on his back, and hold his hands on his stomach; place one strip of wool evenly under the crutch, and observe each hour during the day whether the broken limb's figure does not move or the bands become soft; if by virtue of medicine it is done, and the flesh that we have mentioned before you in part so that the flesh be subtle at first; when he begins to take on again, let it be heavy. And it is customary for the crutch and leg to be taken off in forty years total; and then, indeed, must one dislocate and administer baths and ointments with herbs to soothe the wound. And if the strain is ugly and swollen, let it remain undone for a month or six months.
of the arm breakage
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "foscil" or mallet; one is small, and it is that which holds the pouch; and the other is large, and it is in between these two; perhaps only breaking the larger mallet alone, or possibly both together.
When the small mallets are fractured, restoration is easy, and healing; but when the large ones are fractured, the treatment becomes poor, and more painful than if they were broken together with it. If it is only one of the larger mallet that is fractured, then it needs to be extended a little bit longer, and made equal in size.
And if it is the large mallet, then it must be extended more strongly; and stretched on one strip, and blew at his own hand, and some strips above him; and other mensters in this part of his arm; andstretches. Then extend the ministers to hise sourieces of lee. Andes to the armor, et bien as apein.
nge saxence.toc moultifre:sse deffure seing,woman :gemailles.seille outrage tande. Allongue soignesseuran icessexes. Theèsse ia.
And if there is an opening of wound, I have spoken to the individual scholar about it; take care.
And if at the beginning of restoration an abscess opens in between the bones, I have spoken to the individual scholar about it; gently place on it a silken cloth made with olive oil and beeswax, not too hard or too soft; and then apply lime powder with plenty of flour, placing it so that the sling is further out than the others; and know that it should have 2 to 3 slings in various positions: either on one bone or two, more above the abscess than anywhere else, as I said at the beginning to the individual scholar; and make sure the cloths placed above are not too hard or too soft, and make a linen thread of moderate thickness, as we have said. And tend to the limb and its ligament after some time intervals. And if some accident happens to the limb, as itching that occurs in a member, it is necessary that you immerse the limb in warm water until the itching subsides; then let the member not be too tightly restrained. Then resume the straining, and when the ligaments are loose and the bones dislocated, if it so happens, as we have said.
And if the constrictions cannot reach the limb because it is too tight, it is necessary that you slightly soften it, and leave for some time until these constrictions resolve themselves, and then resume the straining.
And if none of these things we have said do not come to the patient, then let his hands be tied at his neck for up to 20 days or longer, and make his collar equal in size, and tend to movement and restraints, and lie on his back; know that this dislocation is restored within 30 years or even more, depending on the preparations and constitution of virtues.
about the dislocation of the hand
Know that at the back of the hand and we have seen few cases of such injuries, and they do not usually occur more than a few times.
And when the plantar of the hand is dislocated or bent, it is necessary that you examine him closely and tie his arm equally; then place his hand on top of a piece of wood extended, extend his ministers' bones that are dislocated, making them even in size, so they are well joined; apply the poultice and bandages, if there is no abscess forming, then wrap it according to the size of the wound; and cover him with one linen cloth.
And if the dislocation is in the area of the palm'e hand, make a bandage from linen cloths, and command the patient that he strain his hand; then stretch it with an equally thick bandage as the hand, and tighten it as it should be done.
And if the fracture is open to the air, it must be that you place a stake above it, and another below in the sole of the foot, so that the hands are raised and straight, then bind it tightly with both hands, and securely fasten the connection between the two.
And if the fracture does not belong to either of us two, if it is in a sac or sack, then you must place it with the sole of the foot and tighten it; and if you see any movement, you should place a small upright stick above it so that it does not move. And if the fracture is in other places such as the index finger or one of the others, then you must place it and tie it with the same bandage which comes after; or bind them all together where they can move, or set a stake above it like we used for a sack. Take care in restoring and positioning afterwards, and heed what comes next as I have said.
of the dislocated shoulder
The shoulder joint is often dislocated, and you can see it when she turns both ways; and the restoration should be tied on top of the dislocation, and another one below. And the malady causes a pain in his face, then extend each of your bandages evenly to its respective place; and this happens when the fracture is within the bone.
And if the fracture is near the root of the shoulder, one bandage should be towards the upper part and others around the dislocation; and also if it is near the knee, some bandages should be placed underneath, or extension above it; then place a pin in his arm so that it is evenly distributed among its two hands, as much as it naturally conforms to shape, and then set the splint, and secure the position when no further movement occurs.
And if it has an abscess, let him be calmed down first and then return to your work and treatment; the bandage is made in half way. He must wrap a hard bandage around the fracture; and in the excess material below, then turn the leg so that the toes point toward the root of the knee, and place a sticky thread long between the shoulder blade and thigh; then bind it at the three staves above the bone; and after, and two stakes, and tie.i.
And if it happens, if he dislocates him, and addresses what comes to him as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that pinch him, then he must warn him, who can do so; and if not, then he must cut the joint, and extract from it, and treat it as we have said until he is healthy.
And never is the shoulder blade broken in such a way that it is reattached as with the shoulder and arm; in this restoration everything does not worsen the patient's pain greatly.
And you know that the shoulder blade is restored in one year, or a little less than one year or a little more, depending on individual variations.
from the groin of the thigh
You know that in the groin of the thigh there are few fractures, but it often bends many times. And if it breaks, then it is either a simple fissure or an indentation, and it occurs with all wounds, and this sensation hurts quite well.
And the restoration is to put in such things as are required for its two sides until it can be moved; then place the plaster and cover it with a soft bandage if you know how to do it, and wrap it tightly as required, then repair all the preparations that we have mentioned elsewhere for fractures, whether in the joint or other similar things; put such measures into action for each accident he must undergo until he is sound.
from the fracture of the leg
You know that in the leg there are two bones, one called a 'mustelz' (mandible) and the other 'foscile' (fibula); and all preparations for breakages come as they do to the arm, so the restoration is just like that of the shoulder, and the operations performed in this case are identical.
And if both bones are broken together, then twist the leg from all sides.
And if the slight bone is broken, then twist it forward.
And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and they can see it well; then turn him around. Then adjust the extension, and put him in his place again; but generally speaking, he must have that fracture to be ugly, and he has many pieces thereof which the extension is smaller and lighter than usual; and alleviate according to your mercy.
nage jurredre defface. Thisesulta lice: theu’s androgains. Eau :nobear. Il
Of bone breakage from such great pity
The ankle does not come from bone breakage; the old bones rarely suffer a fracture and seldom require more extensive measures beyond pressure adjustments.
If the old bones suffer a fracture and you see them protruding at each other's sides like wounded limbs that would want to fly away, now place your patient's body on top of their leg; lift the leg so high until it straightens out in its joints; then apply an immobilizing device and traction along with hot compresses over a small padded board placed under the injured area; restrain the limb for support, and perform other necessary treatments.
And when three or four years have passed, if the swelling subsides, as you will find the bones level, whether they are fractured or dislocated, depending on their condition after healing over time.
If there are no broken sides, then reconstruct them as we previously mentioned for the sides of a joint; place an elongated wooden block on top of each side according to their length and make it slightly wider than needed; put this board under the padded support described earlier; if there are two or three (or more) fractures in addition, use a correspondingly sized block for each, covered with one linen cloth, and secure the board against the patient' Cookie.jar/
And it is crucial not to forget the other things that I have mentioned regarding other fractures (and accidents) we discussed previously; for each type of injury, there are specific treatments required as prescribed.
Regarding the fracture of the old bone (osteoporotic fracture) near a joint.
Ai desaide ait. Estamine, alesmes.
And when the bone of the shoulder blade is fractured in the man or woman, and it is reset as we have said for the humerus; and these proximal fractures are not hidden from those who put their study and use into it and understand my book. For the fracture signifies several additional dispositions of the right way to restoration: therefore.
In the vein, when it is fractured, take a piece of goose and bind the vein; then cover with linen tightly, and leave for two or three years, and he will be cured quickly.
from fracture with wound
It is required of those who have a fracture with wound, especially if it is large like the bone of the shoulder or the shoulder girdle or similar; let them be cured now, so that the cures we have mentioned testify to it.
And if the wound is healed, then apply vitriol to it if you have no other thing; and try again in that same hour or day to restore the fracture, as long as the abscess does not come back.
And if the abscess returns, then leave the restoration again for another new day until the abscesses are calmed down; do not touch it for a whole year or for three months, because you would cause bad accidents.
And if the fractured bone is found to be exposed from its cover, it must be put back carefully with one's hands in a small movement.
And if the extension does not allow you to place it equally with your hands, then take this instrument that is made of iron, which has 1.5 or 2.5 meters long, and its width according to the size of the wound; because in such a matter one must carefully determine whether to use three or four joints, depending on what each treatment for a fracture requires; it should be round and heavy enough so that it does not compress the member during your work. And if it is too small, then place it forward and at the end of its length, as follows:
And it is called "palenchief", and it must beams of the bone placed on top of the fracture is slight underneath one's head. If: les os: «mettre la verge de sene. Ce n’est.
And if you cannot return the bone, as we have said, if the tip of an instrument suitable for this purpose is used, whether it be a cutter or scraping tool; then repair what remains lodged in the bone with great hardness and small cracks.
And when the bone is returned and it causes great pain afterward, you know that it's not in its natural place. If it remains so, then moisten with one piece of black vinegar tightly applied; and do this carefully on top of the wound; and never put anything above the wound ointment or oil, which would cause wetting and rotting; then apply bandages as you have restored the bone, leaving the wound exposed, and cover it completely according to the size of the wound, and advise well that the wound should not be strained with breaking; and many times this has been done by wise men, who brought about death or corrosion at any time through these methods; and let the treatments for other types of breaks be more mushy and softer.
And if the wound is large or severe and you doubt whether it might happen that blood will flow from there, as we have said; but do not put anything above bandages; instead, wrap tightly around them with hard drapes and linen; and when after a year or two the bow has receded at the wound, then change what you have applied on it throughout vinegar, and cover it with healing ointments as we used to do in similar medicinal preparations.
And it is essential that you move the limb two times a day, in the morning and evening, as long as it remains set and healthy.
And it must be cleared to some extent so that the blood flows downward easily.
And if for many days it remains unhealed and the bone can no longer be joined, knowing that there are small fragments of bone, therefore you must tend to the wound with tent, and remove all these separated bone pieces which bring about great pain.
And if an abscess comes to the area or in some other form of corruption, you must treat it according to what is stated by this chapter's master before; and when the bone is broken and protrudes from the limb, as with a knee or shoulder joint or others like that on large limbs, do not attempt to straighten it at all, for many times death has come because of such attempts; but let it remain until it can move by itself; perhaps after twenty years or three decades, then care for the wound if you are able to do so; and if you cannot do so, leave it.
And those who come from the saltwater corrosion.
We have often seen after the fracture healing, especially when it is close to the joint, and quite something to see the limb's appearance; and sometimes it can't perform its natural functions.
s : theesca: Injures. Andromatice,secre en. Ire froma,cumfier (brief. Theuccesue apewite itcunt andsureble ascleave isiscribed.
When the bone fracture is restored and then left to become weak afterward in its members that are subtle, it may occur for many reasons: because he was tied too tightly, so it wasn't tied as it should; or because he had too many ties, preventing sufficient blood circulation to the limb; or due to numerous dislocations; or from excessive movements without proper time; or because there is little sinew in his body, thus making it weak. This Old French medical description reflects an understanding of post-fracture complications and emphasizes the importance of careful treatment for successful recovery.
And the treatment involves feeding the maladied patient with food and making the heart tender until it multiplies in him; then administering baths to give joy and ease; afterwards applying pitch on the limb, so that the pitch draws out the great swelling, often through moisture flooding, until the swelling corrects itself naturally. This guidance from a medieval medical treatise suggests holistic approaches combining dietary measures with physical therapy techniques to aid recovery after injury and illness. The use of natural elements like pitch indicates an early practice where materials readily available in the environment were employed for therapeutic purposes.
A limb twisted following health
When the members are twisted after restoration and the bones are broken apart, and the form of the limb is ugly, such a condition does not naturally occur: for we do not believe those who say that one must break the member from birth, as many observers in our land have done; these treatments are blamed heavily, and they often lead to great harm, or sometimes even death. However, if there are nodules and tortures present, it is recommended to be treated with warm water or mollifying herbs cooked like violet leaves and roots, among other things; making an emollient as well-done dakkonon (a type of plant known for its medicinal properties), taking musk lily oil mixed with fat from a field hen or sisal oil, and applying the emollient to it. Alternatively, one could use figs greased with linseed husks; these are among other similar remedinas (medicine) that help soften the callus. This complex treatment approach illustrates the interventional nature of medieval medicine, where various methods were often used in tandem to address ailments and injuries, including herbal remedies, animal fats, and physical manipulation techniques like warm water baths or emollients for healing.
And there is no occasion to repeatedly friction and rub the callus on wet hands; instead, every hour provide movement for the limb. This advice highlights an aspect of medieval medical practice focused on rest and motion in recovery from physical ailments such as fractures or dislocations. The emphasis on regular movement suggests that even with immobilization being commonly prescribed at the time, there was still recognition of the value of gentle exercises to maintain joint health and overall physiological function during convalescence. This approach reflects an evolving understanding of rehabilitative care in a period when medical knowledge and methodologies were gradually developing.
And if the twisting becomes old and hardened, as bone, and there is a need to expose it to iron, so that the bone covers itself incisively; and apply a treatment, and let the patient be studied. This portion of text appears to discuss a dextremes d’oultre cestorture.
The medieval times. Inferes:
Dislocation arises from no joint of its place, for thus it cannot move, and the limb is misshapen, and it suffers great pain and injury.
When dislocation arises from no joint of its place, so it must be urgently repositioned to target the affected area.
For if it is delayed, the limb swells up, and perhaps if reset to its place, nails may protrude; this does not allow for movement in the future where it has become inflamed: many times brought on spitting blood and other pains.
generally speaking, when this occurs, it is beneficial to apply warm compresses and ointments to the maladied part; then raise the limb with hot water and oil, and reposition it gently, treating each member as they come into place.
And I ordered the sections on dislocations to be placed at the top of the list of procedures.
regarding the mandibles (jawbones)
It is rare for the mandibles to be dislocated from both sides, and in such cases: they are slightly cracked along their edges, and loosened a bit; or they are completely dislodged, hanging down towards the lower part, cutting off the saliva of the mouth so it cannot hold it nor close its mouth, wrapping its tongue with speech.
When the dislocations are minor, they return by their own arrangements.
And if it is complete and accomplished, it requires that you reposition her immediately, without targeting any specific area.
and in such a manner that the minister touches the malady' corners of the dislocation, placing one hand at the root of the dislocation inside the mouth if it is from .ij part; and the other hands are to be removed so as to level them out; and command the patient to soften his mandibles, and move all parts.
And the minister places it level, until it returns to its original position.
And if the repositioning causes pain in .ij. mandible areas, we must assemble both jawbones together after warming and oiling them until they are moved gently without focusing on the area of dislocation as previously discussed.
And if the jawbones are returned to a normal position and the maladies of the mouth close well after being moistened with a cloth made from oil roses and wax, they are then moved gently.
and the maladies lie on his back, and their teeth are between .ij. spaces, without favoring either side, not trying to move them gently but promptly, as long as there are teeth troubles and jawbone issues present.
And then we shall open the mouth of .ij.et ee les chascun membre apees ce qu'il veue ieu bones tote almeing cestui lice, andi de .iiigre la cite gart de .ij.
sainse,ingleve tede :se compose de laisse ceceux à coudre.naturexent,acque seyseute lame,c:sangelle.sache (ssecceles soifrece pasin; ifnagire lexsekitésiclez sonse malteille,curexsexte afections. lisesage.
And when you see this, then you know it is a dislocation; and many times those who experience it, die in seven years.
Of the forceful one.
The forceful one cannot dislocate the joint between them and in their vicinity without causing harm; it has never been displaced later than necessary, and they certainly feel its effects.
And the restoration if it is that the painful patient sits upright on his back, extends his arms; then presses firmly with your palm to form a shape, and it returns; then places upon the bedpan and bandage, and tightens.
And the cries that are directed towards the joint cannot be dislocated; if not, and it has never been displaced again, then places upon the bedpan and bandage, as we have mentioned; and commands the patient to rest until he is well.
And now we must bring back the head of the splint when it is displaced from its place.
Of the shoulder dislocation
You know that the shoulder is not displaced by less than eight movements: one movement causes it to dislocate from the anterior part of the shoulder blade and downwards; and the second moves it towards the posterior part. And occasionally, it may dislocate above, which happens rarely.
And it is never displaced backwards for the shoulder, nor within the nerves; rather often it is dislocated downwards towards the shoulder blade, especially in those with little strength, because this occurs suddenly; in those who have enough strength, it goes up and comes back down.
And by chance it happens to some people with impact or fracture, and the shoulder is inflamed at its attachment point; take care that it is not displaced because of this.
It is then that you must test her, as long as you are sure of it; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that when it goes towards the shoulder blade, and you differentiate between the dislocated arm and a healthy one, you will find manifest differences between them. And you will find at the top of the shoulder a depression, and touching it on the shoulder blade in the same way as if it were an oesophagus; and the painful patient cannot bring his hand to his neck or make any movement.
Ander: "leu de la vostre paiens les louis.
nous le monde.vale of theire. (12sesu's itmesures. ousage le pice: "meffacte. Inventaire. Iesus. A lou.a. Thevesure.c. Le:resculiere and's.
And the manner is that the ministers hold the patient's hand high, then put their fingers under the elbow, and lift the joint strongly at the top towards the socket; and the ministers hold the hand, and extend it upwards, so as to move it there; if done hastily.
And if it does not come as we have said in the past days, then it must be that the pain is bathed in warm water; and they are massaged with emollients softening and soothing, like decoction of honey and fenugreek and marshmallow root in warm water, and they are massaged.
then beaten under the pain on their back, and put a piece of linen evenly in the elbow groove, not too soft nor too hard, then put the pins on top of the cloth, and lift the shoulder joint firmly, and move the patient's hand.
and other ministers color the top of the pain's head, so that it does not move further downwards; this shoulder returns again in its entirety, and if you see how to realign according to this method:
and it is that you make the patient present. I. A larger person than the pain; and place them sideways towards their elbow groove, and push the shoulder in the elbow groove upwards, so that the pain dangles downwards. and other ministers pull the patient'shift downwards towards their belly. And if the pain is too heavy, do not put anything on it at all, and the dislocation returns now.
And realigning can also be done in another way: and it is as if you stick a long piece of wood into the ground, so that the shoulder joint is not too large or too small. then put it under the pain's shoulder but with softer fabrics on top, and let the pain hang long from there; then extend its hand downwards to another side properly, and the joint returns quickly.
and if it does not return through all these things that we have said, then make this curative treatment: take a long piece of wood from the arms, two feet in width which has the top ready to enter into the elbow groove, according to this shape:
then lie under the long piece of wood on which the shoulder does not hurt the pain; and put it inside the elbow groove. Stretch out your arm above this long piece, and place the sling there, and hold the gear near the top of the hand, and make a loop with one large cloth around the wrist, and extend the hands downwards, and let the patient' Written at least once
And when it is present, whether by any means, if it must be that you put inside the elbow groove a piece of linen evenly; then place an incense ball sprinkled with powdered medicine on top of everything, and spices and oil on the shoulder and armpit, and draw the sling from underneath the elbow groove, and embrace your hand in its palm, and let it stay as above.
En iaire de laine cestant liere:en:atexprime dese.esle ofsaint :153rdre.comme parlement; etape dede:re le morce decaustre. Incharmoste.il'smajeste,l theorace 200vint.fragments leu.tejurse (Iceles.erjacin.
And if the joint is loose due to dampness or for any other reason it comes about, then you must administer four punctures like in front of the chapter on cauterizations.
And if you do all this and after two years, the joint still does not hold, and it cannot lift its arm upwards, then you know that either the main nerve at the shoulder is compressed or stretched or softened; and you also realize that the joint has never been fitted back into place.
The dislocation towards the backside and the muscles or behind it is made by a sudden push or hand extension, and administer other treatments until healed.
And if after healing the limb becomes grieved again with subsequent movements, and it uses many times the painful hot baths until the grief is alleviated, and then returns to its first natural state.
from such a dislocation
You know that the joint of such a dislocation is dislocated by punctures and comes back; and when it has been dislocated from all sides, most especially in front and behind, and the dislocations are not returned because one can see them well and feel them clearly, and they are dislocated according to each case. And when you join the painful dislocation with the healthy one, it must be done openly. For the joint is stiff and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder in any way.
And it is required that you reset it immediately so as not to cause weakening of the joints, for if the joints are weakened, returning them would be painful; and perhaps they cannot be returned completely in all cases, especially when it is at the back, which is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and sometimes the injury results.
And the restoration is when it can be returned to its proper position; you extend his hand to your two hands; and his arms are spread out according to the degree of dislocation on either side, above and below, and fix the joint back together with all his shoulders or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its original place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his own hand and tightens the root of the cost that has been dislocated.
And if it does not return to its place, and administer strong extension; and let two ministers extend his arm, and they burn it at each side, then turn the arm of each side, and wrap a double sheet long and wide.
Etour. This isle, lesmeinfeel itmesur : ás meillane. leu mesure deside asumele ofre.coment andesoubre: "maille ofte thele. Ifire de lopuresque: The medieval comest.
And when it is in place, if he puts on a hot iron with the edge of steel, and strains it, and bends the arm at the shoulder joint, and leaves it for some days, then he releases it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, he loosens the ligament, and leaves it; and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, then repeat the cautery and the ligament, and leave it for some days until it is securely repositioned; then release it.
And if he feels pain after the repositioning of the ligament, and it moves, then bathe and rub well until it is soothed; or place a warm bath with sheep's fat on the joint, let it stay for one day and one night, then let the physician treat with either immersion therapy or bath. And when he sweats, he rubs the joint repeatedly, then reapplies the warm bath, and alternates between immersion therapy or bath, doing it two to three times until he is healthy; and if you see him, put hot linen soaked in fat on his body, and stretch it. If it returns to its original position.
The dislocation of the hand
The ligament of the hand dislocates, and its return is light, stronger than other joints always; it must be repositioned as soon as possible after displacement, using an iron in my own house while the ligament is displaced again, or if there are charred stones.
And the repositioning is done by placing the affected hand on a table, extending the physician's hand to align it evenly with the joint, so that the patient places his palm in front of the joint position and holds it until it returns to its original place. (Note: This line provides guidance for an alternative repositioning method based on traditional practices.)
However, it must be that you look to see if the ligament is well placed; then put the patient's painful back on a table with extension and retraction of the hand involved. (Note: This line suggests monitoring the effectiveness of the repositioning technique by observing for any signs of discomfort or instability.) And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, you must put the patient's painful back on a table, and he watches to see his palm at the appearance of the joint; if it returns now, that's good. (Note: This line provides guidance for treating dislocations specifically located in the back of the hand.)
If not, if the strain with cauteries relaxes it again, then repeat this process. (Note: This line indicates that if initial attempts using cauterization do not provide satisfactory results, one may need to reapply and attempt once more.)
And if it cannot bear the pressure, and you cannot place it back in position after some days without complications, then the dislocated ligament may remain tight. (Note: This line emphasizes that failure to reposition a dislocated ligament properly could result in persistent issues.)
And you cannot deny that the patient's hands remain weak, and he can not perform any movement: so you know that there are fractured bones or arteries; if by cautery near the case, it is better than anything else. (Note: This line refers to the treatment options for a specific injury scenario wherein a patient's hands are weak and suggests that broken bone or artery might be involved.)
And when the hands are at rest, place them on the instrument we have mentioned before; then strain and let it remain for five years, then release and leave as they are now.
And if it cannot move well and has no cracks, then heat water in an iron pot and rub until heated properly.
From the dislocation of the shoulders of the hand
Never have they dislocated the joints of the hand to any particular part, never on the back of the palm or in the abdomen.
Then it is the joints, and place the dislocation in your sacks as long as he recovers, then support the head of these two joints, and move them towards where they are joined.
And let it remain for two years, and then replace it in the same place, as we have said before, and loosen it up again by movement, and hold it together, and do this often enough until it is narrowed.
And do so also if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and make it like you have done before, until it becomes sound again; and do the same thing if it is dislocated elsewhere.
double dislocation of the spinal vertebrae
When the spinal vertebra or neck is dislocated in several places, there are no remedies for it, because death comes quickly to the patient.
And the signs are that his dislocations occur spontaneously, he cannot hold them together, and many times they become loose on their own or affect one finger, two fingers, both arms, or all three limbs.
And many times his spinal vertebrae become four in one part; the one that moves to the back is called "Gibb's disease":
the remedy is if Gibbs' disease came in childhood, and he has no treatment nor cure for it.
From the ounge aise de mal. Laocasion estrange. Lepoudre aprezent.
But I have moved it according to my intention, and I have shaped staves in various ways.
And I say that in the swelling that comes before the navel, there is neither cure nor healing.
And also that which comes directly in the left and right flanks, and it cannot be healed properly unless I am referring to those precisely that come behind, as I have said.
And it is that the maladies are spread over his face in one irregular spot, and have strain within themselves so they do not break out there.
Then place a burning coal at the head in the ground forming it, and another as joints, and interweave there the pieces of flesh around the maladies, and another as hamstrings, and thighbones, and shinbones, and ankles.
And both ministers perceive the links, one at the head and the others as joints among the two burning coals.
And be well closed, the coal as we have said, and the surgeon places his hands on the formed spine so it relaxes.
And if it does not improve with this cure, take a stretcher of two long arms and bind under the parting, and place the maladies on one side, then support the head on the frame under the parting, and lay the padding of the stretcher on the spine. And the surgeon places his fingers on the other end of the stretcher, and presses well so it relaxes at the top; if you see, then do it with the turner who turns by hand.
And it is that you place two burning coals at the top of the maladies with an arm's length apart and between each coal there are a handbreadth and space.
And in each coal there is a hole or the turner operates on it and firmly place the coal in the ground so that they do not move; between these two coals there should be another coal rotating, because due to their turning, the pieces of flesh are turned by hand using small coals of an arm's length.
And then tie the link among the pieces at the top turner, and the other link towards the joints with another top turner, and each minister turns his turner throughout the entire piece of flesh, and the master places the spine in a way as we have said.
And when it is spread over the tablet of two yards long, and cover it with a drying oil abundant in honey, and then burners, and an anvil upon which to forge the healthy part of the spinal column, and bind them together as we have said, and use the maladies with subtle grumbling so they become healthy.
Inchief. Ames leu a la sancule choses lesorma.ié leu desirre ions leu theame. Amonks Amede itmei l'it Ainstejohn:ime theils. I'savision.componme itime ofire. Itere.
And there is never an appearance at the back of the spine joint in the upper back, and we consider it to be dislocation; and because this bone opens, one should not have any assumption that death may come about.
Dislocations of the hinge (spine).
Knowing that the hinge (spine) and shoulder joints only result in dislocations solely, they do not come like other joints; and the spinal joint is divided into four parts: between and behind, and in front of and behind; but more towards backward and rear.
And the knowledge of dislocations towards the side is that when joining the diseased leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer and the diseased joints are wider than the healthy ones, and the diseased knee cannot double its movement on fire. And is the thigh behind the incision heats up because the shoulder blade comes there.
And the sign of those whose injuries are towards back is that these accidents are contrary to them.
And the signs of those whose injuries are towards the front indicate that their legs are well-formed according to completion; all things, they do not double the knee movement due to pain, and if it is done, cannot go before, retains its urine, swells the anger, and when going, passes over the heel.
And the signs of those whose injuries are towards the rear indicate that they cannot expand their knee, double, and it is one leg more cramped than the other, the anger is lessened, and the shoulder blade at the front side between the ribs.
The treatment of this kind of dislocation indicates that it has always been present, and it takes time according to its position, where there is no remedy; and it does not require any assumption.
And in that which the dislocation is fresh, and it's about three kinds of dislocations, if you hurry to reset the joint, so it returns backward and forward, and the movement is towards right and left; perhaps it will return again, and there is no need for other care.
And if it does not return in this manner, it requires one powerful minister to dress the leg with two hands or on an iron board where it is bound above the knee. and other ministers extends his hand above the foot in such a way that he pushes out of their shoes, and others hold the edge of the shoe.
and they extend upwards and downwards once, as long as the diseased one is raised again on land afterward.
The fourre. It's oustes deuke en france of la mons. Cromwell forcour çoelea. And it iste ail thewis and the English translate illo. Isle (old age ilumage onsetillement Ilex: In French. Thereuphealthy of theuccuace demajocent. Ille thecaures.eanime la. Whatiches: iten,soul:caesar. Itcello.
If not so, it requires care for its appearance. When the dislocation is at a considerable distance from its original position, one must reset the dislocated limb on its side, then place the ligament near the root of the elbow, and along the line that runs inside the angle, and then reattach the ligament above this point towards the shoulder, and toward the forearm;
Then appoint some other assistants to his arms, and embrace the large tendon of the painful elbow, and extend it in this manner: if it returns now to its original position; and this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you cannot tighten it in this manner that we have mentioned before, then it is necessary to tie the injured limb together with a strong sling under both heels and thighs, and make the painful leg extended by more than the others.
Then hang it from the top of a pole, and then hanging from a long beam .ij. arms length; command one assistant to embrace the head of the elbow, and appoint other assistants around the painful elbow who also embrace it in this way because now the joint quickly returns.
And when the dislocation is at its extreme, if it hurts him so much as we mentioned in those with buboes, and straighten the sling under the painful leg itself, and also under the foot.
Then place .ij. pins on top of the joint and in the other limbs as well, then insert one pin between the elbows surrounding the painful elbow to give it shape. And cover it with wet cloths to prevent the wound from bleeding, then extend each assistant towards him and make the patient hold his hand where the dislocation is located.
If it returns well then that is good. But if not so, place him on the table and press him in this way as we mentioned for those with buboes, and make sure he doesn't move his painful shoulder.
And when the dislocation is in front of it, one must extend the painful leg quickly as I have said before; then make the patient hold his hand towards the shoulder and press with the other hand, pushing down from above towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at its extreme position, one should not extend the painful leg further downwards or lift it up from the ground, but rather make him lie in a position as we described for the lying on the shoulders after being evacuated to that place. And it should be positioned under his chin, and the sling extended as we have described before, and he must press down on the joint at the table.
And when the patient extends his legs, they will be equal in length. Then adjust the elbows and attach the bandage tightly, and tie a belt around him so that he does not move from this position.
And if he rests for two or three years, then place the bandage under his arms, and make sure they are equal in size, and tie it as before, for three years; then release him to walk well while his limbs are comfortable.
And if the jacquires. Ainee leu d’un fie sance a les cuixes.
The oftermarche.
And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at his knee, and if it does not do so, you know that it is dislocated.
And the restoration of all this is that you make the patient sit upright, extend his leg if he can, and place his back on his knee, and put his foot on your feet.
Then he takes his hand on your palms, and retracts between your two hands, then bends the kneecaps of both legs symmetrically; and other assistants extend his leg so that it returns to its place, indicating that it can bend its knee lightly.
And you apply the plaster on it, and raise the leg to the knee, then fasten the straps tightly for three or four years, and remove it; and do not work too much on the patient's painful limb until his members are stable.
And if the member is not, with strong extension as we have said in the treatment of hernia, until it is sound again.
from the dislocation of the heel (heel dislocation)
The heels are sometimes torn off completely, and repeatedly displaced again.
And the signs are that his ankle is dislocated, and you try before the part where it has been dislocated:
The repositioning is lightly done, and when he is removed from his legs, you must extend them gently as soon as possible.
And when it is completely dislocated, it must be that you make the patient sit upright and place two assistants on him except by his leg.
Then you take the leg in your right hand, and then twice with your left hand, and lift it up nicely, and place it firmly on high.
And do this three times as we have said, lifting and carrying the leg upwards; if it returns, that's good; if not, repeat the procedure, because it comes back.
And if it cannot return in this way, make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and fix two sticks firmly under his knees between his legs, and wrap a cloth around him tightly so that he does not cut himself.
Then you place the assistants on his knees, and another two assistants extend the leg either to your hands or to one of them where they hold it over the neck of the thigh. Then each assistant extends equally, and the sticks should be firmly between the patient's knees to hold him when you extend it.
Then place the pins equally on his hands, and another two assistants tie the healthy leg above its position, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is at a certain point, you apply the plaster and strap tightly on it, and bind the thigh, and tie the cloth around the leg, and warn those nerves that are behind the ankle not to be overstretched.
Then leave it for two or three years and loosen the straps if they are too tightened, then release one day or quarterly, and let the patient walk in the middle of those three years. And suppose it is not. Siens: ains :
:grosse cest-aure the cachetures laisse:age.eanime parle dexure a French, as itil before 12.
Of daggers he orders the Moor to let his hair grow long and even; and if they prick at their roots, he holds them firm so they do not move until born.
When the deed is dislocated, it certainly implies effort in correcting it, and it's a simple matter.
And if the dislocation is not in any place of its origin, it indicates that you must make the Moor sit on either one flat surface or upon an even table with all four legs straight. Then place your patient over these joints and press firmly until he relaxes again.
And if he is level and nothing appears to be wrong, then place the patient's foot on a table with two daggers, stretch it firmly, leave it for three years, and then remove it; and let him rest until he becomes sound again.
Of wound and dislocation together.
When the wound comes with a dislocation, and they try to restore it, there are many times when the patient's pain is great.
If you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you do not seem knowledgeable about it and have not used it for a long time, and if you are humane and merciful and slow to act, then you should be careful.
And at the beginning of things that soothe and cool down the wound, leave it in God's hands if you do not see hope for healing. And when you see hope, now mend the limb at its place, so that it becomes loose again.
And when the limb is at its place, soothe it with cooling things and care for the wound as required, using dry ointments.
And if with the dislocation there is a break, and small bones are displaced, realign the bone and do what we have said in simple diseases.
And keep from entering into a state of fear, as I have said before, because it is determined by your Creator, and for the sake of your strength and courage. Amen.
