O you, most dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical science together with its explanation and by its explanations and definitions. And it came to me in a vision that I should complete this treatise with this part 'chirurgery', which is the work of hands.
And because the work of hands is practiced in our region and has spread throughout all, so it is persecuted and rejected that science; and nothing remains from its force but small descriptions found in books by the ancients whose works have been moved. And from this arises the errors and foolishness, with understanding closed off and knowledge abandoned.
It seems to me that I will revive this treatise with the order of exposure and explanation and abbreviation; coming together are the forms of cautery instruments and other tools of work along with adjustment in explanation and preparation as needed.
And because no good masters are found among us at present, the art of medicine has been abandoned. And it is necessary for those involved to be versed in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until they understand the judgment of limbs, and their forms and connections and separations thereof, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and the number of joints, and their movement and vessels that move and rest, and from where they originate.
And thus Hippocrates says the joint with no movement is greatly valued, and that which moves little; especially in the art of hands.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that if one does not understand what has been mentioned earlier, he should take care to avoid errors and causing harm to people; therefore I have wanted to warn many times those who involve themselves in this science and abandon sense and experience.
For I saw a mad doctor who cut an abscess of hard swellings or the neck of a woman, and severed the arteries in her neck; hence so much blood poured out that the woman bled to death between her hands.
And I saw another doctor who treated a stone in a man's bladder, and the stone was large; he accidentally removed part of the bladder with it, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and if it was too much for them to cut, they would die.
A physician took charge of another patient, our land's duke who had a broken leg and an accompanying wound; the inexperienced doctor pushed the break next to the wound with great force without leaving any gap, and left it that way until completion; he instructed him not to dislocate again; the leg remained as such until fully healed and rejoined at the joint, ultimately leading to its demise.
I went quickly called by him and hurried to come dislocate his leg; and when he saw it was dislocated so peacefully, he felt no pain at all.
However, the contamination was already established in the member and could not be healed; the corruption continued through the limb until the entire limb was completely lost.
And see a certain doctor who collapsed an encrusted abscess, and then inflamed it due to the wickedness of its lordship.
Because a cancer, when it is filled with black bile humor, does not require that you touch it with iron unless there is part of the head where everything can be removed if corrupted.
And therefore, dear son of the wool weaver, you must know that work by hand is divided into two divisions: this is to say, in each one I will show where there is fear and danger in this book.
Because it is necessary for you to guard against them, so that the foolish may not speak ill of you.
If you take up your arms in conviction and embark on treating the sick with ease and firmness, using the best means that by God's grace you may come to health and be praised; and let go of the illnesses that offer hopeful recovery; and remove doubt from your weapons so that within yourself you can come from this world to another of glory.
Galien says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take ill diseases for care that you may be called foolish by the wise."
I have composed this treatise in three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cauteries and medical-watery caustics, and the chapters are ordered from head to toe; and about swelling forms, metal caustics, and everything necessary for the work.
The second chapter is about tailoring and piercing, and suction cups and wounds, and extraction of arrows, and similar things; the chapter is ordered and forms of swelling.
The third chapter is on restoring dislocations and sprains, and similar matters; and it orders the resetting of the head down to the fingers, and the shapes of deformities.
So as we remember the work, it is necessary for me to say about the quality of help and the harm of each constitution.
I say that the qualities of aid and harm are words of longest length and subtle science and secret remedies; and on this topic spoke many wise men, and agreed to it; and my purpose is little their words, because I repeat at length.
I say that fire cautery helps in all temperaments where there is matter; for two temperaments are to be considered: namely hot with moisture and dry without moisture.
In the combined hot and dry temperament with matter, some say fire cautery is greatly helpful; while others argue the opposite: that fire cautery only benefits diseases arising from heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot and should not be treated with heat from warmth nor dryness on its own; but those who argue otherwise say that fire cautery greatly helps diseases that are both hot and dry, which occur in the bodies of men. When you examine the body and its moisture in relation to hot temperament, you find the body cold.
And I adhere to this statement. For I have found it no time through experiment.
le ben; the same que heu, they do not s 0 (e: they to the time. If younus : And all the wise ones gathered together for the cautery.
And know this, my child, that fire cautery is a secret of healing and brings greater good than burning with medical heat.
For the fire is simple and comes to fury only in the member that is burnt, and harms no other limb if it has any name.
Ardent medicines come from one limb to another by adjoining, and bring severe illnesses of healing to the affected member; and sometimes they kill the patient.
The fire for its high heat and goodness of its essence does not do this unless there is excess.
And this is what I have found through experiment and long service to the field, as well as my study in which I have put great effort, on the truth of things; therefore, I excuse myself for the length of words, for it pleases me not that you take away the secret that is kept or written here about fire, and the quality of the work, how it defeats diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; so receive this in your thoughts.
And know, son, when to perform the cauterizations and poultices.
And I say that cautery is appropriate in all circumstances, because the harm occurring can be addressed by using cauterization; and especially when a cauterization is necessary for urgent and severe pain which cannot wait until more serious afflictions come upon the limb.
And never think like the foolish physician; because in the illness cured by cauterization there is no relapse; and they claim it this way; but it's not as they believe, for cauterizations are medicine that changes the complexion, dries the humors which cause pain, and its value lies more in its swift efficacy and the virtue of its work and authority.
And one possible thing is that the illness arises at any time according to the constitution of the patient and the location of the disease and its nature; and are combined in him excesses by the acquisition of meats and similar things, unless caustics administered on site where there is little excess and moisture, as with caustics for pain relief, and similar things, such that no further pain arises; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why caustics are called the last of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that caustics have value after medicine, their understanding is false, and caustics are the last of medicine because when we administer treatments for any illness and they prove ineffective, then we administer our caustic treatment, and it has effect. Then truly, caustics are the last of medicine, not according to the foolish beliefs of people.
The ancients said that cauterization instruments made of gold are more effective than those made of iron, and they stated there were no exceptions other than for the quality of gold and the high value of its substance; they also said that the heat from cauterization does not cause putrefaction but is indeed true as I have tested it myself, and found that in some men it is so; cauterization with gold instruments are as effective as those made of iron, as they claimed.
Even so, when you heat an instrument of gold, it is not because the color changes due to heating and then cools off quickly; if overheated, they require rekindling; thus there are sufficient obstacles.
And so we use the fire cautery that has proven effective in our work.
Now I have ordered this chapter from head to foot, so that the path may be easier to find.
The olive oil caustic
These cauterizations are for moisture and cold in the head, and therein one makes due to an illness called 'soda', and from numerous humors descending into the eyes, ears, causing a multitude of dreams, pain of teeth and throat, as well as all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar afflictions.
the se quitter that:
And then the patient should sit down, with their hands crossed in front of them, and place their hands on a small stool; afterwards put the base of your palm over the base of his neck between his two eyes; and wherever your fingers come to rest, there it will bleed, then heat up the cautery known as "olivare," for which here is its shape:
And place the heat on that spot with ink, and gently draw and stretch your hand little by little while turning it; then slowly release the hand until you see the small bone one piece; if you do not see it, resume heating as I have instructed until you can see the bone; afterwards take a bit of wax, put soft cotton inside, place on the spot and leave for three days; after that, cover with linen cloth soaked in oil; let sit until the burning is gone; then treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmaçon," until it heals.
And if said by ancients that the longer an open wound remains, the more it purifies itself; and for this reason, we aid in its healing.
And some say that one must thoroughly cauterize if a portion of the bone is burned, and then remedy what has been scorched from the bone, and heal it.
And others say that one must cauterize extensively, and push so hard as to flatten the bone as wide as the wreath women place in their hairs because the humors flow out of it; and one should thoroughly cleanse an open wound; afterwards, one should heal and bind.
And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to me wholly good in all cases; rather than that in certain patients where there is room for fear; and it appears to me that I should leave them alone; because the head, as we attest from other members, becomes weakened by continuous natural solutions. Similarly, when the patient's head is naturally feeble, and the first sign of cauterization seems more beneficial and healing to me, then in such cases, my work aims for this combined salvation.
From acute pain in the head
When the pain in the head becomes chronic and lasts a long time, the patient should use years and pills called "coclearia," as well as purging of the head and oils and plasters; but if you perform the cautery we have previously mentioned, it is not effective.
Be careful if the patient's head is of a strong constitution and not too cold; then you should perform the cautery below that we have mentioned above, for a little while.
by the. ous and but that s. This-do.
In the treatment of the head wound with fire cautery. When sudden pain occurs in a part of the head and the illness extends to the ear, and the head is purged by medicinal substances, and other treatments as mentioned in the division of diseases have been applied, but nothing helps: then one performs cauterization according to two methods, that is, with cold medicine and salt.
The cauterization with cold medicine is that you burn a piece of wax, and remove the bark and cover it again with two grains in two places, then make an incision on the temple where the pain occurs so that you can replace the wax under the skin; and when it has been replaced well and left like this for sixteen hours; then release and bandage the place of the wax, leaving the wound open for two or three days; then apply cotton plunged in butter until scabbing occurs.
After the ointment treatment until it is cleaned; and if you see any written prescriptions for burning medicines that I have mentioned or discussed in the treatise on burning medicines.
Heat the iron of this kind as follows. The shape of the iron to be used is:
And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a bell or has .i. corner, and near one side there's a small opening; and place it on the inflamed area, hold your hand and gently rotate the iron slightly until half of the edge appears charred; lift your hand so that the artery does not burn further back, and abundant blood flows out.
After placing cotton in the wound for three days, then put moistened cotton with butter, and treat the wound with ointment until healed; if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellus" at the tip, be careful not to seal the artery in this migraine which is not ancient.
Migraine
When you are treating migraines as we have discussed in the divisions of diseases, and if neither medicine nor iron suffices, then it is necessary to heat the "cultellus" cautery until it becomes white; place your hand on the tender area for half an hour and a quarter of its length, remove your hand once, and strain so that you do not seal the artery but only reach near the bone; beware of jaw movement when biting down and ensure that nerves are neither shocked nor causing spasms in patients, and guard against bleeding from the sealed artery as it may cause great fear and concern to those unfamiliar with the procedure or not experienced. Leave the vessel midway; but I will tell you how to stop the blood flow when the artery is sealed, and show you where this happens in this book.
If you see that these cauterizations do not ease the illness at all and the patient is suffering, caulk it in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, apply the cautery we have described or extraction of the artery with the cautery having two blades; this type of cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
From coldness-induced ear pain
When there is ear pain from coldness and you have tried soluble medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and the pains do not ease, then cool this caustic called "points," of which here is the form:
After pointing all around the patient's ear where both sides feel pain, and moving slightly above the ear root after finding the correct position of dislocation; and at six points around each ear; treat the area until it is healthy again.
Regarding mouth tormentor
Torture that must be treated by fire is only those caused by moisture, as we have mentioned in the division of diseases; and do not apply heat to conditions resembling scurvy or black hairs from nerves.
When treating this type of torture that causes swelling from wasps and head purges, gargling, etc., then you should causticate the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, another slightly behind the temple, and the third between the two lips; place the cautery on a healthy part, directing it toward the top of the ear just below the tip of the horn, and another along the length of the temple as long as a finger; leave the cautery until half the skin is scorched; this is the effect of the cautery.
And this is the type of incision we have shown before, but it is slightly more subtle and requires that the knife be somewhat larger; then heal them as I have previously stated until they are sound.
When treating an old apoplexy as we have said, and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then you should make three cauterizations: two on each of the two points of the horns (above) on the head, one at the top, and one in the middle, and one where they are called 'vessels' as we have previously said, and apply a cautery to the mouth of the stomach; treat it as we have mentioned before.
Of lethargy
This disease requires giving the patient large years and purging pillows to clear the brain; then, after removing the chief of the patient's head entirely, place upon their occiput a hemp poultice as described in treatments for plasters; this is how cauterization should be performed: do so as I have instructed.
If he is thus healthy, it's good; and if not, perform the same as described: three cauterizations of ember below the head to the collarbone with two inches between each cautery; treat them like the others, and if you see a need for additional support, apply one in the middle; and if necessary, perform other cauteries on both horns until he is healthy as before. The cauteries called "olivares" are to be done as previously described.
of coldness in the head It is necessary that the head be cleaned of hair and as we have previously mentioned; after shaving the patient's head, then make an incision in the head and along each horn, and three on either side of the spine at the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers much pain, and the illness is severe, do four incisions along the spine of the back; leave it until the whitest hair grows, then lift your hand; afterward heal as long as it is healthy, and let the incision called "olivare" be done as we have previously mentioned.
Of epilepsy
Surgical procedures should only be performed on patients who are phlegmatic, and first the brain must be cleansed along with other treatments that we have mentioned in the section when patients are suffering greatly and enduring much medical pain.
If it is a child who cannot endure much suffering, let them gargle and chew to cleanse the brain often with good meats; afterward, they have their head shaved bald, followed by one cautery as we have previously described, then another on the vein, and each horn; and if patients are very ill and enduring much, perform cauteries as I have said to those who have paralysis and softening of limbs, along the spine of the back and neck, in a manner similar to how I have previously described.
If it is a child who is suffering, perform one subtle cautery as follows:
When caused by melancholy are the excesses or corrupted humors and heavy phlegm, then the cautery of parts as we have said to those with paralysis.
And if caused by melancholy are the diminishing excesses to melancholy, and the body of the ill patient is moist, then give him something to drink so that his brain may be clarified, according to what he has in terms of classification.
After treating the head of the sick person; after making .i. poultice well made, as .i. circle, put it in his head; and the patient should be crossed, and held securely from all sides; present the liniment, and rub with butter of old sheep; and warm the cloth on fire quickly so that they may endure to pour hot water over them; after emptying the circle inside the head, let it cool down; and do this to each sick person once a week with other good governance until he is sound.
When you see the need to cauterize, perform it in various ways with all aspects of cauterization. This manner of cauterization moistens the brain evenly; then apply cotton wool soaked in butter and fat from geese.
From the edge of the eyes. When the signs come first in the eyes as I have described in the division, then begin and give to the patient something that clarifies the mind, protects from all moisture, and makes them sweat or bathe several times on an empty stomach.
After commanding the patient to turn his head backward, and making a cautery in the middle of the head, make two cauteries on either side of the temples where the root of the hair is among both eyes together or in one; seal off all veins and arteries that are under the forehead, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and guard against blood leakage, and if you see too much blood flowing, stop it with a thread as best you can.
And I will teach you about extracting the artery and making an incision for how to staunch it; never make a cautery or ligature below the two bones at the back.
And from the body, tears.
When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and over the veins, or near the arteries that appear in front of the forehead; and it is seen to be excess cold and phlegmatic fluids, then perform the caustic treatment as I have described at the beginning of this section: one on the head, two above each temple, and two along the eyebrows near the bone; and if there is a need for more, cauterize carefully just under the eyebrow with small treatments.
From within the body of tears through the eyes
When you treat according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three cups of urine cockles; afterward make a caustic treatment on his head, or an oil caustic boil; and also two caustics called "cloves" above the eyebrows near the cheekbones, one just below them; and watch out for the artery so that you do not close it. And this is the form of fire cautery called "clavis":
When the paper of oil is softened by illness and moisture, then one must use the "cautarization" from this fire cautery called "olivary". This is its form:
And if you see that there are two cauteries on the two warts as long as the eyelids are; do not leave the hand except until one-third of the paper is burnt, according to the manner I have described.
s Never is it the case that hairs of the eyelids become inwardly directed, and touch the eye, resulting in cauterization by two methods: one with fire or with burning medication.
The patient is instructed to let the hairs grow long and even; if they touch at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they are fully grown.
When the hairs have grown long and even, then place the patient in bed; above the eyelids, make a figure similar to a feather of mirtle (a type of plant), with the beginning signs below the lashes. Then put cotton wool soaked in egg white and musk oil on the eye, then apply the cauterizing tool as shown here:
After the cauterization on the area you have marked with small and frequent touches, let the skin be scorched there; and the signs of health in the wound are that you see the paper recede, and the hairs rise to the size of an egg; then remove your hand, and leave it for three days, after which apply soft cotton soaked in butter until the burn heals; afterwards treat with ointment until it is healthy.
And if after this the hairs come in and the paper softens as before, then continue the cauterization on that same spot; and if the hair is not sufficient, cauterize until the paper rises to its natural place, and they are even, and do not poke at the original size.
The fiery medical cauterization is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a leaf of parchment; then take French soap and hot wax, half an ounce each, and grind them well together; do it hastily so as not to cool down, then sprinkle on the shape you have made like a myrtle leaf, and place paper over it; if the illness is in one part only, work with just that side; if both sides are similar. Then put cotton wool into boiling water; and the patient'lete the head of the patient be safe and press your two fingers on the medicine, and squeeze a little every time the patient feels the irritation from the medicine, as he feels burning like fire. When you have done this at length, then apply the medicine as needed. And when the swelling is gone, raise the limb again, and if you see it raised as though it had been lifted by constraint of fire or incision; then it's well done. If not, apply more medicine to the limb or where the medicine has worked, until your treatments are equal and your eyes are sharp; then cover with cotton soaked in oil until the smell is gone, after which cure the joint with ointment called 'dyafenis' and others, as long as it remains healthy.
And you must carefully watch your work with great care so that the medicine does not harm your eyes. If the paper becomes thin again, and the hairs prick in the oil, then restart the medicine on that limb as before; after which cure it until healthy; and this is the form of a foul mirror:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to this, let there be constraints; and do not put back the correct path for those who study this art.
For treating a fistula with cauterization
When treating a fistula as we have described in the division of diseases, and if your treatments do not benefit, then it is necessary that you perform cauterization according to this manner.
to the cort i bida; sul. icie as:ss eid and, they, but. I; So, so. Chizcor nonece f (the ou; its pate t
After pressing the fistula if it is open, treat both pus and dryness; and if it is closed, work on the surrounding area; afterwards place a hot caustic on it, hold your hand on the caustic over the part above the oil without letting your hands go wild; then put the caustic in the oil's fat, and let it fester.
If you begin the cautery up to the bone, it would be best. If not, start the cautery again once more, and leave for three days if needed; afterwards place cotton wool in butter, and apply the drying ointment until healed, and after forty days when he is no longer sore, apply corrosive medication until the bone is exposed; then follow according to what you find in your treatise.
And there is a method of treating a fistula that the ancients never mentioned. Listen to this about a fistula and its location; afterwards place in the opening a subtle comb like this one with its shape: They make it in the quantity of a .З. of lead; and hold your hand or bandage firmly, so that the patient does not move at all, until the lead has melted into oil; and you must place cotton on the oil for the sick person: the lead will then be where there is an abscess, and it heals with a miraculous sanity.
And if the abscess is healed by the caustic treatment that we have mentioned, it is good. If not, one must administer a poultice to the neck and bring the fistula back to its proper place in accordance with how it should be properly located there.
of cracks on lips Many times, there occur bubbles on the lips that are called "hairs," especially in children's lips.
When you treat these bubbles as we have described in the following method, and if the treatment does not work, then apply a small scraping cautery according to this form:
And place it carefully into those bubbles until they burst; afterwards, remove the wax residue so that it is clean.
by son ça ben'
When an abscess occurs at the root of the throat or in the eye socket, palate, or around the tooth roots, after becoming putrid and rotten and aged and turning into a fistula; you treat it as we have explained in divisions, and it does not help: then you must have a cautery according to the size of the faster; after burning the opening or mouth of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron becomes cold from its touch, and thereafter at that spot; and do so once or twice, after the treatment as we have explained earlier, until it is healed; if treated thusly, it is good; but if not, then you must expose the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in this chapter.
By movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and teeth move, and you treat it with medicines but it does not work: then put the head of the patient in his health; after heating the cautery as described below so that you place a spoon on the tooth; and insert within the tooth cautery warmly, and hold your hand until heat comes from the root of the tooth; afterwards lift up hands and resume the cautery according to your will; after wash the patient's mouth with salt, and keep for an hour and a half.
And in such a manner, the finger which was moving is fixed, the gums softened and held still, and the moisture corrupted dried up.
Of the pain of the fingers
When the pain of the fingers comes from coldness or heat and medicinal remedies are ineffective, then there is need for cauterization in two ways: cauterization with butter and cauter # query
Cautery of butter is such that you take butter from a cow, and the end in a spoon made of iron or copper; then take cotton and wrap around the tip of a tent, and the wool soaked in butter forms, and place on the aching tooth quickly; thus do this often until its virtues reach the root of the tooth, and if you see hairs and cotton in cold butter, place it on the painful tooth, and place a heated iron on it until the heat reaches the hardening of the tooth.
Caustery of fire is such that you take a piece of iron or copper wire and make it thick enough so the heat does not reach the patient's mouth; then heat the caustic, from which the form will come later, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the caustic has cooebed. Do this often because the pain will lessen that day or the next. It is necessary for the patient to fill his mouth with good butter in the urgency of that caustery, then remove it; and here is what remains of the caustic:
When scrofulous swellings are caused by cold humors and do not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the fire of which comes after as follows: two openings for fumes to issue from the other part of the cautery; apply hot cautery once or twice over the abscess until it reaches the edge of the abscess; if the abscess is small, place a cautery according to its size and leave for three days; cover with cotton soaked in butter as long as there are no burns; afterwards treat the wound with ointments and bandages until healed.
:1, witht ecz:
From dislocation When all diseases of the prostate are due to cold moisture, and the patient does not have fever or chills, and it is an early illness; there should be two cauters on either side in front of the eyes; and another cauter between the two testicles; and let there be a cauter called "clavicle" according to the shape that has been described.
And if you see this, perform the cautery by holding the entire cautery called "points" which is used in the ear disease as mentioned earlier; and let the points be up to 30 or slightly more. After treating the area as described before, have the cauteries at intervals of three rains according to this form:
And therefore are the cauterizations lighter because you make them thrice in one sitting.
Regarding the dislocation of the shoulder blade When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot remain in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movements as we have experienced, then one must first address the dislocation. After soaking the patient on their back and sides; then lift the heart located within the space between your left hand's thumb and index finger; and if the joint is dislocated, heat the caustic that has two iron nails with a specific shape.
And causticize the heart until it reaches the ribs, and the figure of the caustic comes with four caustics; and this is done with the caustic that has three iron nails because the figures of causticization are these four caustics; and the nerves according to the subtlety of a tent is the shape of the caustic that has three iron nails.
And at no time is it dislocated near this particular nerve, for which there are six cauterizations.
After the cautery is applied for the grazes, wrap with linen; then allow the patient to rest and do not move their limb for a long time until it is well supported.
And if it is dislocated above, which happens rarely, then apply a thick layer of plaster for the cautery application or many small cauterizations. Because the joint is reduced, and bone is dry, and the patient is relieved.
t f: bonceze ; you; T1;l's et te ne fun: Ca’t s, nor: ca peu par l’re :
The old ones said that you must make pleurisy fire cauteries from the roots of aristolochia in such a way: take a long root of aristolochia as large as possible and find it, dry it, and let it be both thick and long like your fingers; soak it in oil, hold it with tongs, and burn. One fire cautery between the forehead and neck, and two small ones slightly downwards on the part below the beard; two fire cauteries between the fifth rib and sixth, inclined slightly backwards; one fire cautery at mid-thigh, another above the stomach; one between the two shoulders, and two in line with the two ribs further from the pleurisy fire cautery between the two shoulders; do not press your hand hard, but open it widely as when smelling.
And some ancient ones said that no man should use a fire cautery resembling razors, and heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches an abscess; then great pain follows as we have said in the liver abscess. However, in this work there is fear or many die now, or a fistula appears which cannot be healed.
They say that no one should use razors resembling fire cauteries, and heat it, place it between the ribs until it reaches an abscess; then great pain follows as we have said in the liver. However, there is now a fistula appears which cannot be healed.
When treating the disease of madness as we have discussed in its types and treatments, and it is not effective, then there are three methods of cautery that are all beneficial.
The first method is such that you make three or four cauteries, aligning according to the length of madness, according to the figure of the liver-cautery we have said beforehand; and do not press your hand all at once on each cautery, but let the patient be soothingly seated upon their back.
Another method of cautery is such that you use the cautery with two nerves, as we have shown in shoulder dislocation; and lift the head where madness arises from the left side, and make elevations when lifting the head according to its size, according to the length of the body, and let the cautery be according to the breadth of the body.
After placing the two inflamed nerves until the core is pierced on the other side, and then use the caustic hot iron, thus there will be four (healed). If you see so, cauterize with the hot iron at four places. Then treat as if it has acquired long-lasting pus like the previously mentioned cures.
Ydropsie is a term used to describe an excessive accumulation of fluid in the body.
Cauterization is not for hydropsy (edema), but in the manner called "ascites". When you treat it according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary to make four cauters around the hips, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back near the spine, and one at a place above the knees; and let the cauterizations be close to the source of edema (keur).
After leaving the fire cautery open to let pus drain for a long time, do not neglect the care of the patient afterward; healing would be hastened, and together with God's help, both intentions are fulfilled.
The shape of the cauterization for the belly be the clivulus that we have previously shown; and for the back, it should be an olive-shaped, as shown before in this manner.
To address swelling When the fingers are swollen in one who is jaundiced and bright with yellow bile, it is necessary to apply the fire cautery on the back of the hand between the little finger and ring finger; lift your hand with the cautery turning towards you. And do not go too deep in, thus avoiding squeezing out more yellow bile, and let the cautery be according to this form:
After applying two fire cauteries on each leg at the ankle's edge; let the cauterie be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, mid-leg; leave the cauteries to run lengthwise so bile can drain out; afterwards, treat the other sores as we have said.
Regarding the melancholy condition.
When the solution of a stomach comes from coldness and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive virtues that are in the stomach and intestines are flooded, they cannot be treated by usual methods; and you see the patient well suffering with great strength, so do .i. large cautery on the stomach according to what has been discussed before or stomach cauterization, around which cauterizations subtly circulate; and four cauteries surrounding the belly subtly within one fine cautery, and two cauteries above the hips.
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, do a large cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each finger, and two small cauteries above the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is profitable when there is good aid.
For the treatment of hemorrhoids.
When bunions are present at the base of one or more toes and are long-standing with large cold and moist corrupted humors, and treated as we have described in sections, if it proves unhelpful, then apply cauterization: three on the spine along the back, that is gradually forward from under the almandate point, and one below the buttocks; two points.
And if you think the stomach is cooled and the flesh does not cook, and you see swelling of the face, then apply one large cauterization to the stomach as previously mentioned, another on the liver, and a third below the kidneys where all cauterizations are located; leave the cauterization for long periods. After that, treat the limb until it is healthy again.
From the chilblains which are called "theelule"
When you come to the joint, wet the caustic which seems like a brush, and then set it all ablaze on that part of the joint touched; let your hand and the caustic reach until the vein's birth, from which blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is much swelling, cauterize each one as we have said; afterwards treat with beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you use a large caustic on inflammations, it will provide greater aid.
Of a wound poorly treated
When patients cannot endure cutting or incision, we will tell you about it in its place; if there comes a sickness that cannot be healed but by caustic treatment.
When it comes to any abscess that is old and filled with putrefaction and corrupted moisture, you must probe the entire delicate area carefully, knowing every part of the extent. After heating the cautery which appears like a razor, insert it into the fistula according to the amount that has entered inside, and resume the cauterization until the body is purged from all impurities, once or twice or three times, depending on the quantity of matter needed; be careful not to burn any nerves present, and avoid large veins. If the fistula reaches the bladder or intestine, protect these openings, and do not perform an operation elsewhere except where it is natural, considering that it is not entirely foreign; after treating the opening until healthy, if the material inside has been expelled over a long period, then know that the opening is completely healed. And if the materials have not been removed, understand that the cavity is infected and corrupted at its base; thus as one of those we will mention in relation to the site.
Concerning kidney disease When the pain of cold comes with severe swelling and lack of desire for women, then you should make fire cautery on both sides with the pointed caustic iron that we have previously mentioned; if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, which will provide greater help.
Of the bladder When the bladebag is heavy and cold with moisture, so that the patient holds urine, then you should make fire cautery on the part behind the bladder where the hair begins at the tips of the fingers; there should be one cauterization to the right and one to the left, each as long as our finger joints; and you must also make a back cauterization along the spine, or two if needed; and use the pointed caustic iron according to the previously mentioned form.
Of the dislocation of the joints When the testicles are cold and moist, unable to conceive, and the flowers (testes) are corrupted and their ends delayed; when they come, it causes great pain: then one must do iii. cauteries around the scrotum, as we have said in urinary bladder cautery, and ii. cauteries behind the back; and let the clavicle be cauterized, as we have said.
Of the hip
est (buttray the zen dou that:m'fle t
If these fire cauteries are not present, make three large olive-wood cauteries, and the cauterization should be as wide as all the keys; cauterize until it is healed.
Of the pain in the hip When pain comes in the hip joint and it is coldness and moisture, and the patient has been treated as we have said in the division and treatment does not work, and the disease is long-standing: then you must purge the patient of large humors with foul pills, or other good similar pills.
After the fire cautery; and there are two ways of performing it: that is to say using medicinal herbs and fire cautery. Fire cautery has many methods, one such method being as follows: you make triangular burns around the thigh pouch three times with sufficient depth and width, keeping a space between each burn the size of an almond; it should be in the shape of an olive. Another time, the burn is made inside directly under the top part of the thigh, so that there are four such burns following this pattern:
And if you see the burn in the circular manner we have mentioned earlier for the thigh dislocation; but make it such that the circle contains the entire thwart and all parts of length are burnt.
And that is how it's done for sciatica when the pain stays in the thigh and does not reach the thigh or the leg. If it goes up to the thigh and the leg, then you make two burns where the sick person indicates their pain lies, and one burn just above the ankle four finger breadths; and it should be a cuticular cautery, and it must burn the length of parts. And if the patient feels that the pain has extended up to either two toe or three fingers away, then you make at the pointy burn which is called "points".
And if it is necessary to act further; and if there are signs that the pain comes from under the knee towards the thigh, perform cauterization with a cutting caustic or circular one, ensuring good care in all your cauterizations so you do not continue burning the nerves and large arteries, and cause no further harm or constriction to the patient.
And I have seen others who performed cauterization on the ankle joint, and they continued until the leg was completely withered, as were the bones, and all the bones perished. Afterward, a stomach treatment which caused death.
And if the pain is in two parts together, perform cauterization on each part accordingly. // And they say about the caustic for the hip joint, which follows this manner, make it out of a type of iron as large as a little ship'leteal or slightly smaller, and be placed between gaps with space equal to that of a nut of peas; have two partitions across its length, like this too, and also evenly spaced; and there should be an iron bar well made. This is the shape:
And let it be heated until all are red and blistered, then place it on the bandage of the injured thigh, and turn it over to the ribbed side; and once cauterize with a hot iron and leave for three days; and afterwards apply an ointment poultice for extended periods; after wound care until healed.
Albuquerque says we use little of this cautery due to fear of its appearance, and few people use it; nonetheless, such good cauldrations exist that can be borne, and where they take hold.
from the pain in the back
When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or percussion or from excessive blood loss, or from similar expansion of cold matter, none of these resembles fire cauterization; rather it is for those who have suffered an infusion of cold substance.
After the patient has been purged of putrid pills or other similar substances, place them on their back where they feel pain; mark three lines with dashes, and in each line do five fire cauterizations or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure. The cauterization should be done like the one called "pins", and if so, make three or four at the midline incision according to this method:
Often this illness comes in small children, and the signs at the beginning are that they have a tight belly when they lie down, and fear; you will find it at the last vertebra of the back and near its appearance on other vertebrae.
When you see this wound being cleaned, cauterize it with a caustic lancet in the following manner.
If the caustic lancet is required for any part of the spine, and you see it, cauterize around the spine with a pointed cautery making 2 or 3 lines that are close to each other. After cleaning, leave it until healed as we have said, but be careful not to place cauterization in an area of nerve bundle swelling.
For pain in the joints
When joint pain is due to moistures that have spread to every part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, which those called "gout" properly, and when it is caused by cold conditions and cannot be cured with medicines, then treatment is done through cauldrons placed around the joints of the foot, and each cauldron should be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if there is a need to grasp the face of the foot, then make cauldrons all around each cauldron called "point." And when pains come close to joints and other joints, which often occurs, then place three or four cauldrumbes on each part; for every olive-shaped cauldron. If more are needed, make more but do not hold your hand too far until the color of the skin has changed.
And if the pains descend to joints and the back, then treat with the cauldron as we have said in this chapter. And if there is pain in the hands, place points around the fossa two lines; and if there remains no pain in the fingers, then make cauterizations at each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if pains come to the elbows or shoulder blades, treat each part, and take good care of the patient and administer medicines. For if you provide good care and purge phlegm, he will be healthy with God's help.
From the habit of the sickness
When the habit of the disease comes with buboes that descend to the knees and are newly formed, when you see them bursting, it is not advisable to wait until tomorrow; and use things that facilitate the belly so that the boils discharge from within. Afterward, let him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his foreskin as long as the buboes are healed, and massage the legs at his thighs, and apply a tourniquet below the habit of the disease above the bone of the wrist; and do this with a movement that is like half of a circle over the body. Then heat the cautery as follows:
Then massage the buboes at their place; and have the assistant soak his hand such that they do not return to him; work well on the legs of the patient, and put a cushion and a sheet over the thighs, and another under the feet with which he rubs his hands. Then apply the causticum over the mark made by your entire hand, and hold it straight and steady as long as you reach the bone, and if you do not reach on the first try, then repeat until you come up to the bone; and be careful that the boil does not ooze while doing this. Do not burn with fire, or else by this the patient will die or suffer other harm.
And know that when you come up to the bone with the cautery, your efforts are worthless. It is proper for children's cauteries to be subtle according to their size, and large people's also large according to their measure; after three days treat it at the caustic wound with butter until it is healed; then use other ointments until it is healthy, and lay the patient on his back for forty days so that the wound becomes well-stitched; and ensure that its movements are long-lasting, so that the bubble does not come out when it starts to walk.
And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, dress him with well-made bandages and keep them for another forty days; and let him have good rest, that he works little and is wary of too much drinking or eating, and shouting loudly; and when this teaching is completed, then he will be entirely healthy. And I shall say hereafter the treatment in his chapter on haircutting. Concerning the treatment for stomach wounds.
When other humors come into other bodies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, then make one fire cautery according to its quantity, and the length should be equal to three fingers; afterwards treat as we have said; and none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a fire cautery at three angles in this manner:
But first sign the edge of the incision and make one line for the width above the humor, and another below it, and hold your hand near all of the cauldriform cautery. However, the first cautery is lighter and more mobile.
from ancient pain in any limb When pain comes to any limb, whether from falling or being struck, and the pain lasts a long time, with medical treatment proving ineffective, then it should be treated with cauterization using a caustic known as "points," and the cauterizations should be applied according to the length of the limb, its size, weakness, quality, location of twists, and degree of pain. If healed by the first cauterization, it is well; if not, resume with another cauterization on top of that one, as it is customary for the member to shift near the site, which is why you must continue making cauterizations until the patient is healed.
Surgery
Surgery is sometimes greatly aided by cauterization, especially in diseases that come from the putrefaction of fumes and melancholy. Can you cauterize it, but be careful if the disease is at the beginning, and if it is healed according to what we have discussed in the classification, and neither recedes nor delays, and you doubt whether the corruption does not permeate the entire patient, then apply .5 cauters on the head: .1 above the forehead near the top of the hair, and the other towards the front at the end of eyebrows; and two on each side of the horns, and one behind the temples; and let your hand so that the caustic reaches to the bone, and until scraping out as they come out if the sores leave.
If the bruises are scattered everywhere and they appear quite evidently, then it is necessary to cauterize with these cauteries that we have mentioned previously in chief, and also one small cautery on the edge of the collarbone, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and five along the spine of the back, and a large one near the navel and another nearby, and two on each shoulder blade, and two at the elbows, and two on the tendons of the feet, and above the joints of the hands and fingers, and around the palms; beware of nerves that lie behind pressing, do not burn them; never make a cautery on the bone of the wrist, and one elsewhere on the bone of the stomach, and another near the liver.
And know that the more cauterizations you perform, the greater assistance it provides and benefits him; and understand that the patient does not feel pain from the cauterization as a healthy person would because the body is already completely corrupted. It is necessary for the cauterizations to be large or small depending on the limbs and joints, according to how you will find them in the methods of iron treatments. Afterward, apply wheat flour mixed with honey and other remedies until healing occurs.
"And after applying wheat mixed with honey and other remedies."
When swelling comes to any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and salves, if it is not healthy, then make cauteries on the limb according to its size and significance; the cauterization should be just a small bit into the skin as desired. Then treat with ointments until it becomes healthy. At times, cauterizations are made on hands, feet, and backs where nerves move the limb, and so swelling is caused by bones; however, one must know the limbs and nerve exits to deal with such matters.
The phrase "de albaras" in Old French does not translate directly into a meaningful sentence or term in English without further context. It could be a part of a larger word or expression, but more information is needed for an accurate translation. If it's a standalone fragment from a medical text, the significance might only become clear when considering its surrounding content and usage within the original manuscript.
When the disease known as "albaras" is chronic, and medical remedies prove ineffective, then cauterize with a small incision using a cautery according to the desired size; until the paleness subsides and its color changes; then treat with flour of barley and lentils with rose oil and plantain leaves, as well as swan blood and duck'.
The treatment of ulcers by fire cautery
When ulcers begin and you wish to arrest them, cauteerize with the fire cautery that appears like a circle, all around the ulcer. Nevertheless, wise men also say that one should do this in the middle of the ulcer; however, I do not believe this is good, as it may become ulcerated and corrupted, which has happened before; moreover, it would be better to cauteerize around it with a fire cautery called "circular", as we have said about many other fire cauteries.
Of the inflammation that cannot die out
When someone has a disease called "adubelati," which takes too long to die or because of the excess it causes or due to the state of the patient when they are very old (that is, quite aged) and have little blood, or time; and you see them rushing towards death: then cauterize around with many small cauldrons by poking; afterwards let it be so. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see the entire wound pierced, then warm the cauldrons of which there is no shape:
And place your hand in the midst of the disease called "adubeleti" until the cauldrons have pierced its core, and let there be such cauldrons that the patient feels behind them in a way that the flow of putrefaction is alleviated; afterwards cure it until it is perfectly healthy.
The healing of fire with iron
There is another way of illness called "corrosive," and it's nothing but a mass on the limb, because it consumes limbs just like dry wood does with fire. If you see this disease in place where cauterization with fire can be done without pain, then perform small and large cauters accordingly as required by its location or where the illness is; after cauterizing all parts to remove all corruption, leaving nothing behind except that what's corrupted should become osteomyelitis. Then leave it for three days, and apply oil to the wounded cautery spots until fire sores are healed, along with any remaining corruption. After this treatment of salve applications causing growth, if after three days health appears good, then that's a positive sign; otherwise, continue cauterization on those areas still affected by corrupted limbs. This mass is never been treated in place by the medicinal water during the time of fire cautery; but even so, fire cautery proves more beneficial and I have already mentioned the treatment with medical water in its section: take as much as you need.
of sores that come to the fingers
Often it happens that in the feet is a disease that advances and is called "closed" according to our understanding, and is a large tumor causing pain in the foot. And the cautery for this disease has two ways: fire cautery and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is such that you heat a caustic as if it were a spoon of waxwood, made of good iron able to cover the nail entirely, with sharp edges; after heating it red-hot, turn your hand all around the nail until it flows into the hole; leave thus for three days until pus begins to emerge. Then make an ointment from finely ground barley boiled with salt, and leave the ointamoast on throughout the night, after which the tumor will recede and be uprooted completely. Finally, treat the wound with a soothing salve until it is healed.
And if they are converted forward the body, and it often occurs in hands and feet; then you must administer hot water caustic: take a tube of iron or copper, or a spoon of waxwood, place over the nail and its surroundings; this is to cover warts. Place the tube so that it encompasses entirely, then apply some warm water, hold your hand firmly, and press back and forth until the edge of the tube reaches the root of the nail, allowing deep hot water access to the root; let the patient endure a bit of the stinging heat for an hour. Then leave it as is, and all its roots will be uprooted completely. Do this repeatedly until you remove everything from the body, then treat with healing ointments that soothe.
after use the unt; The root, buttoe le plus they may of hire, then:
When anyone shakes from coldness of limbs or fever quarter day or other, it is necessary that you make .iiij. cauteries or .iv. upon the spine on the back, one cautery between each vertebra; and one cauterization or pez, and one over the stomach at the olive oil caustic; this will cease their trembling, and restore health from the cold illness.
Of painful pustules
At no time are they visible as downstream of the body bathes or pustules painful, that come from large corrupt substances. When first they appear, one should make a subtle cautery on each head of the pustule: a cautery made of wood from myrtle, with its point taken in fire, or long root of aristologist, or lenticular caustic. And whenever it is cauterized at the beginning when they appear, according to this manner, they do not grow any more forward, but are broken down their superfluities which come from them, and become healthy; however, it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
When the artery is ligated Often great harm from the blood of an artery that is ligated to a wound near the edge or through an incision in an abscess, or on a limb with cautery, and such things; it is a very painful thing to stop bleeding.
And in any case if it happens to anyone, hurry and place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and strain very much until the blood is calmed from under your finger; then heat with oil (olive or otherwise) several small and large cauterizations as long as they are all red; then take .i., or great or small depending on the size of the wound and its location where the artery runs, and place the caster against that vein while holding your finger, until the blood is stemmed.
And if it bursts when you lift your thumb over the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another from those at the fire.
And continue doing this one after the other until the blood is stopped; and beware that you do not burn the nerve near it, and no further harm comes to the patient; understand that when blood flows from the artery, it cannot be adequately staunched if the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods we have said: through cautery, or through extraction if untreated, or with strong binding thread, or with medicines placed on which there is power to stop blood; and let it be tied and strained at once.
Who will administer the staunching of being tightly wrapped in cloths or with burning things on it, or other similar things; if not, soon enough they will fail.
If this occurs in someone and they have no mirror or present medicine, then they should put their finger under the wound on the vein as we have said, and stretch it out until it is stuck above the wound and vein; but do not move it, instead let it be cooled by cold water often so that it becomes very cold until the blood congeals and thickens and sticks; then make incisions there as needed for cauterization and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter all diseases that require fire cauterization or burning medicines, and poultices, ointments, causes, and applications of cauterizations; and I placed that chapter up to the fingers, and I will proceed with this chapter in the same manner for it is easier understood as follows:
And so, as I begin this, it is necessary for you to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than with the first of cauterizations, and therefore greater caution must be taken.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incision on an abscess, and treatment of wounds, and extraction of arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I advise you not to be reckless. For many ways of people come in cures. If they are those who have become so accustomed to their illness that they die easily due to the relief they find from their disease, and its severity; and for these, one must have fear. And among these two there is one who gives his attention, and says: "Wait, I am the guardian"; and the patient becomes desperate. It does not matter whether you agree with those coming to you who have this manner, but put greater care in your honor than in your greed, and do not act foolishly but wisely of what you are certain, and which you can take and lose; and use prognosis and indication for the treatments of your sick so health is turned towards them; and this will aid you to achieve good renown, glory, and memory in the kingdom.
Three dear son, Our Lords grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to seek the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
And I have ordered this treatise by chapters as presented here in the chapter on cautery that I have advised from the head down to the feet, so that you may more easily find what you need.
Full of water at its head
It is said that this illness often occurs in children during birth, and when the pelvis is too tightly constricted around the head of the child; sometimes it comes about without a known reason.
And I have never seen this disease outside of children, and in all cases that I have witnessed it has been fatal; so for my part, the work on treatments seems to warrant further investigation.
.
If the moisture is too great, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions shaped like a cross as follows:
And if the moisture is from bone, and the signs you see are the corners above each part, and the vein springs up when pressed by your hand inside, and it does not recede; then one must make three incisions within the head as follows:
the moste; The following; cue; ici:bonet; If they ne mez d; so n’s.
And another way of making an incision is to look where the head of the abscess opens, and its water channel; for it is never before; never behind; never right; nor ever left.
Therefore cut where the abscess opens, and its water channel fills up, as much as you are able to do so; but be careful not to puncture an artery; let blood flow out, such that the patient may die from bleeding and evacuation of pus.
For restoration
When a disease called "catarrh" affects either the eyes or genitals, and the illness has been present for some time, and medical treatment proves ineffective, then the subsequent remedy is with fire cautery, where two arteries are burned.
It is therefore when you have burned the eyes, that the patient raises their head; afterward, they rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then extracting the neck to one whole cloth; then examine where the vein begins and ends at both sides, near each ear, but few are reattached; then seal the sutures, then burn one and the other from a sharp spatula of two parts so that it reaches the bone and is cut widely.
And if you see, take the spatula from under the artery and burn it above, cutting like two points across.
When the vein is opened, it bleeds continuously upwards.
If the arrow does not protrude to be felt, it is necessary that you measure the space of three fingers, then close and clean up to the bone; put in as much blood as five-sixths (0.83), with a little more or less depending on what the ill person can suffer and the fullness of the artery; then examine the wound: if it does not leave any splintered bone, no discharge from the arrowhead appears, then strain the ward, bind it, and apply ointment until it is healed.
If there are splinters of bone remaining, extract them; if you see that an ostentatious infection occurs at any time, make sure to dress it with a clean cloth or bandage. Then remove the wound as soon as possible and apply ointment until healed.
When early gout comes and acute catarrh due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and ancient headache and similar things occur, it is treated by methods of medical remedies which do not help, so we extract arteries from the temples and perform cauterization, as we have discussed.
The manner of extracting them is such that the patient rubs the hair from his temples and listens to the artery which opens in the temple, for it beats properly and does not fill quickly like in some men who are very cold; and if it refills, strain a piece of cloth on the collar of the patient, then rub the skin with an abrasive cloth, and wash the area with warm water until the artery is clearly visible again; then take the spatula which has this shape:
Then lightly scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then stretch it with forceps and divide it well from each part; and if the artery is delicate, turn it at the tip of the pincer, then cut off that portion according to the amount of hairs. Because if it's not divided, all will come loose in every way.
And treat the blood of .vj. days/, until .iij.; and if the artery is large, it must be tied in two places with a strong double thread of silk, so that decay does not come before the suturing of the wound, and bleeding occurs again; then cut off the excess between the two ligatures at the same time, and then, if you see, cauterize with the caustic spatula until the bone is reached as long as the head remains closed; this is the final work, provided the sick person does not have fever and they are of a hot complexion.
For the cautery is aid in finishing the abscesses, for this reason it is more useful for abscesseS; And as on leu sont mes. ESTELLA, ce en toc. Sont cote d’o que tu est le c sunt cogner les pois il soit la ou se c de s conteres tu coulz. Cauchay l’est eulacqui. Ce sans est li est à plus ce de quitar une et a mais, en leu nus est c et. And les ointin; et cuit si to lignoles et c que ce d: qui sont nee clyne coumthat est ce la tene laste When excessive menstruation occurs, it retains less heat. And it should have between the two knives a large space, and then when you reach to tie them together, remove both levers, and let an ardent fire burn until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two parts; they should be far apart by the two edges because it is not suitable for this entire cautery at once; this is the form of the cautery:
Of tears
la s, and bly; they mde t e ce t
And they called it the "ancient contusion cure", and you must instruct the patient who has this disease to have hair on his forehead, then make three incisions or evenly according to the length of the forehead; one incision should be as if two fingers span across, going upward until the nose, with the other two being half a finger apart above the eyebrows, and avoid incision of arteries that are half a finger apart above the eyebrows; place your hand away from the continuation of the two jawbones, each wound should be as wide as three fingers across.
from the incision that goes up to the second incision; and scrape off all skin that is between the two incisions, completely over the skull above the bone, then make another cut through the middle of the first incision to the other second one, and then extract this flat pincers.
If inserted into the first opening is an instrument called "culterall", which on one side is very sharp and cutting, while on the other side it is smooth, not cutting. And insert the sharp edge toward the chest near the heart, and the smooth edge towards the bone, inserting it until reaching the middle opening. Care for all vessels that arise from the head as long as the incision remains continuous up to where it opens at the throat, then continue on the middle fissure to the other end; then extract the blood equally, and express the spot for collected blood; then place in each fissure a tent of old cotton, and cover with cloths soaked in wine and oil and herbs, ensuring no abscesses form; after three days dissolve the ligaments, and apply generous planting of boiled water, then cure it with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, along with other treatments for wounds until healed.
Of the eyes of the head
When from certain catarrhs they come habitually, and you see the eyes swollen and small, with impaired vision and burning pus; and hair falls out, and there is acute pain at the forehead, and sneezing in patients; thus by these incidents one knows that those matters and such catarrhs do not come from a single vein, but rather they arise from many vessels, and it is this congestion to be cured.
And it is that you command the patient to raise his forehead, then make a large incision in the middle of the forehead, and another wide one; starting from the incision at the temple on the left to the right temple, and extending up to the bone; and remove your hand from the nerves at the temples when moving during eating. And once the bone is uncovered, squeeze out all blood into a sponge, then place cotton wool between the two lips of the incision, and try linen; then cover with clean cloths soaked in wine and oil, avoiding any burns from the heat; when it is removed (osteotomy), you must rub the area until new growth begins, then treat with cleansing substances to help healing.
And in this manner: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts tansy, and soak it; then administer to these wounds for healing the entire area fully.
Of stopping bleeding from the ears
All that flows from the ears is one of four things: grains, beast, stones from mining, or similar substances as metal; seedlings such as peas, lentils, and beans; or fluids flowing like water easily and resembling other matters.
When it flows into the ear as a stone or another matter not adjacent to the ear, and does not grow within the ear, place the ear in the sun. If you see the stone, distil some violet oil or sesame oil upon it; then perform extraction. The condition causes sneezing, and they stop up their nostrils when a sneeebreak comes, and put cloth pieces or wool around the ear; and raise the ear above. Often this cure brings relief; and if it doesn't, it is treated with delicate tweezebrs of which there are two forms:
If it jumps up with pincers, that's good; if not, prepare for the subtle extraction of a double needle; and if it doesn't come out this way, make an eel gut incision and insert the head of the eel or ear hole strongly, stuffing around the incision with soft wax so the vents cannot enter with the tube; then properly treat it, as often such force comes as we have said; and if it doesn't come out in this manner, take grease from where the birds sit, and put on some instrument suitable for that purpose, placing a bit of cotton around; then press the grease over the wound or whatever you are treating, and apply treatment. And if it doesn't come out from all the things we have said, quickly make an incision in the ear just as much as the abscess appears and swells, and the manner of making the incision is to first hold the patient's head steady; then draw the blood according to its nature, next seat the patient between your hands with his head tilted upwards, and make a small cut at the base of the ear near the fat or whatever it depends on; and let the incision be as round as a crescent until you reach the wound, then treat it to the best of your ability, and suck it quickly into your mouth; and cure it until it is healed. And if you are drawn out and so as it is made into this form: but not draw them the pierre or seint.
And make an incision in that grain of sand. But do not attempt this when you think the grain is moist due to earwax, until you have done so many times; then extract with fine pincers and a sucker, as we have said, ensuring the extraction is clean.
Then when the water indeed flows into the ear, the patient should use sneezing techniques first, and plug the ear with soft cotton. Place it directly over that same ear where the water entered. If it comes out forcefully, that's good. If not, take multiple small pieces according to the length of your finger held lightly, and heat them slightly on a fire; then place the patient's fingers in their ears, and insert one side into the hole (created by water entry); and from another direction, use another piece against the ear where the hole is. Continue inserting pieces from piece to piece until all the water has come out, thus restoring full hearing; and if you see this, take a reed or similar instrument, place one end in the ear, and heat the other end on fire until it glows; then proceed with others as needed until all the water is gone, just as we have described for stones.
In the removal of an object if it is small like fleas or similar things, treat as we have described in the division; but if it is a large size that can be felt, prepare for extraction with fine pincers; and the easier to remove will be what lies inside the ear.
During the extraction of worms from ears, when treating them as we have discussed in the division and treatment of distillations, if the remedy does not work, you must examine the ear with sunlight: if there are no worms visible, use fine tweezers and, if they do not appear, take a small hook-shaped tool from where it is formed.
It should be narrow at the top and wide at the base. And put the more delicate end in the ear according to the amount of suffering the patient is experiende, then push it completely into the canal; do this often until all worms are expelled. If they do not come out, stuff cotton around the canal as I have described for stones; and if they still do not emerge, administer distillations that ancient physicians have tried with incisions of worms, then you will find them or treat with distillations; and distil oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument, which is as you see it.
It should be made of silver or a fine-grained iron and have small holes at the top and bottom for distillation; and to press the distilled substance through an instrument of finely wrought iron well suited for this, and if you see, take a sieve and wrap cotton around it promptly on the opening, then pour your oil or juice in the ear canal, and let the ear be filled with the sieve and cotton; then press firmly until the oil is distilled or thoroughly within the ear. The patient feels relief inside, and there are distillations a small cakes around this fire so it can be distilled in the ear, but do not be too cold because medicines would not work if they will be as good.
Of stopping up of ears
No child is born without any perception in their ears; and the same thing happens in adults due to a wound or foreign body within the ear, and these blockages always come partially into the ear so that one cannot see it; and never occurs where there is no sound perceived well.
Therefore, when it comes partially and one cannot see it, it is of worse healing in most cases, and for that which can be seen, you must put the patient's ear under the sun; and look inside: if you see the obstruction clearly, then work on this entire area where its form is.
that s.
If the obstruction is present in the ear, take a fine, subtle knife and carefully heat it by fire, then place it on the body of the ear. If you feel the obstruction causing the patient to experience fear upon hearing, gently pierce, but be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear; then insert a tent according to the width of the opening in the skin, and grease with Egyptian ointment.
Do not touch the wound for any day until it is healed; then take a tent and grease with rosewater paste, and powder with sublimed mercury; if you see discharge from the ear, replace the tent and move another moistened tent made of rosette oil and wax until the inflammation is gone; then treat it until it becomes healthy.
If bleeding persists, soak a sponge and drape with cold rosewater, then place it on the ear, and apply other treatments that remove blood accumulation which can be treated by distillations.
From the collection of papers
This althelus that comes in papers from the eyes when they are wet and dry is such that it must be spread with tongs and tweezeboar, and wrapped around a spatula of its roots; then place on the luteolin mixture.
And if they are not decorticated, then cauterize with a fine lenticular cautery after the incision, and the cauterization thereafter is effective; often times things do not remain attached to their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots get burned and do not regrow.
Of the grating
Many times come to the papers from the eyes things that appear gritty in form and hardness, and therefore this illness is called "hailstorm," consisting of a large amount of moisture above and below the paper; the treatments are as follows: take care if hailstones move on one side or another, it's an easy thing to know how to do; thus make them wide apart, then gently scrape each part, then grasp with forceps, and bind. If you don't pierce the paper slightly, nothing will harm the patient; and if there is a large crack, assemble with a stitch, and treat until it is healed; but if it is small, do not apply too much pressure, for the ointment will restore them quickly and cause relief.
And if the hailstones descend into the depths of the ear towards the upper part, invert the paper, and grasp the hailstones with forceps, bind and press on both sides; and if the paper is moved by the incision, it causes no harm; and when the hailstones are scraped away, apply oil to cleanse the area and treat until the patient feels relief.
of the fat from under the eyes
Exinach is a fat that forms under the skin, occurring mainly in children and not in adults; it causes great swelling around their eyes, and they experience catarrh in the morning, and cannot look at sunlight because tears rush to their eyes; therefore, they lie on their faces for long periods, sleep with damp paper over their moist eyelids, which is concealed by exinach that appears upon waking. And when you press it back towards your thumbs and feel the fat pushing out.
The manner of the treatment is that the patient places his head in water; then take a linen cloth and make it into a circular tent-like shape according to the quantity of fat from each side, place it over them; press with your thumbs on both sides so that the fat is compressed within the circle. Then use a sharp knife at the spacious spot and make an incision as wide as one makes in the vein's skin; scrape away the softened fat until you reach the exinach, which comes out of the incision in various shapes like pieces of pale white fat.
Pull all of the mentioned piece of cloth torn between your hands in defeat, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is scattered; ensure that you do not get too close to the tear, so that you reach none of the entire area up to the bone, nor press on it.
And if the head does not exit at the beginning of the tear, gently increase the tear as it appears; then extract it as we have said, moisten with linen and water, and place over the wound, and bind tightly.
And for such patients who gnaw at the wound and put on to spoil that moisture which remains; then heal until it is sanitized. And if there comes a hot abscess in the area, treat with emollients soothing until it is sanitized.
From hairs of parchment
When hairs from paper arise that are misaligned and aged, they harm the eyes, bringing about types of diseases as accustomed to tears, wrinkling of papers, and albugine until it causes destruction; and there is treatment in four ways: by fire cautery together, or by medicinal ague according to what lies before or chapter on cautery, and done either by incision and suturing or by pincers, as I will describe.
It is proper that you place the head of the patient in your palm, then turn the paper of the eye to your left hand; if it is turned correctly, that is good; if not, then puncture with a needle on every thread underneath; and do so at the margin of the paper or where the hairs grow near those hairs, and guide one thread along all over the paper, and turn it to the edge; then make in the part below the paper, below the misaligned hairs, throughout the entire width from large to small rim; then extract a filament, and place underneletechnical papers with cotton and linen threads. Then attach to the paper an outline of iron like that of a bellows, and always ensure that the figure is according to the quantity you see raising the eye which is affected by all.
And if there is need to cut a large quantity of paper according to how much the paper has been softened; then make all along the spatula over the two lines that you have signed, starting from the large ridge down to small; and let one of the fissures be near natural hairs in the growth of a root, then insert the needle into one of the angles with a hook, then scrape it clean; then sew the two lips together with a stitch of a single thread of fine woollen yarn, squeeze out the blood, and remove any excess threads near both eyebrows in all manner of sticky substances if you do this; and if not, don't worry about it, leave the seam and threads for three or four days; then treat the wound without drying and tightening agents, because the paper will regain its position with the healing of the wound and reattachment, but the stitch is movable (as the elders say), and this work is without fear.
And it is that you shape the paper into a form as like the marten'annointment, which we have described, with three needle-sized holes according to the shape shown here:
And if the cautereis d’autre de a formit a une.
If you are unable to hold the forceps and the object is not evenly aligned, take a needle with some thread attached to it, and place it against the skin. Then thread another string around the large prominence and the second one near the small one, then join both strings equally; then lift your hand evenly, and remove all the tissue under which you have incised as we have explained, then close the wound edges with stitches, and treat it until it heals; if an abscess forms at your incision site, soothe it with cerote and similar ointments.
However, there is never a time when the hair on the paper changes color: if it's necessary to use what we have described for incisions; but stitches on both sides are more of an artificial nature.
The treatment of ulcers is as follows: and you must convert the paper and press it down according to what I have said, then make two stitches by hand, and two very thin threads as long as the thickness of the paper and its width at the mattress; then wrap both heads with the threads you hold; then carefully join the two together over the paper's edge on one side, and stretch out the two cords from each part; then leave them like this for some days, and the skin that is stretched will dry up and shrink and heal, until it grows back.
If it is delayed and the bandage lacks strength, then treat until healed; and if the wound were quickly closed, and the paper raised so that hairs cannot grow again; and this is the form of the two veins that you will make according to this figure and in this quantity of length and width:
The technique of the work is that you take a fine needle and wind one thread of soft, delicate silk on it; then connect the heads together subtly, ensnaring both ends with threads equal in length to a palm's width; then arrange another fine, short filament of silk briefly onto the end of the first thread; then have the patient place their head under the sun so that the workings are clearly visible, for it is a subtle and minute operation; then insert the needle all the way to the root next to the hair you wish to remove, and pierce the paper quickly as you pull through along with natural hair until you reach the skin's surface. Then extract the hair up to the thread's length, inserting that same or additional hair if there are one or two or three or more; then continue pulling out your hand until all desired hair is removed from the surface of the paper with the natural hair still attached.
If the thread has been wound and hair does not come out with it, then you will wind the thread back from its full length until the thread is visible by oil vision; thus you may wind up the thread and filament, remove the oil and leave them for two or three days so that the hair grows in place and sprouts on his skin. And if the hairs are long natural hairs, accompany one along with it and then leaves until it is grown and removed:
from the rot of the joint
When this disease called "aleacrati" or rot occurs in the joint, it comes in two ways: one natural and one unnatural. And it happens by sudden wound, cutting, or fire cautery, and similar things.
ande to come onze que tu m. ET li l’o de la ou li avois du; andre de s, puis quiesse. Et: unt ande parle de de le ome dese lignant lor (li or li prise ce t's et lesa eau, qui est the vrai d cite a fadie de lade, eur;
And the essence of your care is to be vigilant that it does not change in any way from its previous form; and these treatments we have mentioned are solely directives for this illness, so that it may return as it was before.
In the oil's flowing forth
This illness called "axacrati," is truly known as both natural and accidental. The accident occurs from wounds, cuts, cauterization, and similar things; and the essence of its treatment involves using a needle with double threaded filament inserted through the hole in the spatula so that it extends to two holes at the top, then extending the spatula upwards fully with the thread.
When the shape of the paper is restored as it should be, that's good; if not, take some ointment and apply it in the split, then turn the paper, creating two splits or cuts inside the paper; and let the head of each split correspond to the angles of the incision you made, so that when they are joined together, the shape is like a letter with "j" strokes; then remove that layer, according to the thickness where its edges join, as it should hold the paper, then bring the two separated parts close together and tie them with woolen thread; then apply what we have mentioned about softening medicines and bandages until it heals.
If the illness comes from splitting or stitching or cauterization, it is fitting that you make a clean split away from the hairs of the papers, and according to what has been said before; then dress between the two layers of a tent as I have mentioned; and you must treat according to the form of the illnness, for its forms are very diverse, and wise masters apply all possible methods so that it may return to its natural shape; and similarly for patients, depending on what treatment and applications in various positions.
When dealing with an illness arises from splitting or stitching or cauterization; accordingly cleanly severed the hairs of papers between the layers of a tent as mentioned; then methods all apply, its form so may return to natural its shape.
When this welding occurs in human hands such that the paper above is soldered with the white of the oil, and cannot move or perform its natural actions, then it is necessary to place the tip of a razor under the paper and lift it up; and extend the pressure towards it until you remove what has hardened within the subtle spatulum, which should not be too dry nor too sharply cutting, so that the patient cannot suffer from a spatulum that is too aggravating or blunts the oil; and make your incision in such a way as to scrape off the gathered matter lightly, allowing the paper to regain its natural shape; and it will be healed completely without any occurrence of fresh water, but with gentle water, and collier (a type of bandage); then place between the paper and oil a tent of linen, and above the oil lay woolen yarn soaked in egg whites; after three days use the mild collier and other similar remedamoisturize until it heals completely.
From the nail of the oil
That the unguarde est toutes nerves de baintes l’a convele cuyante a si que t'art les nervet, si il li qui vousre du ne oint: si ce l’unner la semblanz, et le pierre cest on li mener.
The method of making the incision is as follows: instruct the patient to place their head in an upright position, then begin work; remove paper from your hand, then file the nails with small double-edged tools and extend them upward; next take a needle, put some horse hair, or goat, or ox fiber on it along with strong thread; slightly bend the tip of the needle and insert partway into the fingernail, pierce through the entire needle, tie one end of the thread to the nail and extend upward, scrape off all hair near the edge where the nail meets its root and down to the skin, then cut any remaining piece in the base at the junction with a fine strip; ensure that by this incision, the body does not naturally produce tears as usual; never stretch just the nail or thread alone, but as we have said:
Ensure that the incision does not touch or break the soft tissue and nail bed, and that the nail is not pierced; after making the incision, apply a small amount of sealing wax, along with powder made from litargire (a substance used in old remedies), and leave it until the next day; then treat as required until healed.
the saint li plague toi untie naistis de.
Gently lift the nail without being rough, and if you see that it does not diminish or hasten its healing, then drop juice from your mouth into an oil collar made of litargire and red wax resin mixed with flax, and apply the oil until the next day; then proceed to another work according to this same method, until it is completely cured.
If nothing opposes you in the oil, as with a hot abscess, then let it drain and first treat the hot abscess until it is healthy, then proceed to the work as before, until it is also healthy.
And if the appearance of flesh on the edge is harmful by great damage in oil, suspend it with a thread and peel off part but not all, so that tears do not come to the wound; then drop into the red oil collar made of litargirotin.
From the blow which strikes above the pupil
The blows some men receive cause occasional redness, and it covers the pupil, pressing down on the eyelids, and turning inward. And so it is that the patient must lower their head to their chest, then work upon those eyes, curing all the veins suitable for this, and maintain them with force; then excise the first redness, and go through everything completely until the end, making sure you do not blink during treatment. And make the incision of the cataract as we have said in the incision of the nail and small forces of which one removes the eyelashes; just as this method shows after its demonstration.
And when the incision is completed and all redness removed, apply oil of sweet marjoram or distilled rose water and similar corrosive medicines to the depression beneath it; and put cotton soaked with egg yolk there if you are sure of a hot abscess; if nothing remains, and the wound swells up again, and you doubt an acute abscuess, leave the oil and treat the abscess with calming agents. Then return to your treatment until it is healed, in this way redness is dispelled by this method from beneath the eye.
However, it is necessary for you to heal the weakness of each oil through natural ways and accidental methods in practice with iron; and do not place your hand into any of these practices until you see that this member has suffered from such a craft.
Of veins and eyes
Red veins that are covered with oil and hinder the sight of their craftsmanship and weaken it every day. Therefore, when you look at the oil in which sebel is present, if there is no other illness besides sebel; then do as follows: instruct the sick person to place his head on your chest, then suspend those veins throughout its entire length according to wisdom, and let them be twice as subtle according to this pattern:
And there are two sores placed by degrees within one body according to this form:
Then you will apply the pressure carefully to those veins subtly, and let the blood flow out hour by hour until you see them removed from the oil; and be careful not to prick the oil at the tips of the spatulas, and perform this work at midday before the sun, being very zealous in your work so that you do not miss any veins; and when you have done this, let it bleed into the oil with a greenish-red color to corrupt what is lingering there.
If you cannot grasp it all in that hour, make a plaster with soothing things to alleviate the pain of the eyes, and leave them untouched for several days until the pain is eased and assuredly free from inflammation, then continue as per this method stated before until they are healthy; and this is the form of strength.
Of the fistula in the eye
Mirrors are called "arissati" fistules: when you treat it with cautery and hot ague medicine as I have before described, and if it is not healed, then perform the following operation on the abscess where it must die out, and draw all moisture from it until the bone is exposed.
When the bone is exposed and you see decay and darkness, remove all instruments from which it takes its shape; it is called "sharp head", and made of iron in one piece with a pointed end, shaped like a file as seen below.
Place your hand on the decayed bone and twist it between both hands until you know that the decay has been resolved; do this several times, then restore its position with medicinal removers.
If the joints are swollen and the bowel is hardened, and it remains so for 40 days without recurring or becoming ulcerated, if there were no complications, know that it has healed; otherwise, there is no other remedy than to bring back the fistula to its original position according to this method: and first uncover the bone again with iron and medicinal agues, and when it is uncovered, take a drill according to this shape, and make the head of iron with three angles, and the shaft should be tapered up to the top as you see here.
Then place it on the bone near the cheekbone and move your hand away a little, then turn all around until you pierce the bone and the patient feels it if they hold their hand against their neck; and then restore its original position with dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when the matter hardens and stiffens in the joints, proceed to the neck; this is an easier task for the sick person.
To prevent a recurrence of dislocation from the arm's extremity.
When the bones are completely dislocated and there is no distortion or narrowing of the neck, then you must tie up the patient; after that, cleanse it, and then apply cups or haterels to draw out without causing harm, followed by an application on the arm made of acacia resin, aloe, incense, and sarcocolum. Then stretch the arm, and place bandages above stitches with fabric; you must arrange the fabrics so that each piece is soft enough, and double it fourfold, then put one over another according to the amount needed by the limb; then strain through a leather strip folded in half, and resume cupping without causing harm; then remove the cups and leave the arm stretched day and night, and if the band is softened considerably, then you must untie it completely. Then remove the band after the day and night, and if you see the limb returning, that's good; but if not, resume the bandages, strainers, bands, cupping, and continue until healed.
The double falling of a cloth torn
When the double tearing of a cloth occurs, then it opens, and comes out with particles as if grains of resin, and is inevitable to see; then you cut off the area up to there where it ends above, then insert another needle at the root of that part down to the upper part; and pierce it through. Leave the first needle according to its arrangement; then sew together the double thread from that part lower down, tie a portion around the wound, hold it tightly, then extract the needle and place a soft cloth generously therein; leave until the threads fall out with the wound, then treat with comforting things as long as the wound is healed; and never does the wound remain confined by the wound each part of a circle of fabric, until it's healed.
And if the eyes have a large appearance, pierce at the subtle spot which appears just below the wound, and follow the white-ish moisture descending into the eye socket, and enter it quickly; then extract as soon as possible until healed.
From the bow of the elbow
This disease known as "alcunnati" is not caused by an eyebrow that appears to be falling like water but isn't; the appearance of its operation is such that you make the patient sit on a properly arranged seat and upright, then take his head between your hands with two parts, and move it until you see the brow coming up toward your eyes; then have it inserted, and do not let it down or unravel the threads, and observe the patient as usual; if they don't come down, understand that it is water, and if the construction of the eyebrow isn't properly arranged as we have said, make them sit between your hands, then use a delicate spatula over the horny skin near the crown, continuing with the conjunctive until the brow rises; and when it has risen, let water infused with honey or boiled fenugreek and honey be poured into the eye, then cure as usual until it is healed.
From the waters of the eyes
We have observed similarities to water in the division; and what is necessary for cutting; thus according to health considerableness. It should be done that you seat the patient between your crossed hands, shielded from light by the sun, and apply a good amount of medicated ointment; then place the paper with the ointment on your left hand if the eye is located to the left or on your right hand if the eye is located to the right; then take in your right hand, if the eye is located to the left, an instrument called 'almagda', or with your left hand if it's located to the right; and place the tip of the instrument near the crown by a length equal to a stick at that edge of the oil where it meets the lesser outer corner, then insert the instrument forcefully named 'almagda', and twist your hand until you pierce through in the oil's outer corner, feeling that almagda comes into the emptied space; and it should be such that the depth of the almagda path is to the width of the empty space from the prunelet to its end at the black spot; this is the crown of the oil. You will see bone in the paper due to the whiteness of the horned edge, then place the instrument up to where the water is and express it with another method afterward. If the water flows out now, you will see before yourself and the instrument in his ointment.
After resting for a bit, and the water rises through the second pathway, place the wool with the instrument, and when it is fully inserted and does not rise any further, gently twist almagda around your hand little by little; then put some gemstone oil back into the eye inwardly. Then apply oiled gauze or linen soaked in rose oil and abundant of egg whites, and mix with medicated oil. And we, and those from our time, place comfrey poultice with an abundance of egg whites.
cont the nud Marcude; s.
Then carefully puncture the joint only slightly, not too deeply, but make a very fine hole, then apply an emollient as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient an appropriate resting place where he can sleep on his back in a dark area; ensure all movements are light, give him easy foods, do not move his head to either side or up, keep him lying according to his natural position until three days have passed; then release him from that same dim room and check his vision, allow him to see various things, then reattach the ligaments for seven more days; it is not necessary to perform this during the hour of the procedure or immediately after incision, but you must do so because the swelling rises quickly.
If an abscess occurs, remove the dressing on the seventh day, and provide care for the area that soothes the abscess; and once it is calmed, reopen his vision and place a bandage over his face to cover any days, and he should stay in that dim room. And then gradually leave the dark house, and he will return to himself; know that no novices should interfere in this case.
And all those that one may be found in our ground from therein, and often comes the paiant to ce estoie que tu esprue de qu'il qui les mord leis poinde l’on seintaindont li cist li vient ait ons ne ire.
And these are the forms of almagda because those who do not recognize them see them as such; and they are properly called arrows.
They are heads with the same subtlety, and three corners sharply angled.
from the chariot beside the nose
ou f the b O; so that they do mainda; a bon tred; and t la c
If there remains any substance that cannot be removed, apply all the fine subtle remedies lightly, ensuring nothing remains; and if it swells or forms an abscess, treat as appropriate; and if malignant abscesses are present, cauterize quickly until they are cleansed and the bones are fully exposed, then pour oil, honey, water, or wine.
If the treatment fails and moisture reaches the palate, ensure it is sane (not infected); if the moisture does not perforate as necessary, suspect that there are teeth in the bone above, which prevents remedies from working: then it is time to insert a slightly thick linen thread, held firmly between our fingers with a small space; place the patient's head under the end of the filament as much as possible and pull gently until it comes out through the mouth; this method is often used for children in schools and is easy for those who perform it; then hold one part that emerges from the nostril with one hand, and the other part that emerges from the mouth with the other hand, ensnaring each alternately as we do with our fingers. Do so until you know the moisture has expelled all the material causing obstruction, then extract the thread, remove any blood, and treat it with Egyptian ointment before reinserting it into the nostril as before; continue for three days or more, until the ointment dissolves everything that remained. Then place a linen bandage in the nostril for several days until healed, and use dry medicines if needed; this is the method to purge the head, through which one distills oils and medicines into the nose:
Et sise de lait un chef dun le chef et ausne de, se oevre les cheualie c'on li oe une estremes à croist: adle, si comest li chiés a sai telle chier quoi on neis chief a, ce ou li. Et les mainture; et aloche tu ; siequolli que se diech escomme l’on de la meravez les qui cheur oe cuit duce chef une che le unle pous chiue ce est de. Et les anque dulles ne, mais li tient cheis iustes eues et.
Of a chariot over the nose
Many times a disease called "telul" arises on the forehead, which grows and becomes large until it is visible to the eye; therefore, one must begin by cutting it out completely, then applying strong ointments or hot medicines. If you delay doing so until it becomes large, be wary if it feels hard, has a reddish color, and poor sensation: do not touch it with iron as it is an incurable boil; for when one cuts it once, great harm comes to the patient; and if the sore is sensitive to touch but does not have a reddish hue, you can see that it may be completely cauterized. Then empty the abscess without fear, and heal dry and constricting things therein.
When the nose is cut or injured
When solutions of continuation come to one of these cartilaginous wounds, it is not very useful in any man. Therefore, when this occurs, look if the wound is fresh with all its blood; then join the two edges together and treat until healed; and if the edges are torn apart on either side, trim all parts of their skin as they heal, then rejoin the two edges together, bind tightly, and powder over powdered dragon's blood, and incense finely ground; and place the powders under a piece of frankincense from strong or other frankincense, leaving it until pus exudes on its own, then treat with ointment until healed.
The method of the suture is that you assemble the closure: with needles, as we have said in the abdominal suturing; or with thread, as I have shown you.
For abscesses on the lips
When at home the abscess becomes hard like grains of pepper, both smaller and larger; then you must cut the edges, make incisions on either side, grasp with forceps and apply it to each part; afterwards place a poultice after vitriol incision, until the wound is healed; and then bandage it loosely, and treat the area drying until it becomes healthy.
From the decay of gums
Often there is decay on the gums which the ancients called «albulus»; if it needs to be supported with pincers, and applied at its root, and let bleeding occur from the wound or blood; then apply a poultice of vitriol powder or other restraining and desiccating substances; and if that decay returns after incision, and often happens again, repeat the cauterization: it does not return after this treatment; these are the methods to heal ulcers.
of soreness
At no time are they assembled at the top of the gums, within the mouth between the gums, with ugly and sharp scabs; and never do their teeth turn black and greenish-yellow until corruption comes to the gums, and their breath becomes foul; if it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his eyes are in your hand, and remove any gum or scabs found, so long as there is nothing left behind; and thus do blackness and greenness, and jaundice and other discolorations until they come to light; and if anything taken for the first reason is good, it is well; if not, begin again on the second day and third, until you have completely removed them all; and know that teeth need various forms of treatments to heal, according to what the work shows, because the razor from which one removes the gums has different shapes than those used between the gangs; and these shapes and others are with you prepared.
It is necessary when treating the tooth's pain that you delay the extraction as long as possible, because it should not be done too hastily; for it is a substance so high until there is no reason left for removal. When the patient is constrained by pain in drawing, it must be ensured that you are certain about which tooth aches. Often the pain troubles the patient and they think it's a healthy or holy tooth, and extract the bad tooth; nevertheless, the pain does not depart for this reason alone until the evil is removed, as we have already done so with these saints; and when you are well certain about which tooth aches, it must be scraped around the tooth completely and strongly to protect the gum from all sides; then move it back using your fingers or fine pincers in small increments until properly aligned, then firmly secure the tenaille; and let the head of the shoulder be placed in its proper place between thy knuckles, ensuring it does not move.
After extracting the tooth properly without breaking it, and if it does not come out easily, take one of these emetics and blow into each part lightly, then move it as you did initially. And if the gums are pierced and mixed, it is necessary that you fill them with rags where there are tears; and when pulled out subtly by tenaille, make sure not to break while pulling out; work skillfully around the gum to cleanse the tooth.
Et al les nes tu estrains par ceue, li a la reine, puisque prise au quinti cesmant et ce m, que nos avons rente li brisent quant sire la chenu, de bonde, qui les le vues i ou entreez. Et cestirent, si que soient laste tu meil reit si tue il estes.
The shapes of the strands, to which one moves the fingers first, have long points and thick branches, not doubling when you pull on the thread; and these are the forms:
And be large members such that they do not bend while pulling, and made of well-forged iron, with teeth to grip tightly.
from the roots of the fingers .
And if the roots do not wish to come out through these pincers, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and place the instrument called "althali," which is a tongs-like tool.
And let it be thick and strong so that it does not break, and if the root springs from it, that is good; if not, use all the instruments, as these forms come after this.
And if you help with this instrument which has two handles, here is the form:
And other instruments used for examining the gums, and this instrument that appears to be large pincers, its form is as follows:
And this instrument must not break; there are many instruments for examining the gums; also other instruments that are uncounted; and wise masters discover by themselves their instruments, according to their treatments and the diseases they show, because there are different maladies where the old did not teach any instrument due to variety among them. And it does not break on the carriage or the other bones when affected, but if you seek the instruments that I have mentioned, here is their form: They must be large and firmly hold the bone without slipping but can remove it; then restore to its place with appropriate medicines for that condition, and if there is decay in the bone which is small, you have all this instrument.
When teeth appear not in their natural place and the form is ugly, especially in maiden women, one must discern if the nerve is behind the tooth and not properly positioned, and cannot be moved or filed down; then scrape with a tool. And if it is bent together with the tooth, take this instrument whose shape is shown here, similar to a small beak, made of iron hook sharp at one end:
And grasp the tool gently over several days due to the hardness of the tooth and because you do not move others; and if it is visible that it can be filed, shape it as shown here with part of this filing instrument.
And it is as with the filing of needles; and file the tooth gently over several days until it becomes smooth; then in the end grind it completely flat, without any rough edges, and if the nerve is too sharp and bleeds into the tongue, you must file down the sharpness until it is level, so that it does not bleed into the tongue or corrupt speech.
When the teeth are loose
When the teeth become loose due to shaking or falling out, and the patient cannot bite properly on what they chew without it coming out, treat them with medicines that contract but do not help; if necessary, restrain them with a gold wire, for silver wires turn green and corrode over time, while gold does not change at all. The wire should be of medium thickness according to the space between the teeth; if you see that they are pointing towards each other, take a doubled wire between the two healthy teeth, then place the ends in between them so that it covers any missing or additional teeth completely until reaching the sound tooth on the opposite side. Then continue covering up to where you started and gently pull your hand backward without movement; securely hold near the root of the loose tooth so that it cannot escape. Cut off the wire ends with pliers, reattach them between the healthy teeth, and position them so they do not catch on the tongue. Then leave the gap as narrow as possible for as long as it can stay in place; if it loosens or breaks, restrain with another wire; it will remain stable this way throughout its duration, ensuring proper alignment of the teeth and shape after reattaching the two healthy and missing teeth:
And when the tooth falls out, reset it back into place as freshly as we have described; and do not involve anyone who is not skilled and patient in this procedure, nor shape it like a wild boar's tooth, but put it where it belongs according to its absence, and restrain as previously explained, allowing it to remain there for an extended period.
Of a boil of the ligament of the tongue
At no time is there this kind of swelling that arises from the tongue or nature, such as we do not treat in this way; or by accident of burned wound. The treatment is done so you work on the mouth with the patient's head held upright, and lift the tongue; then cut the ligamentous nerve wide, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there are hardness or lumps present, it is of a burned wound, so put in the probe and cut the ligament as wide. Be sure that the incision is not too deep for the artery beneath; and once done, raise the head with rose water and ease, or cold water, then place a linen tent underneebythe tongue; and treat the eye nightly so it cannot close. And if there are signs of bleeding, put vitriol paste on top of the wound; and if blood does not stop, cauterize with a slow-burning caustic that is effective in this way; then use other remedies until healed.
And if you see it of a color or black or hardened, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it as it is cancer; and if there's discharge like pus, apply onion juice and then use an unguent to dissolve it from both sides; and if it still persists after your initial treatment, put vitriol paste until healed. Then return to the previous method of treating until you finish everything thoroughly; then raise the head with water and salt, and treat with other remedangs as long as they are sane.
Of abscesses of the throat
At no time do gobbles come into the throat called "godath," and they are properly referred to as two almonds, and when you treat them as we have said in the division, if they are not healed, take care: if they are small abscesses with a soft and colored core, do not touch them with iron. And if they are red and the root is large, do not touch them with iron either for their bleeding to subside; but let it remain until it dies, and then you shall cut it off, or it may rupture by itself; and if it is a pale color and the roots are slender, prepare the instrument for cutting, but firstly observe whether the abscesses rest calmly and have subsided. Then make the patient sit in front of the sun with their head upright, and they shall work on the mouth and insert the rod between their hands, pressing the tongue down from all sides; and it should be made of silver or fine copper as a knife:
Can you press the tongue with this instrument entirely and see if there is an abscess? Then take a needle and insert it into the almond, and pull the pus above as much as possible; and do not touch anything else with wool. After that, wrap the head of the instrument (which appears like one force) with wool:
And if you do not have this instrument with you, use tongs of which this form is:
And it has a sharp and blunt side; and when you have captured one of the almonds with the cap, capture the other in the same manner, then after making an incision gargle the patient's mouth with hot water, vinegar, and herbs to stop bleeding if it occurs, then again gargle with warm water or cooked quince seeds, myrtle leaves, etc., until the wound is healed; And no other abscesses should appear in the throat except for these two almonds, so capture them accordingly as you did with the first.
qle bon CXX.
From of the eye
When the retina descends to the eye and becomes detached and elongated, it should be called "perpendicular"; if it is still thick and round after being cut as we have previously described in the division, and the surgery does not help, and you see that the wound heals and appears delicate, then you must excise; and those that are rounded and not long should also be excised. If they are sanguineous or of a flesh color or black, it is necessary to make an incision at this point because there is great risk for the patient. Therefore, when you see them according to the manner I have described, concerning their position and length, seat the sick person in front of the sun and press their tongue with the instrument we previously mentioned; then insert the needle into the eye, pull downward, and excise at one or two of the points that I have mentioned for the incision of the two almonds. It is necessary to not excise beyond the natural termination; if you excises more, it will harm their voice and speech; after the incision, use what we have said regarding the incision of the two almonds and heal until it is healthy again. If the sick person fears being cauterized, then it is necessary to use a device for the sensation they are afraid of during cauterization. The manner of this cautery is with sharp vinegar-like fluid. And ensure that the patient places his head in your lap and then presses their tongue with the instrument we have mentioned or chisel of cautery, and confine it with a vinegar solution so that it is neither too thick nor too clear; and apply this pressure using the shape I described here:
Here comes le coupsus la medicine si tu n’est li recoupe la medicin lesmede. Pou replei. Est parle the medicine, tant ceut la a lune. Tu ardide la mire enlucie cite lesquarre de le mieux est dude la medecel et d’elle le ouste tu la garnes ce li recu.
This treatment is more effective with incision than with the cautery; if it's treated by fumigation in this manner, take calamus and yellow yarrow and origanum (oregano) and rue and chamomile and avronne (avranle) and similar herbs, and gather them all or some of these into a pot. Then make easy boiling; and the pots should be well stuck with strong clay, and within the pot there should be an instrument inserted as follows: And it should be of silver or brass, and one end inserted into the patient's mouth so that the vapors ascend to the eyes until they are suffused; repeatedly resume when the vapor dries out, and ensure not to start this at the onset of a hot abscess as many things can happen. And do not insert it only when there is a decline in the heat of an abspect. And if this instrument isn't present, take some cloth and put inside its head a feather from an ostrich, so that the patient's mouth doesn't become too hot; because the ostrich feather does not weigh down the vapor on the face, and it is a good cure together with health.
of the following text is a medieval French, around 12th-13th centuries.:
And let the strum be bent towards the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and lift the head upwards; and watch to not touch the epiglottis, for if all goes well, do not push in any bone inside; move as needed so the patient places the instrument, because where it is less dense; then blows out of the mouth or pulls forcefully with the entire instrument evenly until it is done.
from the obstruction of the throat
Medicine is never in vain if I have said it in the division, by the cure of medicines; and when they do not help at all, then look into the throat with the patient towards the sunlight, and press their tongue against the instrument as I told you. And if you see an obstruction, squeeze out everything through a small pin or delicate pincers that are suitable for this; and if it does not work, take a large needle, blow into the throat of the patient, then insert a hot iron in the needle frequently. And when the patient has fever all day, then fill a glass with cold water, and work on the mouth, pouring it in little by little until they can swallow; move as needed often with their hand; and if the obstruction feels the liquid, it will go out.
If it does not come out as we have said, then smoke the patient with aromatic incense using the instrument mentioned in uve fumigation; do this many times, for it will eventually yield results. The method of fumigation is such that you take a pot filled with charcoal and cover it with a perforated cloth inserted into a container; then pour your fumigation there, have the patient place their head in the vessel's mouth and close it so smoke does not escape but fills the space. Now the suffocation will occur, and if it does not come out, restart the fumigatur by many times; let the patient suffer thirst and consume dirty things such as sour milk, and do not drink water; then eventually they must be brought out using this method of treatment.
The form of the instrument used for suffocation is such that when it can be seen, it resembles bent pincers to enter into the throat; and it has a shape like a doctor's spoon, with roughness of sand so that whatever it takes in cannot escape. And here is its shape:
The form of this instrument, which resembles surgical forceps, equipped with abrasions on the edges; and has a sharp points for grasping or holding tissues:
There are many kinds of abscesses, as our memory brings forth from one and another in this book, and they are different by perforation and cutting; there are two ways of dealing with them, the first being similar to itself, because it holds moisture. The second manner is for boils that appear on the body. For abscesses on the head are unlike those at the base, and abscesses in a swollen joint are unlike those that occur in joints, each having its own judgment in practice.
And if to an abscess one must not pierce until it is fully healed according to its completion; and for those which require piercing when they are ripe, but do not die with their completion, as in the case of abscesses near joints. For when abscessamoins occur near joints, if left to mature entirely by chance, there may be corruption of the ligament and nerve of the joint causing contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is near a principal member, then delaying piercing until it has fully healed will harm the principal member; or if near the foundation, one should not pierce except when it is ripe; and do not pierce an abscess before digestion is complete, unlike those near the foundation that swell entirely and become internal fistulas, nor can they be cured in a significant manner.
And it must you pierce the abscess; and so is heu leu percedez maintes et se la semblanz est douces leu, et lorant ors lesperit dument eus li percerte, et ne doit lou lecumbre le pierre.
In cases where there is swelling in that limb. And when abscesses are located within the flesh, it should be left to undergo complete digestion before you puncture them, as we have said. For if you pierce them too soon, they will become filled with much filth and remain unclean; and sometimes their lips and depths may harden. And for any abscesses that are perceived along the wide expanse of the body, according to what part needs it. It is necessary to drain small abscesse
For those without a head, if the abscess is superficial like an abdomynfly one, you should pierce it directly; and for large abscesses with great swelling and bubbling, puncture it but do not drain all of the pus at once, then apply dressing to the wound until the next day, then don't add anything further. Repeat this process gradually over time until the bubbling is gone; especially if the patient is weak, a pregnant woman, small children, or elderly men with frail constitutions. Because sometimes the pus will spurt out as it drains from the abscess, which could lead to the death of the patient, so be cautious when treating this condition. Avoid using these techniques carelessly, and after identifying an abscess, cleanse the wound; and check if the size of the abscess is small; and if it's a simple cut, prepare pads from old linen or cotton; and for large abscesses with many openings, place pads in each one so they touch each other; and if you have punctured part of the skin around the abscess, fill it with old cotton or cloth scraps without moisture, then bind it until the third day; afterwards remove it and apply medicinal salve until healed.
, alstroy est toun ;mba cema (sple:
And this is how it should be generally known in the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how one must go before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
Of swellings
A small abscess may occur on the head, and it is treated in the manner of sheep dags (scabs), as well as a goat's knees; there are many similarities. Some have moisture like hair and others are hard to pull off at the root, without any doubt if they cause discomfort. And the operation of cutting on the scalp is such that one feels with every instrument called "entromissor", which forms a cavity afterwards containing whatever it holds. If there is moisture inside, it escapes from below; and when the moisture has been drained, scrape without leaving anything in the hair that contains the moisture, as it returns again if left untouched; then insert cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment if available, otherwise in water and soap, and apply to the wound until the next day. Then begin with the same cotton on the second day, and continue daily, ensuring that there is no delay during the night; then treat the wound with an appropriate ointer until it heals completely. And if a fatty lump remains from the abscess, wrap around lengthwise; insert needle-like stitches, remove all sides, and apply your treatment thoroughly as though milking leather or any other substance that is placed on it; and if tendons are causing problems, do what I have instructed you to do afterwards. And similarly treat an abscess whether it is hard (scabbed over), and the lanced area as well as cutting away tissue and soaking in a solution of water or soap.
And the incisions of abscesses and pus-filled wounds are easier, for they have less blood. And if any of these abscesses or chiefs do not have moisture, and some of them I made heads from an old woman; and found an abscess as hard as a stone, rough and bloody, which could not be broken open; and had one struck it, the cut would have been just like that made by a stone. In other abscesses coming to chiefs, such as those that come at the heads of children and root ends of ears, they should always be opened to their full depth daily so pus may exit; and treat them accordingly.
Scrofulas
Scrofula is a type of swelling or abscesses often occur on the neck, and under the shoulders, and armpits, and there are many times they come elsewhere in the body but nowhere else, and similar to other parts of the head, as we have said; and the symptoms these scrofula. There is one that contains moisture, and so has malignant which do not want health. In those cases then, and are visible signs at good disposition on touching it appears at the place where you see but obvious to the body of color as in course; and neither near nerves nor arteries or windpipe is through that throat pipe nor be too much so close them all, if you're: thus do not close and open so far as he does not are. And it well closed just a bit at with little by little time, then they the more;
And if you open a vein or an artery and it does not allow you to work there, then apply vitriol paste to the wound, or any powders that prevent bleeding, and bind the wound; leave it until the abscess is calmed and softened, beginning to decay. And when the blood has ceased flowing, return to your task until completed; if after this small cysts appear, remove them and cleanse. If there's a large vein in the root of the scrofula, do not cut out that scrofula at its root, but bind it with a strong double thread, let it hang without harm; then dress the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and cure.
And if you cut out the entire scrofula, it is necessary to join the two edges of the wound and hold them together so that there is no excess due to its size. If it needs to be covered at the root, drain well and bind as we have said. Those scrofulae with excess, puncture where you deem fit; and pierce in a similar manner as previously mentioned, then treat the area with ointment and related things so that they decay from corruption; and when the wound is thoroughly cleansed, cure it with healing salve until healthy.
And if you cut out any scrofula, puncture, where as mentioned to be treated well before afore drain likewise salve of health from purge and similar ointment after the area is thoroughly cleansed with infection heal until fully. And when it pus exits cure so they are inh:
The elders spoke and wrote about the treatment of throat ailments; however, I have never seen it done in our land, and this is according to their writings.
For those who have swelling, it is necessary that the cut in the throat called "epiglute" be cleared; and this cannot be treated by urine, because all veins and the main part of the sickness are present with abscesses high up in the mouth, or in the throat or in two almonds. When the disease is in the channel of the main part, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
When we wish to split the epiglottis, it must be divided from three or four circles, a small slit across, between two circles or by the quantity of the incision into the sac.
And those that are prone to bleeding when cutting into the epiglottis should have no veins, and vessels should be long enough.
And if the master is fearful, it should be stretched with a gorge cloth to the full length, then cut until reaching the windpipe; avoid vessels of blood, and if you see anything else, excise the abscess as we have said.
And it is demonstrated by the section of the throat's vein that burst forth from a rupture at its place and due to the loss of voice.
And leaves an open wound uncovered for a time.
And when the time of doubt about strangulation has passed, gather together the two lips of the wound on the cheek, and sew it all tightly so that there is no gap; then apply remedies which make fresh flesh grow until it heals well.
line; Much; the acute f (et la:l're the said pard. If heu; ça ben tret na morte. Then seal the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe, and they breathe through the wound, thus avoiding death.
And so they command the physician to leave the wound open until the illness is passed, and it passes in three or four days. Then they instructed to sew up the wound and heal it, until it was healed.
And I shall tell you what I have seen. I saw a maiden stab herself with a knife in her throat and cut off part of the larynx.
que loe them e t les so tre.
I discovered the wound and found that blood was issuing from it; moreover, it seemed well that it had not consumed any bone or conducted a vein except for the throat, as life flowed through the wound.
I quickly stitched up the wound and treated it until it was healed.
and there occurred to the lady only that her voice became hoarse, and afterwards she returned to my care.
On this treatment of the epiglottis, I tell you it must have no fear.
In the throat's large entrance
with p and liquer sofla: ould; t; Jambal ket que theyr that you met. Tantairesse ce est la pe Cler; OUD to m the t untous ils. If heuiesle ;that le t, et on te ou.
And it is according to two ways: natural and accidental; or natural causes have no remedy.
And the accidental cases are of two ways: one is similar to our fatigue and the other way resembles an abscess coming from our artery. and there is fear, and it does not suffice to work on major vessels but only in the small ones, and tries and searches everything thoroughly. If you find it like our flesh and not causing any pain, then bandage it as we would with wounds, and treat the whole head of the injury, if there are points. And examine thoroughly, and heal it as needed until it is completely well again.
of us
lignant;  (le et he. Don't combte marcent f vile, and le crotre. And also: th: Ca bon ils contes; if the cor:l corsne te la;
And now I must explain all the differences between them.
I say that dislocation is fevers and heat-stricken, as long as the boiling point has not passed, and decomposition is complete; then the fever subsides and the heat lessens.
With ours [oursed], there is no fever or pain, and it contains a pus (exudate), which is its own sac and follows the color of the body, beginning as if glassy, and grows.
heu; that are the t, so far lesse ; it is the in the said they must beau the  (orniher, or not-Tes: f much the other : s, and to make a. The UCC form.
It is necessary, when you come to treat the wound, that you first try and examine all the instrument called "entre-miseroire," according to its form or chapter which follows.
And the manner of examining abscesses is that you squeeze or make it more moist than what you find in the abscess, and gradually turn your two fingers, until you know that the pus has reached its head, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then extract the entre-miseroire, and be careful so it does not slip out.
If the running moisture is of such color as mentioned with other boils, then do it similarly.
And if after the incision no moisture comes forth and it appears greasy, then treat it crosswise, using forceps on each side, carefully scraping off each part, and preserving the coat where it lies to make it clean with a knife.
And if you cannot cleanse it completely, then cut into pieces so that nothing remains.
l'segniu se c1 ydes que ne the:
If it lingers a bit and the pain increases, apply an ointment of corrosive herbs to the wound, tighten the wound, and place soothing substances on the abscess until healed;
If it is severe, cut out the two edges of the wound and treat with what relieves thirst.
If the wound is inflamed or something else if you hasten and apply a lead of vitriol paste, leave it for two or three days until the swelling subsides, and let bleeding rest; then return to cooking what has been left undone.
See here the forms of intrusive tumors, and they are in three ways: large and medium and small; and there are three zones which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are three ways to encircle abscesses of fistulas: large, medium, and small.
and are similar to the needles used for witchcraft, made of citrine, iron or silver, and those that move value as yellow ones, which are better tested with dark black material to surround abscesses of fistulas.
and they come in three ways: large, medium, and small, depending on the quantity of the size of openings.
The shapes of tumors are of many similarities, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and some that have two protrusions in three different ways.
and those that have three protrusions in all three ways; and those that have two protuberances, one only, and are also of three ways; and all these must be in their place.
The heads of these that are cut are sharp, and there are some where they do not sever only one side, which we scrape the skin off because we cannot clip the vein or nerve.
And of these dislocations are reset with fingers, so that the patient does not expose themselves at the onset of abscesses.
And they come in three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see them;
And it is used near there, and limbs, and also similar things.
Et souvent il en vient un outil petit, semblable à des lambeaux d’ongles, ainsi qu'en ceci : pour attacher le sang.
Et cela se fait une seule fois à l’endroit sain où les veines sont ligotées, et aux artères, ainsi que par cette grande méthode : pour les recoudre.
Pas une seule fois gonfle-t-elle des seins d'hommes qui commencent à être corrompus, jusqu'à ce qu'ils ressemblent aux seins d'une femme ;
And they stay swollen and painful, and if one wishes to treat them, it should be done according to this form of the following line: b. Jusqu'à g.: Then scrape the fatty tissue, and dress the wound with medicinal salve, then sew together the two edges of the wound, and continue until it is healed.
and the wound is bent downward, and softened due to its size, as it happens in women, so that they form two rib-like structures above, by two similar splits. The reason one holds the other at the end of each, so that the larger contains the smaller according to this form, from line b. to line g. Then scrape the leather between the two lips, remove the fat, and apply what we have said about stitches and powders, as well as anything else necessary for treatment, until it is clean.
and if it is not clean, or the incision is not fully made because the patient does not want to rest, or due to bleeding, then you should fill the wound with a pounded cotton soaked in corrosive ointment. And leaves it until it fully rejoins and fuses with fat, then treats it until it is healed.
For abscesses in the ankles
And when it often during times evacunet les plaies dule esproves blood and healess on l'est à toi sances sont asseles plies la veue de isles estires, as muches de cuer of snes, et doles tisemples:
Those who contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line B to line G: And when all the bowels that are in the abscess have been emptied, apply a woolen cloth to the wound and leave it until the next day; then remove all the wool and treat with ointment as needed until it is healed.
And if the abscess resembles swellings like we have said of groin sores, treat it by making incisions as we have described for groin sores before; and if the wound contains bowels, then perform cautery as we have described earlier.
Of the dislocation of the artery
When the artery is ruptured and the skin above it becomes hardened, there are often abscesses and also bleeding from veins.
And if you touch near when this is for the artery, so it comes that the abscesses are large in size. When you feel it on your elbows, there is intense strain; and when it's by the vein, reason for fear appears.
And it is madness to cope with this abscess, especially when it's under ligaments and tendons and at the joint and in many other places, and they are very large. Thus it is necessary to remove the iron treatment, and those who are at the head should also be treated similarly, and in those who have an inflammaturature over the long skin.
Thus it is necessary to remove the iron treatment, and those who are at the head should also be treated similarly, and in those who have an inflammaturature over the long skin. ; They are said.
Then insert a needle on one side, and pierce it all the way to the opposite side, and tie off the artery with a double thread for two inches, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are at the temples.
Then mark the place which is between the two ties with a probe until you find where it bleeds, and then sever the abscess.
Then prepare the dressing that I will instruct you to apply, as long as the wound continues to ooze. Then apply an ointment to the area as needed until it heals.
and if an abscess is present for the size of the vein, it's necessary to treat with your hand the ointment as much as possible on the abscess throughout the skin. then insert the needle under the skin that you hold in your hand, and pierce it, and let there be a double thread, so that you can pull from the other side. they merclavestroit. If the t s; if the same: it le pas as (e, so that you should be pletise sez; the them, and e ceda.
If you doubt that the child is not cured, then replace with another needle at all along one of the threads from underneath the abscess to the incision made by the first needle, and strain the threads in four directions.
Then close the abscess as long as excesses persist, then cut away the excess fat and leave what remains attached.
Then apply a cloth soaked in wine and oil, then treat with bandages and salves until they are healed.
From boils to nerves
Just as abscesses come in arteries and veins, they become abscesses of nerves when injured or due to excessive labor.
This occurs often in shoulders and elbangs where there are joints, it is .i. grievous abscess, its appearance resembles the body's color, and it causes pain in various ways.
: de laisssa they are not ce way.
And be well from all sides, and does not go forward or backward, neither up nor down, and that which is in the joints should never be bound with iron: lest it may cause constriction.
And he who is at the head or forehead causes swelling of the scalp to the parietal bone. If the abscesses are small, use forceps and dress them at their root;
puro:lum.
Of large hanging mouths At no time does it occur in wombs or elsewhere, and it is an illness called "fungus" due to its appearance like dough, with subtle roots, and large stems; there are both small and very large ones.
and I saw a house where there were two wombs that looked more like fungi than anything else, with no differences between them, they were white in color, had fine roots, were split open, and oozed moisture within.
the ttcere ;
If the swelling at the spatulatum is large, and be in your presence the fire cautery. For on cutting often comes great bleeding of blood, and if it does not stop, then quickly provide the caustic treatment.
If you see the patient hopeful and fearful of the incision with iron, take a well-made thread, and bind the wound as we have said, leaving it for two days.
and then the binding, and continue to strain with the thread until the wound is closed, and it will heal; and if the roots are thick, be fearful of cutting through them completely in one go, but do well cut off most of it.
Then burn it so that it does not re-dislocate; then treat the wound and ensure you do not cover the torn tissue which is of a sickly color, poor feeling, and milk white appearance.
For it is an ulcer that has hardened, and I shall come to the treatment of this syphilitic sore hereafter.
when there are boils or furuncles
by the t. S (aguni colore tostrord and: they do not.
When it is due to the rupture of the seam and through an abscess opening, then its color resembles that of the body's color, and is easily evacuated without pain from various outlets. And if it is due to the outflow of the intestine, then there are many variations, and when pressed on its sides it bursts open, and then returns, and sometimes becomes hardened, greatly expanding at the entrance of the bowel and requiring vigorous work.
And if it is due to moisture, it is an easy matter, and opens well when pressed with your hand, without constriction; and if it is for blood, then the abscess will be large and hard, protruding according to a quantity;
And if it is for swelling, then the area should be tender-touched, and the procedures are such that you must observe whether the appearance is due to blood of an artery or vein, or swelling. If it is necessary to leave the wound as is. For there is doubt and fear, just as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses for arteries and veins.
And if the appearance is due to the intestines or bowels, then you must instruct the patient to soak his armlet and stretch it out straight, then tie a string around the entire belly. Then command it to lie on its side between your hands, Then go around the area you have marked with all the spatula. Then extend the bulk of the abscess above all the large hooks;
Then work on the extended abscess on the ligament, insert your index finger, and feel for the intestines. If you find it caught in the ligament, release it, and push the intestine towards the navel of the belly;
And if you find swelling, catch it with the hook, and remove any excess tissue.
I, with ca f on:
Then strain the abscess into four points above the needles, and if you see them, remove the needles, and let it remain in place until healed, and extract the dead tissue by itself. Or cut when it is thin and ripe enough, then treat as required, and remove the abscess as we have said.
Or cut when it is thin and ripe enough, then treat as required, and remove the abscess as we have said. And extract any blood or pus you find, then treat the wound as required, and close the wound.
Of a carbuncle
We have said in the division about chancres resembling certain things, and how one should treat them with medicine, and bleed using leeches; let us speak of chancre starting in the joints, requiring great caution during treatment, and as per ancient sources, if a chancre is present or can be removed like one found under the nipples, in the groin, or on the thighs, it should be completely excised at the beginning; and when they are large and old, there is no need to approach them, for I have never known anyone healed from them before.
And if the operation is present or can be excised as we have said, purge the patient of black bile once; then provide a good resting place for the operation to perform the procedure; then apply onion poultices or chancres and cut off all hairs and tissue from any part, leaving nothing behind; let it bleed fully, squeeze out well onto your hand or something else, and if the progression of blood causes contrary to the incision in the vein or artery, cauterize until they are sealed; then perform another treatment till healing occurs.
From dropsy In our discussion on the division of dropsy symptoms, we have discussed how water accumulation occurs in the body and its manifestations. We also talked about each type's signs and treatments with medicines or iron; it is only when they are evident. One should not use iron for these two types: tympanites and hyposarcosis, as this can be fatal. So if you medicate a symptom of dropseia called 'eclites' with medicine but the cure does not work, check to see if the patient is weak or has another illness besides dropsy; for instance, gastrointestinal issues and other similar conditions; do not use iron as there may be doubts. And if you see a very strong patient who only suffers from dropsy without any other disease and they are neither too young nor too old, then proceed in this manner: Gently lift the patient's hands, and let the minister press their belly, pushing the water to the lowest part near the groin. Then take a spatula made of two pointed parts as follows: And it should be sharp on both ends, but not so sharp that it can reach the intestines when inserted.
Then look to see if dropsy is originating from the intestines: if it requires that you make an incision above the elbow, three fingers' width straight down from over the wrist; and if dropsy stems from liver disease, make your incision on the left of the bend, three fingers' width; and if it is from kidney issues, do so to the right, ensuring that no excesses flow towards a weak area.
Then pierce the hide with your instrument and empty it, then lift your hand to remove all fat between the hide and flesh just as when scraping for an amount of a thumbnail or slightly more; then pierce the flesh until the space reaches eight fingers in width, this is where the water lies, followed by the blood vessels, and you insert the tool with which it resembles: And it's like a silverfish thin, made of iron wire or copper lightweight, with an opening on its underside; one hole at the top end, three holes on each side, and one in the center. It has head cut as if a pen, and this is how authors carve their pens:
At the head above is the membrane, so when tension comes to water, it should be suspended on the instrument; then drain most or one-third of it, because if you drain more than necessary in that hour, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit due to the weapon's impact.
However, in emptiness according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the conditions of the patient's strength mean, and their hairs; then use the instrument and retain water, which is now held open by the key that blocks the passage above the sack, as I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then resume the instrument on the following day if you see the patient suffering thus, and draw out a small quantity of water.
However, on the following day, and keep from fanning until it does not remain but just some water. And if you have doubts about the patient, and leave too much water, then treat with burial or hot sand, and by a lot of sweating or bathing and in the sun, and dye with drink; and cure with dry medicines until he is healthy again, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after extracting water, as I have said before.
For prevention of erection At no time are children born without any foreskin on the penis, or if it is small, or not in its place. If it needs to be done quickly so that a slender piece can be pierced: then attach a very fine cord to it, and tie it up as such for three or four days; and when he needs to urinate, untie the knot, allowing him to urinate, and then re-tie; but sometimes this is not necessary because the urine that comes out does not retract. If the foreskin is small, then it should be treated with a medicine of linen swabs as we have said, and it will enlarge. Those who do not have the foreskin in its place are falsely attached because no one is born with the foreskin at the top of the penis, which means they cannot urinate unless they lift their penis up; and they cannot ejaculate because the material cannot reach the testicles, and this is a bad illness.
And the method of this procedure is that the patient lies on their back, with the head of the penis and the scrotum similarly to the size of a pen, so that the foreskin can be cut away as needed; and guard against bleeding which often occurs, and if it happens, then apply the sealant that stops the flowing blood, and treat the wound until it heals.
Of pustules of the penis Many times come these swellings in the penis, and there is an ugly appearance of wounds; among them are malignant and benign ones; it is necessary to pluck them with a fine needle, then cleanse and purify all, then cover with cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; then treat with refined oil until they heal. And if the swellings are malignant, of pus color and discharging, it is necessary to treat with fire caustery. After you have cleaned them, and if the swelling is within the skin and partially outside, remove the swelling that is inside first; afterward, attend to what is outside. For when you treat both together, ensure the head of the penis does not become perforated, and blackness and decay come into its place; it is necessary to heal all that is blackened and corrupted, then apply a poultice of honey and flour made from the bark of pomegranates and vinegar, then treat with other remed groves until it heals.
If bleeding occurs, arrange the lunar cautery according to this form: The cautery serves two purposes together - for stopping blood flow and preventing decay. And if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it must be that you insert or guide a piece of lead in the penis and urinate among those who are ill; and when the hairs at the top of the penis become hard due to these issues for wounds or abscesses in those who have not been circumcised, then it is necessary to scrape them off with an instrument made of steel until the ties are loosened and the head of the penis freed from all sides.
If it is a serious matter to discuss this issue, then scrape the spatula slightly on the head of the penis and hairs; afterward, carefully separate them, and place a subtle linen cloth soaked in cold water over it that it does't become completely dry.
On circumcision
Circumcision is not necessarily a dislocation of continuity like other wounds; however, when we perform this work of our own will and properly for children, it must be done the best way, and in the easiest manner for health.
I say that the ancients did not mention the circumcision of their children, for they do not practice it in their laws, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Because I have wanted the greatest part of masters and saints who performed circumcision between one day and three days, and at all times; they were buried with two sheets, and occasionally, the coffin was placed above and below the body.
Or it recovers with copper, and the pain is doubled, and at the disfigurement which is hard to assure are not the tips of the member; and at the manicuring of the nail by chance slips away the iron, causing infection, and many times arise thus there is no need for further treatment as I have observed.
From the manicuring done with force throughout all parts of the line I have found the benefit of experimentation, for the forces cut precisely both above and below.
For when you press your hand, trim evenly throughout .i. all strands; but that the threads are well straightened around the skin; and make the first operation in such a way that it appears to the child (if he understands), that you do not tie him tightly with the thread only on the penis, and then let him move freely in any way that you can. Then the head is supported between your hands straight up, and it reappears as forces return to your hands or from under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the straps. Afterwards, put your hand on the rod and blow or cough, and draw it up until the head of the rod is aligned; then cleanse well of the filth assembled therein, then secure the socket with a double thread, then tie it from one protrusion to another linkage; and hold as two fingers by the second linked at the pouchet and index finger, making sure to cover between the two links. Then lift the cork gently and realign the head of the rod.
Then the head is supported between your hands straight up, and it reappears as forces return to your hands or from under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the straps. Afterwards, put your hand on the rod and blow or cough, and draw it up until the head of the rod is aligned; then cleanse well of the filth assembled therein, then secure the socket with a double thread, then tie it from one protrusion to another linkage; and hold as two fingers by the second linked at the pouchet and index finger, making sure to cover between the two links. Then lift the cork gently and realign the head of the rod. Then allow the blood to leak slightly and steadily, as it is a woman's issue; and apply powder above and below the powder, with a small cloth bound by an egg yolk cooked in lukewamoistened rose oil, mixed with fresh rosemary oil, and leave it there until the following day, treating it with another treatment as necessary until healed.
The form of the forces in cleansing is this: both eyes are held and made sharp, and they should be as large as possible.
If the issue of inflammation is when the kernel inside escapes during incision; therefore it is necessary that you extend it to your fingernail, so too does the head make an abscess; and cover equally, and if you cannot hold by your fingernail, then with tweezeboarers, and thereafter bandage.
And if they pass three days, and that which is from beneath the rod is swollen, let it be until the abscess has soothed; gently scrape it off; bandage as you move, and protect the area of the rod, for it will not do harm in any way.
Therefore heal the sudden wounds of powder that we have mentioned in treating powders, and if you bandage too much, and it goes beyond, it will not harm; heal as we have said until they are healthy.
Retention of urine
The retention of urine is due to the obstruction of a stone, or frozen blood, or bowel, or foreign matter, which we have discussed in the section.
and if the urine is not expelled, and you see that retention due to a stone lodged in or near the bladroid, then it is proper for the patient to be bent on their elbangs (elbows); and their feet should be placed under the back, stretching out the belly towards the upper back, and restrain the patient as much as possible; and thus, one constrains the neck of the bladder to express the stone above, so that urine is released.
the ld but in t.
And the method for urine flow is that you take a double thread and tie it to the tip of a small piece of wool or cotton, then insert the end with the thread into the syringe; trim any excess wool or cotton and fill the syringe up to its top with it, then grease the syringe with oil or butter and mastic resin, and have the patient sit on a seat, and apply oil-soaked urine and olive oil as well as watered down pitch to their bladder and penis;
Then carefully insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the base of the penis, then wrap the penis around with a double layer towards the bladcuft; then fill the syringe up to the bladder and let the patient feel urine flowing back from there, and this is not done in this order because that is how the conduit twists; then remove the thread little by little until all the wool remains, allowing urine to follow the remaining wool, then extract it;
And repeat the process with the syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relieved.
of bladder diseases
When there are wounds or blood in the bladder, and decay has gathered there, and you see it needs to be cleansed with waters and medicines, so do all on the instrument called "clenched fist". And this is its form:
It is sealed, and has .iii. openings: two on one side and one on the other as you see; and a receptacle over which the medicine channel passes well to spray out the seed without addition, so that we may drain the moisture and insert when necessary.
t c (don't se c. Joles entre. And the comm: by pa jumlemente f the durnt that cirez; if they est de leur.
This is the form of subtle clysters used to cleanse the bladder: so it is here.
It is made of silver or copper and the head is higher; then from one shoulder a band breaks loose. Then take an ox-hide bladder and put in it the moisture you intend to use for cleansing the bladbean, then tie it between the two well-formed breasts with a good double thread, and heat some of that moisture over the fire; then insert the head of the clyster into the phallus, then strain your hand on the bladder until the patient feels that all the moisture has reached the bladdern.
It is made of the piece avec li pren .i liens qu’il est d'accompanment puis qui li chausse vues, et ce cest lee fai les boute l’oiles; de tient li versaies ou il est le nons et en l’s a la moitor.
Of stone removal
We have discussed in the section the methods of stone removal and extraction along with medicines; we also described the difference between stones placed by rain, all signs, and where one must operate on sizeable stones; as well as within the bladder and penis; I will now clearly and briefly explain to you.
I say that stones placed within the bladwarthey occur more often in children and it is a sign of urine flowing from the bladder like water in its subtlety; and there are sand-like substances, and graininess in their penises, and they frequently pass them, then become lodged; and many suffer these stone movements; healing for children is relatively easy until they have reached four years of age, but it becomes very severe with adults and moderate for those between youth and old age; the treatment of larger stones is easier than that of smaller ones.
When we come to treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient with an enema, in order to cleanse all feces from the intestines. For at times there may be obstruction caused by stones.
Then take the patient by the feet and stand them upright until the stone descends to the front of the bladebox, and it does not come up again. Then let him sit between your hands properly arranged, with his hands below his thighs so that the bladder is fully inclined downward; then grasp and touch its sides.
If you feel the stone in the space, then hasten to cut it out immediately. And if it does not come out with all your effort, moisten your index finger of the left hand with oil, if the patient is a child or an adolescent, use your middle finger; and insert it into its foundation, grasp the stone, and when you feel it on your finger, move to the neck of the bladebox; then press below your finger, and push the stone out through whichever hole you cut.
And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and he commands him to extend the nails of his right hand upward, and to remove the skin from under the nails on his left hand in the part where one makes an incision; then he applies the spatula copiously, which forms it.
And they make between the nails and the base, not inside but to the left of the navel; and it is right above the stone, and your legs are together or apart from the floor, and make them so that the opening be wide at the bottom due to defecation, and narrow internally according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
Sometimes press the legs if they are at the base or floor, so that it springs without effort; and know that there is a piece of stone with angles, and margins: those will be easier to remove; and some pieces which are smooth like glass, round, from which the removal is easy.
When the bone has angles and edges, make the incision larger; and if it does not yield, it is necessary to extract with tongs similar to a file at the top, in order to widen the hole so it doesn't escape; or you place under the instrument, a subtle curved device on the head; and if you cannot manage this way, make a small opening, and if the bone has been corrupted, extract with vitriol.
And if there is more than one bone, first remove the largest from the bladder neck, then cut above it, then extract the base, and other small ones afterwards if any. And if they are very large, you must make a larger wound, for two things happen to the patient: death or urine flowing back because the urethra cannot seal; however, do your best in milking, or debridement with tonglete, until it is drained into pieces.
And when you have completed your work, dress the wound with incense and aloe and dragon'annointing oil, and bandage it, and place a linen cloth soaked in oil and wine or oil and rosewater and cold water over it to cool down the abscess; then wrap the patient up on his back, and do not remove the dressing until the third day.
When you reset it, it is raised well with oil and water, then treated with the final diafinitus ointment and basilisk ointment until healed.
And if abscesses and ulcers occur in the wound and blood congeals within the bladder, preventing urine flow: thus insert your finger into the wound to drain the blood, as if left there it will cause the bladebladder and prostate to become inflamed.
Then clean the wound with water and salt and vinegar, and aid in all ways that you can, until healed; and it is necessary that for every application of ointment, you bind his two thighs together and apply the remedies to the area.
If the stone is small and it is located near the vein and inserted there, and urine cannot pass; then treat as I have described here, by making multiple incisions at this location for relief. I have experienced this method before.
Take an iron rod according to this shape and make it with three sharpened edges in one section:
Then take a wire around the vein below the stone so that it cannot reach back to the bladebag; then insert the rod gently into the vein until you feel resistance. Twist the rod with your hand lightly and slowly towards another part of the stone, as if piercing through it from there; urine will come out shortly after, then press your hand on what remains lodged in the vein within the stone. It is instantly broken apart, bursts out with the urine, and provides relief to the patient.
If you cannot do this due to any hindrance, then take a thread below the wound and another above, then make the rod between the two threads, then extract it forcefully, and untie the ligature, and cleanse the coagulated blood in the wound; and treat it until it is healthy.
From women's stones (likely referring to uterine fibroids or other related conditions).
Sometimes stones are found in women'wart hilt, and if it happens even once, the treatment is difficult for three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second reason is that they cannot find a skilled woman who can undress before the mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
And the third way is that sometimes it may not be possible to find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone from the woman's body is harder than that of a man, so deeper incision must be made, which causes great fear.
And if it is necessary to do so, you must bring a midwife who knows well and trustworthy, and search for one carefully. If you cannot find such a skilled midwife or woman knowledgeable in the art of women's health, then choose wisely from the available ones; and instruct them to perform as commanded in the stone removal.
And carefully observe if the woman is a virgin: then she must place her hand or bottom and search for the stone; and if she finds it, she should hold it from under her and command that she puts her hand or joins with the patient, pressing firmly her left hand onto the bladder.
If it is torn, one must gradually move it from the entrance of the bladder to below, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then push on the bone at the hip near the joint where it has been dislocated, feeling for the protruding bone in that area, and do not move its knee over or under the bone, and let the flesh be torn slightly.
Then insert the rod into the thigh; if you feel the bone and can expose it far enough for the bone to be removed forcefully, know that there are many types of bones: they may be small or large, sharp or blunt, long or round, with ridges. Understand these kinds in order to know their outcome.
And if the bone does not break easily, put vinegar on it and hold for an hour until it becomes pliable; then return to your work, so that the bone is firm enough, and have the splints I told you about in extracting the bones from the horses to help you with your task.
If the blood does not stop flowing, and it is from an artery that has been severed, then apply powder to the area and use ligatures and bandages, do not attempt again in this manner, leave the wound untreated unless by chance the patient dies; then treat the wound.
And when the fever of blood is calmed and the limb has regained its strength, return to your practice until the wound is healed.
Of hernias of fleshly matter
Immediately following a urination is not anything else but an assembly of moisture or white faeces, which is below the head of the kidneys that contains the urethra; and it is called "faeces", and never properly in the tissue of the urethra, as one might think it to be another organ; and it is the leather of the kidney between the white faeces we have mentioned; and this does not occur often.
And the generation of this urine is due to weakness that comes from the kidneys, and it spreads throughout those tissues.
And it never comes from impact on the kidneys, and this urine has many colors: sometimes yellowish in hue, or without redness, black, clear, and this happens more frequently.
And these are the signs of this assembly being whitened as we have said, so it is short abscesses, i.e., long like an egg's shape, and do not open the veins, for they are entirely moistened.
And if it is moist in the proper cloth, then there are short abscesses with part of the membrane, and thus one thinks it is another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the veins and the whitened membrane, then it feels quite well; therefore when you see to know the color of the moisture, probe all around the inserted thing fully, wherein the form was previously as described. According to what follows after the introduction, judge accordingly.
According to what follows after the introduction, judge accordingly. And when we treat with iron, it is necessary that the patient be cleansed as much as possible and have their body replenished; then they lie on their back, on something slightly raised, and place many layers of cloth underneath.
then they lie on their left side, and command the assistant to sit on their right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the lower edge of the collarbones;
the s but s:
Then pierce the shaft completely filled with water to one wide hole and extract all the water, then put in linen bandages, and extend the shaft upwards; do not touch the head of the bones, but only the shaft itself; wrap it carefully or piece by piece like its delicate ribs, and if you don't bind it firmly enough, the water will return.
If the joint slips during your work, when you have completed the treatment of the shaft, then join the two halves of the bone head with a stitch, and treat it as other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the joint to be affected by another disease, it is necessary that you bind all the vessels that are hanging loosely, suspecting bleeding; then cut out the bone head entirely and treat as we have said.
And if the bone is fractured into two parts together, recognize that these are two branches; treat the other part as you did the first one equally, then stop the bleeding and apply linen soaked in rose oil to the wound.
and then apply another layer of soaked linen in wine and oil, place two layers on top, and cover with doubled cloths, securing them all according to this form.
Then take two pieces of cloth, cut the ragged linen according to this pattern and stitch them together around the girdle of trousers, one side reaching from the foundation to the back, and the other over the hollow of the wrist; the second piece is fitted on both forearms, securing it all in a belt at the waist.
Et never is this branch of fire-cautery in the place of a barbed steel tool, and you shall take .i. fine cauterizing cultellus, and cut the leather from the sheaths, and soften it as we have said, so that the white worm contained within the water is uncovered;
If you take the fire-cautery thusly, and pierce that white worm at its joints, and scrape with this subtle hot cauterizing tool;
And you scrape in all manners that you can, until you have scraped everything; and keep the flame from touching the egg; and know that this work is more healing; and be mindful of bleeding wells, and make sure that the wound drains properly.
If no other thing occurs to you contrary or an abscess or blood flow or other matter, treat that which is contrary to you according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to endure this procedure due to its severity, perform a puncturing as I instruct you, and when you are well certain through the signs we have discussed that reflux must be stopped.
If the patient sits on a raised seat with their legs elevated; then pierce the abscess below all the surrounding fat tissue, and place the puncture deep into the body's core; and make the holes wide enough that all of the fluid may flow out.
Then apply cotton at the site, bind it, and allow for drainage of any remaining fluid; then heal until the wound is healthy.
And if the gauze bandage does not allow fluid to exit through the wound's opening, it is necessary to insert a tube or instrument used in draining abscesses as previously described; and slightly enlarge the wound, ensuring that fluid returns, coming together again after 15 days or so, and when assembled as before, this will allow the patient to recover.
For treating an abscess in the joints
In this part of this branch there are fearful conditions in various cases, which seem to me that it should be left alone.
and I will tell you about the procedure and similarities of an abscess.
Therefore, I say that many abscesses come from the body, especially in the joints; and this is quite often seen.
n’n:
The color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; there is no pain, and it is a serious abscess.
And sometimes it may be a frightening and painful abscess with a bloody color, and never comes from us of arteries or vein swelling.
When it originates from ours [from the patient], then it is known by the appearance of an inflamed abscess when you press with your hands. how they: (and sosten to:
He who is afflicted with vein swelling can be recognized by his tendency to react when touched on the joints.
and may even perform surgery upon this kind of limb, and other fractures as well. and it is that you cut the head of the collarbone, then elevate it upwards, and expose the white fascia, and release the suspensory ligament from all sides of the humerus.

If it is near the liver or within the vessels, one must completely remove them, and roundly cut out the sack.
And if a stone's birth is behind it or there, one must completely remove the stone and extract its contents as we have said.
And when the operations are completed, dress the wound with lin cloth soaked in rose oil and wine, then apply other remedies until it is healed.
Of abscesses of boils
This is an abscess surrounded by swelling resembling a lump, with the softening of boils. and it quickly changes in appearance when approached by the ill-disposed.
and soi lesme:
And thus we shall tell you the procedure for it, as done by the ancients.
It is necessary that you seat the patient on an elevated chair, then put a support under his knees. to all the vessels that are near the penis and the testicles, and make them straight outwardly.
then cut with a sharp spatula across the area where the vessels are, until they are fully exposed,
ivo s and (1. Et t; pas sot;
Then insert a needle where there is one with a double thread, and tie it at the first spot where the vein appears, then securely to the other end. Then wrap the bandages tightly straight, according to the length of the body, and treat the corrupted sores.
Then heal the wound as you would with others or make a bandage, ensuring that none of the threads rot away and one of the sides does not.
by (the ou Re leman. If the joints lose their nourishment from the incision of vessels, they dry up and cannot be healed.
For this swelling due to a snakebite The remedies for this viper bite are by cutting the area of the fang wound or extending pressure to the abdomen in the groin region, causing the intestines to protrude from that swelling toward one side.
the a and sonle ;
When the signs indicate that it is due to an extended sigh, then they occur gradually over a long time and do not come suddenly. And the boils are equal up towards the forehead because the sigh accelerates the intestines.
And the signs are when it is due to a cut sigh, which causes sudden pain at first, and various boils appear close to the skin, from below the hair, as an issue of the intestine and in all parts affected by the sigh.
In; If youre bon's ct; f.
And for these iron treatments of fear, one must dispel them.
The manner of the work is that you command the ill person to cleanse his intestines into his hand within the wound if it can enter. Then gently press above its neck between your hands, and lift the hindquarters.
Next, stretch the body upwards, and cut all of the skin around the joints lengthwise. then put the guts of the abdomen into hooks as needed to open the wound, and make them such that you can pull out the intestines.
ym le c not... The  (or; and they. the CJ. If you may they a egress: Jum.
Then insert your index finger into the hole which supports it, in that between the white sinew and below the skin of the elbow, and between the second sinew.
and remove that which is behind the elbow, and between the second sinew; then move your hand to the head of the joints inside the right hand, extend the white sinew upwards towards your left hand, and lift the elbow with all the sinews towards the waist. and instruct the assistant that they extend the elbow upwards, and loosen what is behind the ligament.
And if it has wrapped any part of the intestines around or hardened white sackworms, and if you find anything therein, then blow into the belly from below.
Then take a needle or one with a thick thread made of several strands, and blow into the rear part where it is after the calf's hide; behind the waist, then cut out the hairs that show through the threads until there are four strings remaining. Then join them one on top of the other in a cross-like manner, and bind the hide which we have said is located below the calf's hide with a strong tie using two parts. Then wrap the heads of the children and form them into two parts so that none of the winds that nourish them can enter in without pus, with no abscesses occurring. And place the ligatures according to the first ligature for two fingers long of it, and after these two ligatures leave out the sack which is outside below the corner of the eye; a great distance of one finger.
And afterwards according to the roundness that the eye bears; then cut along the part which is outside below the eyebrow, as we have said before, without hurting it or damaging the bow.
Then prepare softened cloth with oil, and apply it to wounds, and also prepare the bandage as we have said. And never is cauldrated the white scab that we have mentioned, after incision, out of fear of blood flow.
For this often happens and leaves the bandage until it is healed; and if it takes time to come off, soak in warm water and place as we have said, until it is healed.
s the fact ondudusme; The Jum by howso; provide.
Of a groin hernia due to fleshly protrusion
In this remedy, I have never seen anyone daring to perform the treatment with iron.
And the ancients said it is made as if like the reamer that joins the nails together just above the bone, pressing them lightly and then removing pressure.
be a in the following: che on les to the and r, then nes.
Never does rotundity come to the ankles as we have said, and they open up; and none of the intestines are attached with ligaments, and if any do detach, it is slight, and heals within hours.
And at the same time, if it remains too long in this spot, a hernia or abscess forms until the intestines protrude.
And this happens from the spreading of the abscess which is in the ankles, as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and inflated both skin and opening.
And the treatment is by fire as we have previously mentioned; and on occasion it is treated with iron in this manner:
And the patient lies on their back between your hands, then wrap the inflamed wound with a bandage as wide as three fingers' worth of cloth.
Then extract the sack that lies beneath the skin, and take a piece of thread and tie it around the visible part of the sack.

Then extract the skull from the wound, and cover nothing of the sinew or extend the uvula or any other thing, as I have shown you in the treatment of intestinal perforations.
Then he is cured through wound care. And when you bandage the wounds, if they become infected and you treat the injury until it is cleaned.
The sinew is constricted, and does not have an appearance in the dressing, and the cautery has healed at this place, and closer to recovery.
From softening of the leather of joints
Many times the leather of joints is softened in certain individuals because their internal structures are mollified, and fluid can be seen; and it is necessary, when one wishes to treat them, that they lie on their back while the area affected by softening is covered with skin, then join the two edges together using a stitch, and if you look first remove the excess leather in three or four firm stitches; then sew between the stitches as with other wounds until it heals, and let them sneeze.
In the art of surgery
Chastrains are outlined in our law and for this reason I would prefer not to discuss them in this book; however, there are two reasons they must be addressed: the first is so that masters can respond when asked about chastraining and its cure, and the. The other is because we often need chastraining of various animals to assist us, such as goats, sheep, deer, and other creatures. Thus, I say chastraining is done in two ways: by attraction or incision. In the method where we do it by attraction, make the animal sit in hot water until its joints are softened and pliable; then grip with your hand so that they are returned to their place and you no longer feel them. For chastraining by cutting: you must hold the animal, press down on the skin of the joints with your left hand, then tie a sling, and wrap each hoof with bandages once properly scalded; and leave no piece of fecal matter or fine dung under its hoovebeams. This way of chastraining is similar to attraction because in attraction sometimes nothing remains on the joints when heated, which causes lustfulness in the animal; then treat the wound until it's healthy again.
Hermaphrodites are those with both male and female characteristics.
or.
Of the inflammation
Inflammation is a swelling near the natural part, so unsightly to look upon; women have it as large as one's hand, and this is its healing. One must reduce the excess inflammamo(u)r on their hands or ankles gently, not too far inwards, lest bleeding occurs, then proceed with other treatments until it becomes healthy again; and another swelling that arises from the mouth of a vein, its base, and occasionally bursts forth, resembling a hollow. This was called by ancients "maladie kowee". If it must be treated as we have said for inflammation, treat until it is healthy again.
Erratic refers to something that lacks a fixed direction or pattern; in medicine, this could refer to symptoms or conditions that manifest unpredictably or without clear causality. The specific translation of the term may vary depending on its usage within the context of a medical text from the Middle Ages. However, since "de erratique" is not a standard phrase or word in Old French medical terminology, it might be necessary to clarify that this appears to be an isolated term without further information available for accurate translation. If "erratique" is intended to mean erratic behavior or symptoms within the text, the translation could be:
Irregular if the nature of women is not fully pierced or the opening is small; and it is natural by birth, or due to disease that comes about, or it's through an instrument inserted either gently or deeply, and is formed entirely in the thighs, or buttocks, or elsewhere, or wherever it may be; and prevents conception, pregnancy, and sometimes even childbirth; and knowledge of this depends on examining by sight. If bleeding occurs nearby, apply pressure with both hands or a rag. If it is a subtle syphilitic sore, and appears close to two months or more, act quickly, and treat as follows: place the two index fingers together, and have the woman lie down on her back with legs apart; then extend the two fingers fully until the syphilitesteemers are gone, and apply over the swelling; then use wool and tallow mixed in oil, and apply it to the area each day so that healing can occur. And if the sore is hard and spotted, you must cut a leaf-shaped piece of myrtle bark for treatment. If bleeding occurs from an injury, suspend a cloth on a rod; and use medicines such as bloodstone, dragon's blood resin, incense mixed with frankincense in abundance; then prepare a large bandage so that the wound cannot close, and leave it long-lasting, and also apply a linen tent; then treat with other remed cures until healed. And when bleeding occurs in the thighs, cover according to this method unless there are deep abscesses near the injury. Because for an encrusted boil on the thigh, it should not be touched or probed by a stick.
For hemorrhoids:
e inissistant, andthe ma.
From abscesses of the muscles
There are many ways in which boils come from the muscles, such as chancres and piercing boils, herpes, itching conditions, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and burning boils, along with other diseamoigns that I have mentioned earlier. Therefore, I shall now explain the treatment of a hot boil in the muscles, which is not one of those boils that simply form a blister; observe carefully if you know how to work with iron. If the boil appears red and warm initially, accompanied by fever, do not hasten to puncture it immediately but let the pain subside first. Then make the patient lie on their back, place two small pillows for them to rest against, and elevate their legs. Spread out their thighs, and position their arms below their hips while securing with a good bandage; then turn the instrument that is used to treat the mouth of the muscle toward you later on; ensure when using this instrument that it enters no further than necessary without causing additional discomfort. If swelling persists, cover the depth reached by the instrument with linens so the tool does not cause more pain; and once the boil has burst open and can be handled, apply a clean cloth to absorb any pus gently. Afterward, treat the area as described in the division I have provided earlier.
from the medieval medical textbook on wound care: When treating an aposteme les boil, and keep it is healed; after which treatment was used to be treated. If a fistulae treat, if necessary when. And with pus abscesses are infected and other conditions of as perforation. Infected, the wound cleaning the lanced. Then bandage apply poultaceaux.
First it is necessary to understand the natural shape of birth and its signs when you see a woman straining to push outwards, desiring to smell blood: then quickly the child must be born; thus you know that this birth follows the natural pattern, with the head issue from above and the second part following; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press her belly so the child comes out soon, for as they descend on their head, the second part follows too, and their skull bones are well-formed by good molding; and those who come otherwise do not come naturally. For sometimes they come on their limbs, or it is strong in body or neck, and in hands, or where they come out of her belly or sides, and may turn accidentally around the neck, or other malicious forms; it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle about these things, and avoid error and deception, and I will show you all the figures as one should help them.
If the child comes out naturally with its head first and the woman labours heavily, and her strength is weak, then let her sit on a stool or be held by women; and let her nature's oil or fenugreek be cooked, and then give the midwife between her thumbs the small spatula in this form: the femme et le tuisent la s; ande mots de la parle fuit then bont, et: ase, ou tu meus les mainte la.
From the dislocation of a child under its feet When the child comes on its feet, one must lift it up. and then turn it slightly and slightly until they are levelled.
and siles they de the c (the g;l;
If it falls just to the hips, if ordered to press, and there is an eruption of condition. If it falls far, if God wills so.
And if it is not far as we have said, if you turn little by little until it returns to its natural shape. Once done with ease.
And if it does not come back as we have said, take mucilage of alum, and linseed oil, and molten wax, and all mixed in one mortar. and apply to the affected area within the body, along with this salve mixture. then make her sit in warm water until below the ribs.
When it is softened by pressure from outside, make a paste of myrrh, apply it there and leave for an hour. Then seat the child on a chair, then make them sneeze and strain their mouth and nose; gently press their abdomen, as now the baby has started to move. Of a child dislocated on its knees When the child comes in this form, place your hands gently and gradually.
From the passage of the child, take out a handful with one hand while s ;l’d c�.  they et les, and so. Do: If you cannot reset it, lift the woman up and away.
If she cannot walk, lay her on a bed and stand both legs apart.
Then attend to the muscle swelling as I have described;
 And wrap the child according to its natural shape, and let it sneeze, and command that it suckle until the baby has fallen asleep.
From the dislocation of the child's head near its neck, and let his hands spread out, and turn his face toward his mother's back. It is required that the bailiff dye his hand, then twist it slightly, and wrap it gently.
And when it is evened out, place upon the natural mud-like substance of wax and oil as we have said, then command that it move little by little.
And when you have done this, let the patient sit on a seat, and command that they cough; then let them sneeze. In the same manner for everything in the second instance
In the same manner for everything in the second instance t's c - fir et te peceu:t illle Tarn; And so.
And if a child lies on its face with its head hanging down, the cap slips off, and it is not held in place, causing the child to die.
Then lay the child down properly as needed and instruct the woman not to move at all.
;t e-cons that he;l's o :le t in: igne they for the boflesh by they don's ; you to the translation is a s. Sores often arise many times, and sometimes they appear three or four at once; it is not an extraordinary thing, and rarely happens. Two things are extraordinary, and do not live long, if rarely named.
I know that they multiply, and are dispersed by the snake who drives them away, which is connected to the bladder.
un le butt; te: b’s C's that heal*t not they don’. I with thes pLat s: M. A
And if it comes apart quickly, follow the treatment as we have said, and be swift yet gentle in what you do. And do so as it will bring about good health. and many children.
and many children. At no time are they formed in the mares.i. or .ij. or .iij. or .iiij. or .v. or .vj. or .vij., or more up to .xv., and all shaped like a child by proper measurement with the glorious tool.
And it is fitting that the bailiff gather all of this, as sometimes similar things happen to him. if he does so according to what is appropriate.
of a child who has passed away
When treating a woman with the deceased or pregnant child, as I have mentioned in the section on it, and there is no expulsion, and you are compelled to work by hand. If it is necessary that you assure yourself if the woman is of sound mind and has not had an accident or fears death.
If it is necessary that the woman be lying on her back with her head inclined and legs elevated;
; [the.
Then rub the mouth of the maris with oil from moistened almonds and musk root and flaxseed, then anoint the patient's hands with these oils and musk. Then gently bind it in place, then securely wrap the tendons with bandages as needed.
And be careful if the child's fontanels are open so that they do not descend above their forehead; If the tonsils are found within his eyes or in his neck or in his mouth or behind the palate or under the beard or near the throat or close to the ribs.
and if the lymph nodes are on his feet, if they become swollen and protrude between the middle ribs;
and it is necessary to wash the tonsils with his right hand, placing the spoon between the fingers of his left hand, gently pressing all over the hand, until he finds one of those places we have mentioned.
Then apply to another joint or wherever you need it, so that the extractions are equal.
And then extend equally from one side to the other in order for them to move out and become well-aligned, so that the joints are shaped properly as they should be.
And if a part remains, then treat it by applying some of its oil to the affected areas and apply it there, and work on the other side.
;d end the de la tat:
And if one hand comes before the other, it cannot be brought back due to tightness. And if it is necessary to wrap with a bandage so that it extends fully.
Then wrap with a bandage at the joint of the foot or knee, and thus it is fitting that you do so on the other hand, and for two feet.
And if the child's head is large and it protrudes at the back, or has one side of the skull fused together. If it is necessary to place a spinous bandage between your two fingers and make an incision and remove the skull piece. When you apply with the instrument called "almidatch", the shape comes along with the extensions or paste that follows this.
and in like manner, it forms the child with significant natural growth. and then pulls out the bones using pincers,
in the same. Inulgrouw c (in-to ceussi's  (cule dalire: The text phey ebonner se t. And ift. What I. JB:
If it cannot be released, break the skin by making cuts where you see fit.
And if it is swollen in the abdomen or under the ribs, then one must pierce until the pus flows out.
And if the child is over its feet, there is a slight attraction, and the direction to the mouth of the calf bone is light.
And if it is uncomfortable in the belly or udder, one should strain with an aid of a strip wrapped around by hand. , and so that le passt puer se tu beau s to it is de lesseus to the la place, and then re, si sa peindre of its est ce.
When another limb is aching and the head remains dislocated, If the patient's hand is swoln at the beginning of a vein, and treat it up to the mouth of the vein; Then he inserts an oncin or two, and makes them straight;
When the mouth of the muscle is retracted by an abscess that has arisen there, one must not exert effort. But it is necessary to apply moist and fatty substances; and apply balms for inflammation, cut in softening and moistening water.
And if a child is on his back, place him as we have instructed for a live child.
And if you cannot do so, divide the treatment into parts, leaving nothing of the secondary procedure.
And once this is done, follow what we have said about abscesses when they arise.
If there is bleeding from movement, it must be stopped by applying a tight bandage, and then other treatments are administered.
And I saw a woman with twins inside her womb; one was dead while the other was alive and unharmed. After long time an abscess appeared in her thigh, and it swelled so much that it covered the area, causing great pain.
byt.
I place on strong attraction and extract one bone, and after some days another. I greatly doubted because it has a belly without bones.
the ocul;
Upon examining the wound and breaking the bone, wait until the woman is at a better point. And the woman suffered for a long time thus, and was slightly bowed at the joint.
and I have not recorded this chapter because when the master encounters something strange, he knows how to apply help.
in returning the bone to its place
After this comes the form of the pressure, to which one attaches the books; and at two turns with two heads of two ligaments. Nevertheless, the horns must be more refined with regard to restriction, and made of board or boxwood.
To do sois se pours. L'autrefor ce que s chapeur, and of the casson ou ne sautez et le feu est dou peux to be made of ait: et doupeir, li cori-il. 9. 2860 And among the two limbs are two dislocations of this same kind, which must be firmly set in each one, about half a palm long or slightly more.
And these two dislocations are bent at the joint of the arm when you turn the two corners.
And made, orelle duit ne est ceste corde de ointie. And it has two heads and two joints, as you see, one hand's length long, and two hands wide.
And when you see opening the marrow with all instruments, make the woman sit on one bed, spread her legs and arms apart. Then put both dislocations together into the arm, and hold the head of the instrument below between its thighs. Then work your hand on the entire instrument, as if you have done with pliers evenly, according to the quantity that opens the mouth of the arm, until it does what it wants to do.
This instrument is all made of bronze, and it has multiple forms; and the more skilled they are in making them, the faster the work, and higher at home for their quantity.
byud? (th; so much; And you or not, they have.
When the second toe is caught during childbirth, it must be commanded that the patient grip his calf, and then one should induce sneezing with certain conditions, and strain the hands to the mouth and nose. And if this happens due to a spasm, it is well understood.
If not, take a pot and cut the lid or cover, and place herbs that can open the mouth of the womb, such as sage, rue, anise, chamomile, mint, and centaurium.
All these herbs, or any of them, are boiled in water over the fire; then place an iron net or strainer in one pot and the other end into the mouth of the mortar.
And let it steep until the vapor rises in the mortar; then make the patient sneeze, as we have said. If his second condition is a stabbing pain. If it remains after this treatment and is not healed, command the maid to moisten her left hand in oil of embalming or high-quality musk, and then place it back on its own.
And she shall seek the splint; and when it is found, gently bend and extend it slightly straight so that the sinew does not snap during removal. But she must move it lightly to the right and left, then flex; she will come back and be relieved.
And if the mouth of the scrotum is stretched out, we have said the remedy is to induce sneezing and inhaling herbs.
And if it does not result from all of this as we have said, then be sure you do not touch the teat.
But it is necessary that what is at the mouth of the scrotum be tied to the thighs of women and then enema with fourfold medicated ointment.
t the her: Zan de la Maglia ce ne f, and c's.
If it is necessary, then you should conduct incense-laden smoke in this manner: none of the ancient ones have tried smoking with rosemary and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument used to smoke the woman for retaining childbirth fluids and afterpains is as follows:
And it resembles an animal, with the head delicately made in shape, and wide shoulders above the fire.
s.
Of piercing the foundation
A child is born who does not have the foundations pierced, but rather it has been finely split with a needle. Therefore it is fitting for the midwife to pierce that which has been split at its appointed time and not with an acute needle, and she must guard against touching the stitches.
that, as: ce quem lief not ne soi:
If you doubt that it pops out again, then place a woolen cloth over the joint and let it rest for several days, until the child is ready to walk in rooms.
And this swelling from suturing a wound or an abscess does not occur; if it needs to be re-sutured: use the treatment with the woolen cloth as we have mentioned before.
of the fistula at the base Fistulas that arise from below the foundation are inflamed and swell up those coming near the foundation or within the space of the two parts,
If there is one fistula or several; and if that inflammation is old, work it out, and provide warmth with clean or subtle bowels.
and never are these fistulas dry; and recognized by what comes out or waste through the patient's stool when they have diarrhee, and sometimes in vomiting with foam.
bessibly; t or in-Faluire ; by his le oucfe; aont so thatn the coleze and other; < kori's at est en the maine m. êtes crates if they.
And so one finds a persistent fistula at the base, and it is not healing. Et c'est qu'il faut percer l'index ou le pouce, et insérer une aiguille fine d'acier ou d'argent dans la fistule quand elle n'est pas tordue.
Et s'il y a torsion, alors insèrez un petit tampon fin, ou c'est-à-dire du poil de cheval, jusqu'à ce que vous sentiez la compression à votre doigt.
Et si vous n’en ressentez aucun, et qu'il n'y ait pas de perte d'effluence ni de ventilation ni d'excrément comme nous l'avons déjà mentionné : Sleeves so that they do not puncture; if you hasten to cauterize them.
And when the fistula extends to the bladder or urethra, allowing urine to pass through it and cannot be controlled by medications.
If it extends to the hip joint, then pus flows into that area. the oustide peir ne eue, and so they.
And in these perianal abscesses there is no certain remedy except painful treatment, and the folly of foolish men who meddle with them.
In those who are not fearful nor old, with hope of healing by iron, as I have tested.
and that the patient lies between your hands on their back; and you lift their legs up to their thighs, with their thighs angled towards their belly. then wrap a tent of flax or linen if there is any twisting, until you know where the tent lies.
s eble to not; don’ciza. And then: that hewed.
When you then sense that the area has been felt; and if it is revealed or you feel between your fingers a sac or a scar, then announce that they are present. If you do not turn it, for it cannot be healed otherwise.
Everywhere one can properly heal some, but this happens rarely.
by Caulautre. And the stick is heated in the fistula until it nears the base; and do this two or three times, as long as you know that the drawn charcoals have cooled down, which are similar to a feather of a bird.
Then the treatment for swollen veins involves applying butter until the drawn charcoals are used up, then apply an ointment that soothes and binds.
If it is thus healed, it is well done. There can be no other way to be healed;
If it is between and does not pierce to the end that lies at its foundation, and between your two fingers and the tent an extensive covering of cartilage or flesh, then you will see the fistula where the skin puckers beneath the covering. If you remove the beginning of the fistula and push it back before the tent, then apply the fire cautery until it reaches the top of the tent.
And he will be freed from the tent and shall scar over; then remove any protruding fragments that resemble a bird's feather, leaving nothing behind.
If the vein is won, cut between you and the flesh, then cauterize with fire or medicinal herbs.
For the fire caustery gathers two things: that is to say, the burning of these adjacent parts and the coagulation of blood and drying of moisture.
Then treat twisted tendons with poultices or chopped bread until the bowels leak, and tie the threads to the bow.
Then treat wounds from burns by applying poultices with a hard paste, and use dry medicinal substances.
For when it is restored, then it heals well and does not recur.
the ch: :e cra�[S:
If you feel the tendon is taut between two points where it can be cut or severed, there should only be faith and hope through one of these three methods by administration:
When you cauterize as we have said, or excise until the root, or if it appears to still be alive, treat it with a course of action as before.
And do not proceed too far upward, so you do not excise the element that holds the foundation, and let excretions come out as they willingly desire. Then heal it, as we have said.
Then heal it, as we have said. by son'm; Flower: ca; and ecrill’s. Then make a suitable bandage which is in the wound, as much as you can.
Then study how to restore the wound, and keep the abscess in place on the part behind the base; it would be an easier matter for the patient.
And never are there abscesses in this manner; and when you insert the tent into the abscess, it is close to the base near the skin above. if you take a pierced tent according to this form: And he inserts a twisted thread of two lengths, and pushes the tentacle throughout the abscess until it reaches the head.
If it is pierced near the bottom of the dental foundation, then extract that thread from its eyelet, as you insert your finger or foundation.
and treat the head of the thread, and bring together both heads as one, and constrain them to each other, leaving it for one or two days;
. If he said:
Then treat the wound until it is healed and cleaned.
If the abscess is not healed through drainage, it should be cut in all possible ways if it does not penetrate too deeply.
For it is not necessary to make a large incision at first, and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the pointed spatula used to make a fistula is sharp and one-sided, with a cutting edge. And on the other hand not, because it does not cut as you should not cut; as you see here:
In many ways: some are within the foundation, like sap of pitch, and there are small ones and large ones, and at their core blood. and some have one or more cores, and they protrude from the foundation and toward its top; but those that are loose have little moisture.
and there is also a bit of yellow water or a bit of blood, and they have the body's color;
by the benx. You.; There are line (1 and: If you act quickly, and with pliers, where you hold it at your fingernail, then cut the root.
And if the fingers cannot hold them due to their slipperiness, that you take them with a rag, or cotton, or a piece of camlet. And pull out the hairs from both sides, then cut them, and powder over hot ashes that are present at the site of cauterization. When you cauterize as described in this chapter of fire cautery, then treat with other remedies until it is healthy.
and if the foundation cannot be expelled, then enema the patient with an irritating and bitter cleansing to wash out what is at the base, so it can come forth openly.
if the feces are hard, and the thread (enema) is too much in the foundation, then the treatment should be gentle; the fude by and so long.
If it is necessary to dress the wound in this manner: take a twisted thread and put it on a needle, then pull the thread from above and pierce the needle on the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle. and make it wide enough; then tighten the thread firmly, then knot the thread, and remove the neednail, and do likewise with all others, leaving some for excess blood to be absorbed.
then place a small cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the foundation, and put it over the area, and instruct the patient to rest there.
And then let it lie until they settle, and when they are set in place, treat with ointment and other remederseven until healed.
Firstly the foundation or groundwork Many times it frequently happens that there is blockage in the intestines and due to natural constraint, especially when illness is old and medicine does not help.
the in an. The patient s n's (1, but that: Then treat it until it is settled as needed.
and if it cannot be stabilized, resume the smoothing stronger than before until it is sufficiently healed, and be scraped. Then treat it as long as it becomes healthy.
The heat of fire cauterization causes slight tremors. A flea is a small creature found on the body and spreads widely.
and it never brings warmth but rather feels like cold trembling, appearing throughout the body, especially in the hands more than elsewhere.
isn: anguile ough for this the he prist. Then turn your hand to the entire neck until you grasp it completely around the tremor, and place it firmly in front, and straighten the tremor from its roots.
And if you see it, make a chain of iron or steel in this manner, and be subtle below and traverse above.
Do not perceive with the eyes, but hold it in both hands and press it firmly; And if you see it, cauterize the tremor as if it were before or a fire cautery.
the uue et: At no time is an enema made of silver or brass, or melted lead or molten metal; and at no time are these small and large suppositories prepared according to the substances they contain.
However, those which are made in the treatment of children who are weak and sorrowful should be small.
The shape of the small and large enema is as follows, depending on whether the belly is tied up in this manner:
c.
And let the belly or eye receive the remedies from a bladder of beast or parchment, and be pierced all around by small punctures.
And between each puncture, there should be space, then insert a strong thread through these small holes, and secure the belly as if it were an untied bag. And when the remedy is placed inside, tie it with a strong thread at the instrument's end, then enema; and this forms a circle.
t.
Then the minister grasps its two hands together until they are squeezed dry, then extracts the enema, and lifts the patient's legs to the surface.
And if the medicine needs to be expelled, as much as it can through ringworm; and if he sleeps all night, then greater help is achieved.
And if you administer the enema for a bowel disorder, and the medicine needs to be expelled quickly, repeat until he is healthy again.
When the hemorrhoid is at its base or an abscess, provide a clyster as subtle as for one child;
**(15th, par la gulphes que osteon et su tous limbs **se tu es**
Of wounds
In the division of wound care, we have said previously; now let us discuss treatments for hands and medicines according to their completion.
I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and by what causes or ways the wounds are made, and for what reasons they are made.
Things made by causing wounds are through the thrust of a spear, and cutting with a sword and ax, or with a lance or staff or arrow, or similar things.
Things made according to the natural openings of the body, such as a wound that bleeds from the neck, or head, or thighs, or belly, or liver, and similar limbs.
And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and begin with simple head wounds, as memory will come in its chapter.
When a simple wound or head injury occurs and the bone is not broken, take care if it's from piercing of an arrow or similar objects, and the skin is always torn and the wounds are large. and if you slightly doubt an abscess is hot: if the wound immediately becomes warm on the head mainly when there's blood from the wound, it should be washed with something contrary to the affected part.
and remove the patient's lethargy by providing wine and fatty meats.
If it does not wish to fasten, its flesh shall be amputated, and it should not drink wine nor eat meat.
And apply to the wound if there is an abscess, with a cloth soaked in oil or tinted wine.
And if there is no abscess, apply to the fresh wound that has not bled fully and is not moved by air or dust, sprinkle it with powder as I will say later.
t; Ichad :
And if the wound is large like a sword cut and similar, with edges that cannot be joined by stitches, join them by suturing, as I will say for abdominal wounds, in sewing.
If the wound is open to the bone, and flat, and holds only slightly, then cover it; then treat the wound with medicines, and restore hardened skin in place of leather. And instructs the sickly person to eat large meats, such as tested and cooked wheat, also like eggs, and similar things.
And if you find or suspect putrefaction, and it does not affect the bone, completely remove the rot, then pour wine, and treat.
And if he has an artery in the wound or vein, which without treatment cannot be stopped by medicines, so bind it with a thread if you find that it is torn. If this does not help at all, then resort to cauterization.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: apply this powder that dries just as salt causes things to move.
And the manner of making the powder is as follows: take one part incense, two parts blood of dragon, three parts quicksilver, and grind finely. as the dissert and sof; cuze; they  that not detre is the purpose; in English with them: an.
And then securely bind it, allowing movement if it does not swell; for the medicine is not removed until it has healed completely.
And never perform this treatment solefly; when there is no incense or dragon's blood, but the physician has not healed the wound.
And if the physician has healed the wound, especially in this case, do not use any of this powder.
le t c. Et n the bon: Then treat other injuries until healed.
And if a bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then extract with delicate forceps.
and I will tell you about skull fractures afterward.
From a wound of the neck
If a wound comes from the neck and it is straightforward, without any difference between it and that of the head, but if the veins or the artery in the neck are damaged.
If it is the veins, there's no other remedy but to allow healing, and not apply anything constricting, for it harms the vessels and causes them to retract. en sondat a les de the s ;fait is not so that.
But let the medicinal herb be soaked as if washed in gentle water and sweetened with rose oil, and boiled similarly in gentle water. and other minerals prepared in this manner, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, then bind it with bandages; then treat until healed.
(or, i: they are the same as that nt ula.
And if the arrow is embedded, with bleeding inflowing, then you must expose it, extract it, and cauterization may be necessary.
And if the spine of the throat is embedded, or the cartilage, and the pathway is blocked, so that tissue becomes affected. if it cuts into the bone of the throat's cartilage, but does not harm the throat itself, then restore it according to its natural shape. line: that est the fe lasd sympts; e t.e: ce: f. In addition. The bole les*.
And if the wound has caused pressure on the bone, then choose it. And if there are bone fragments, pull out all that you can, and leave those that cannot be removed; let the wound remain until it scabs. And let it be removed and aligned properly;
And if the wound is fresh, apply the dust as I have mentioned. And if there are bones and a fistula in the wound, treat it as I have said in its chapter.
ete toun:
If it is a wound from a lance or knife and the injury is deep, observe if there are signs of vasculosity as the patient pales: know then that the wound is deadly.
If it is not deep and the wound is fresh with all its blood, do not apply powder in the first hour or bind with bandages that would stop the bleeding from flowing freely. and return to the body, affecting the eyes of the patient; But apply an attractive balm, and bind it twice a day.
li; and the, which que c (c.
Let the patient sleep on the wound for three or four days, or more. If there is no more spasm or muscle tremors in the body. And when you see the bone properly positioned, know that the wound is healed. Treat with tent and other remedies until it is sound;
And if it cannot heal or close, when you know there is a fistula, then treat as one should.
the painte:
If it is large, with stitches; and if it is small, with powder, and if it is embedded in the bone along with portions of cartilage, then treat the wound and remove any foreign bodies. And if they are not lodged, allow the wound to heal naturally, ensuring proper alignment of any extractions.
and for other injuries on other limbs, make judgements as we have previously stated.
During a rupture of the abdomen
The dislocations of the abdomen are large, medium, and small.
from a great wound never occur an intrusion of the intestines or their nerves, which leads to an infection.
as much.
This is why you must frequently reset them back in place, if they are not reset one after the other. Because the intestines swell soon when they feel cold, thus they protrude more frequently.
And thus the middle wound heals, so you move the intestines back to their place like the others.
And know that the treatment of the abdomen is according to four ways:
The two common suturing methods occur in the stitching of the abdomen,
and the suture of other bodily wounds and two other specific sutures are common for other wounds;
bye:
When a wound is small and there is no issue with any internal organ. And if it needs to be reset, this can be done by one of the two methods: or due to the smallness of the wound, as we have said, Also: ici et heum, and so that is done:
And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: Moisten a sponge or a soft cloth with only warm water slightly. or cook in slightly boiling water with salt, ginger, and pepper. And when the intestine arises, until it is sufficiently swollen.
and never should one do this that restricts them, but rather lift up to allow expansion.
And when you see the inflammation receding, if the intestines are cooked with cold or warm and bitter water. For by this reason the entrance is aligned with a small object;
and if it cannot enter, make a slight incision at the instrument by which you cut corns.
and the first treatment is to remove whatever is obstructing it. they don’t de:
And this is the straining to split:
If he cuts into the bone but does not reach it, and there comes its shape:
And when the wound is expanded, and the internal tissue burst forth, . If you can manage it, for this is a movement.
When the wound is wide and located in the part above the belly, if it must be that you make the sick person lie on his back, And he raises his legs higher than his head; And if it is in the part below the belly,
When the hernia of the belly is in one of the two parts ensure that the wounded part is higher than the other.
and thus gently so that they're as gentle the tire de air essent.
For small wounds, apply what has been prescribed,
then have at hand a minister of pity who grinds the remedy to your palm, and bring together the lips; s
s And it is so you may take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound. Then leave space at the head of the wound, about two spaces apart, and insert a needle where there is a strong thread or wire. And pierce the two edges with the two ends of the sliver.
Then strain a double thread through both needle eyes, then immediately join the two edges of the wound together.
and let it have some space, then insert another needle; the ou 1 wounds, de lons est: Et continuer à le faire comme nécessaire avec les aiguilles. As long as the entire wound is properly closed.
And use the needles appropriately, neither too subtle nor too thick, For fine needles cover all the hair, and those too thick cannot enter well: Therefore it is necessary that they be of medium size:
And do not insert the needles too far from the hair and into the skin.
that do not so they should I don’t
Then protect the heads of nails so they do not pinch the patient while sleeping. And place bandages or cloths on the heads of nails to hold them steady. by Camilt; l’; don’s e ce: cmaichti; ou ses en t and; If you see (prison cesse, for vit anno; est le même.
This manner of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds. For it requires one or two needles therein.
The second stitching method is common, the n’s, and: And when you have identified all four of these things together,
And when you have identified all four of these things together, If you reset the arrow in the part where you began, in the manner that one wears dresses;
and place space between each stitch as wide as a small finger;
These stitches hold for him.
And I sewed a wound that had been to his belly.
who was pained by a knife, 1 and it does not as a bonis: est they do not the translation of is to be sure way. And so long and le pait with the file themself, and thatnazez and heal or. Then comment il sans tissued ine ecut if yout this text ointainte de c, et que bon la peux: And thus, of the intestines are two large fins.
And there was a wound amidst the abdomen. I brought back his intestines as it had been for twenty-four hours.
by.
And the physician judged that he would die, yet it was a miracle.
and I did not treat him with ointment either, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine. and every day I placed two pieces of cloth above the wound, and washed it with honey water until he was healed.
That sis, so far la ; thet; and they ne lie me; que l's’s  (don’t it is not; do t1. If you can'se an; if he-fors. So that a:
Take the needle, and push it through to the part behind until you reach its interior.
When it has perceived the head straight in line, if at the base of the skull or where you have inserted the needle,
est a li cuers tu de ce leu to do the lignor, s'est la, you have as ours les parties of the craft and it all par tout ce en sonli the has tous parts reach inside, so que part dedens. ici, et leue the l’have dans tout a li est heu en its reached until then li jus de c cuers; si comme nos d ce nons et est de lign auit jusqu’s have to li les oe l’et, and son li has part of them parts: all du it.
The understanding of this suture is to sew as a tanner does with hides. And that you leave the edge from one side, and fold it over to the other, until the suture is fully completed.
The second method of suturing, which Galien describes properly,
to leavez la proaire When they apply one side of the sac to the other part in such a manner:
insert a needle or nearby flesh piece and make an incision only at that spot. and leave the two pieces of sac: theta; Cannotte tad that dur ; it. C;llie chi s. Ik le are m et ce: Two shoulders dislocated.
Then pierce both the affected part down to its inner cavity in two other shoulders that are opposite each other side by side.
And this is the manner of suturing and it is most common.
as they aret la les pacient if you can be not l’li de:
One must sew the belly with two needles, each having thread.
And one must insert one needle from one side and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew belts.
And make sure that when the suture is within the belly, If you. Doing; it thet filed sot they n's.
The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds:
and it is that when you find the fresh wound with all its blood, in the same way as if an artisan had moved it. then return the intestines and the knot; then put on the powder soaking chalk,
then return the intestines and the knot; then put on the powder soaking chalk, : Et qu’il cisele le fil, et soit solide son siège, et le miracle. Then treat the wound as with others, until it is sound;
And if you have no medicine, then apply as follows, soon when it starts to swell: wool and old cotton. 
When there is no need for other remedies when wounds are simply situated.
and if you suspect the wound has caused a connection with the main limbs, if it is necessary to soak a thin linen cloth in boiling oil or rose oil, And place it back within the angles, and beneath the elbows;
And if it feels pain or swelling in bumps, which often occurs, If the enemas of black wine are too much, and mainly when the swelling comes up to the intestines.
And it perforates internally, and you know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to cleanse than the small one.
The small intestine called "jun" cannot heal when it is in distress. And it is due to the positioning of the veins that they occur, and because of the subtlety of the entire body, and their proximity to the nature of the nerves.
And if the spleen falls from the wound, set it back as before like the intestines while fresh.
And if it is old and has become purple or black, one must bind the hollow that is black to prevent bleeding. ça they.
Then hold what lies between the joints. And place two pieces hanging from the part above the wound towards ease for extracting thorns, and to bow the wound.
From the treatment of boils
: ells quateres; also a s, aftert ine et de les pei: If it can be restored at all by any means,
because I see a gentleman was hurt with a belly of an arrow.
and the wound was on the right side of the abdebdom. Et il fut enfoncé et devint fistuleux, et de cela il y eut la fuyade et les vomissements.
I applied treatment as best I could, and did not stop observing until he was healthy again, and his wounds were closed.
And when I saw him healed, I doubted that the sickly one had not harm in his stomach; And there is no harm, but it remains in better conditions, eating and drinking.
And some experienced individuals say that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be treated in this manner: Taking forceful pressure with large hands, then bringing together the lips of the wound. And when the froth has opened its mouth, place it between the two lips,
Then apply another remedy as before, until the wound is fully healed.
And close up the wound. If the head settles into the intestines and causes no harm to the patient,
the not bd.
In a certain manner: Take the head of this intestinal string that is well cleansed, Then take the end of this thread of fine, and place it here: Then insert the thread into the needle, and stitch the intestine, and reset the joint in its socket.
And this method of suturing with threads is not contrary to the way of faith and hope.
And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it involves one of the vital organs in the intestines, there is no remedy or health, rather subtlety.
From a fistula or where it may be found Say that any wound or abscess, when old, is universally called "fistula". and particularly when it arises and grows thick.
they don't be presente as heal in the ether, which is not: And so it is as if plucked like a bird's feather.
and sometimes with clear bowstring, and other times thickened; at times barely there, and other times adequately present;
Et I have spoken in the division of wounds, that any wound not healed has no dressing. It is only due to one of these seven causes:
This means the following, namely by the smallness of blood or flesh; soi (g., and, just be sure. Or because there is hardness inside it, and on the lips, do not let blood appear. Or if there is too much bowing; Or if the flesh is wrinkled, and the matter is of poor quality; they are: When this corruption is a form of plague; Or because the property in this area is delayed digestion, late health, and flees naturally; Or there are wounds or bones:
the the et is byzlt (x.
Now it is necessary for me to teach you about the treatment of an abscess, which is done by handiwork.
Fistulae occur in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, sofels the painz. ould et: Or on the spine of the back, or on any joint of hands or feet.
And all the fistulas that are of this kind have serious healing, and there is only labor, and ignorance involved.
the s. Toi: And you observe it to know, if taking a tent of flax or iron, where the fistula is straight, so take it.
and if the fistula is twisted, search for a subtle tent made of linen. because such a sore bends near its twistedness.
And if there are blinded tumors on hands which you cannot well search by touch. And if it is cleansed by one of the blinded tumors.
The moisture is too close to an opening, and it becomes infected.
Then you should properly dress it according to your ability, knowing if there is bone or nerve involved and which way the vein flows.
And carefully ask the patient about the pain they feel upon pressure from your hand, and where it is located.
When you know for certain the location of dislocation, whether it is far from a joint or nerve, artery, or vein. In none of the cases I have mentioned to you, if according to what I have said to you.
In none of the cases I have mentioned to you, if according to what I have said to you. And furthermore the ailments that are within it and corrupted. And then the treatment until it is healed.
and if the fistula is well placed in the right location, it is necessary to cut cleanly from the beginning as much as you can. then apply medicinal mud and let it dry up to the very top of the firmary.
then apply medicinal mud and let it dry up to the very top of the firmary. et so, that is not c:s tire sont icta les pus sod a quis and heal the same de:
And then you apply healing balms with holy herbs until they are well-dried.
And if they do not dry by this method, then perform the cauterization as we have mentioned.
And if the bone is corrupted by a fistula, treat it accordingly. If veins or nerves trouble you or your principal limbs, as we have said.
and if the bone is exposed, and there is decay and blackening, until the king has removed all of the infected bone. then treat such strange things until it becomes healthy;
and untud: Take care to go as far as necessary until you reach your destination:
if it unravels and turns as much as you are at the bottom, and remove all decay, then restore to its original place;
If it remains thus healthy, it is well. But if not, understand that the infection is too advanced, and you cannot approach it; If there is no other remedy than using the poultice.
by that you dose: If an arrow is to be removed with a suitable instrument,
and if there are any bones, ensure all fragments are removed, leaving none behind.
but if the situation is reversed due to moisture, and there is no mistake or fear, so that it ne: unt ijangle; but not s f gue yse text de bavgust from: O and he said the boze que sont le ben
If you cannot remove them within an hour, place on the wound something repelling putrefaction. and leave it until they are fully risen around the bones,
then they will have lighter bones afterwards.
que:t; the main they I l’s ie the mud so do not be noit; a If you regularly rub away at the decay until all the blackness is bone. then restore the wound;
and if there is a large part of decayed tissue, and it reaches down to the surface of the bone; *tous by.  (prindronze but it.
And I will tell you of a fistula which occurred in one's leg; If you take this as an example and assist in your practice.
There were young boys 30 years ago who had pain in their leg from a cause that came from within the body;
As long as materials came to the leg, and there was flowing from a large abscess, but no reason not to open.
But the doctors worked with such zeal that they opened up the abscesses too much. and they consumed a lot of materials, and it became an abscess, and much pus gathered that all went towards bowel and moisture in the body.
by (th;
As long as I am called upon, and see his leg and the medicines with which he was treated. and what was needed through small openings for his large body; and the body of the youth became red again, and had a citrus color.
:
And I found that one part approached another from all areas of the leg.
So I hurried then and examined the opening until I discovered a piece of bone, And I found it decayed and pierced through, reaching up to the inner side of the bone;
the text as it that they dontt a, and jus in; if you see iste:
And began to heal the wound with medicinal substances for long periods of time, and could not be joined.
then I resumed, and discovered the bone as before.
and found continuous corruption in the bone, and its membrane, and then the bone itself, and I tried to join it again.
par la s est croet ougte: Then you will reset it with medicines; and it was quickly made whole and stable again.
except to continue the treatment due to the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and because of my fear of his death. as much if the for themt; also to dose patient:
as much if the for themt; also to dose patient: And it produced in the place of the bone a hard cyst, and was well-formed and had no harm or adverse effects at all, neither upon approach nor departure.
And extend the head so you can treat the corrupted cartilage from underne <br> And uncover the cartilange above the bone where you see it swollen, ensuring that the sore does not touch the cartilage. And place a wedge or a splint under the bone to straighten the deformed joint; And let them heal as one can see and feel the corruption, and still be treated further if needed.
And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or part of it, If it unveils all of its flesh, then place a splint underneath; afterwards,
and then bind the two parts together to remove the decayed tissue, and it should be sutured as we have said;
and if the decay is in the joint, cut off the corrupted joint, and suture it to the bone or that which contains on the other side;
When the corruption is continuous with both joints, there is no other remedy than to use heat.
And if the corruption is at the wrist or ankle, and it is a very strong condition, However, you must investigate the corruption, how exactly does it affect you. And clean it thoroughly in all ways you can, but let neither vein nor nerve be against you.
And you must know that the cutting tools and needles for fixing these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and appearance of the flesh. and their size and delicacy, and their length and shortness, and their hardness; and therefore it is necessary to provide each type of work with its instrument.
the malad thereby: they do not; please; you can'i and so it e; You should (u; And witness to the symptoms of illnesses; If you consider using the instrument you need according to what is appropriate;
By fire The head swells or due to humors, or from excess.
and when you have the medical treatment for that corrosion with medicines, and they do not help,  If the patient dies from this of death or wickedness, which is greater due to the defect in the limb.
If the patient dies from this of death or wickedness, which is greater due to the defect in the limb. and the signs are such that the limb becomes blackened, appearing as if scorched by fire. and following this darkness, then there comes the consumption of the limb into other parts of the body. s as t li so that line;
When it is by the strike of venomous creatures such as sea scorpions, snakes, and similar beasts,
If the consumption is at the base of the two thighs, remove the flesh and do not give any space for it to reach the hand.
And if it reaches the hand, cut around the joint so that consumption does not spread to the arm.
When it comes to the arm, if you bind with a bandage; and if it goes past the bandage, that is death. And there are no remedies other than in proportion to its usefulness;
And do so as when inflammation or pus comes: if it comes to the first joint, then bind after the other joint.
heal Js in t ecritt; but no ça and so ce d. They say that la pe's lessele ennecztroye de lore ym cite que don’s and li ;f; the old, se: When it rises up to the leg, follow the joint of the knee.
And if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but for the patient to apply cold compresses.
and wrap the member with either a cloth or linen bandage, wrapping it above and below, in de; And you sever the cartilage between the two ligaments with a scalpel as wide as necessary until the bone is exposed.
Then you cut or saw it, and place on each side a strip of linen, ensuring the incision does not reach the healthy bone. And bring another injury and abscess to the patient.
Et so ke t, TTPlesse not; EST; la ben; he said il ymileir lesi by enne t they the same. When you apply certain binding powders; then return to your medication until it is completed.
Then bind the wounded limb with a bandage and treat it until it is healed.
and I will tell you about an event that happened to one man in his dreams:
s.
The corrosion first appeared on his right elbow, so much so that it consumed the entire arm.
and when the man saw the corrosion, he cut off the arm with a broad knife, and was saved.
And after a long time, the corrosion returned to his hand's elbow, and it came towards me.
And I placed it upon things with rebounding effects after bodily purification, and could not stop the erosion.
and he vowed that I should cover it with my hand, and I did not know if I could transmit the substance; and also doubted that if I were to cut his hand, he would die. 3t some of a And if he breaks his hand, and is healed;
Nor do I know of any other methods except those that are necessary.
An abscess does not come forth in its proper place and remains for so long that it forms a large mass of pus. the w est onde. And the skin above is as fine and delicate as a cut piece of cloth. and do not reach beyond the bone nor the nerve, thus such illnesses can be called "healed".
But if it is so swoln that it reaches up to the bone on either side, it is called "fistula";
The cautery is such that you cut out the skin entirely, especially when it is thin like a cloth. and do not wait for its decay.
And if you are sure that the skin is becoming hardened, and there is no rot in the center, they can be se prits un.
Look to see if the breasts are large, and the bow which is part of it has a foul smell. Then use the Egyptian medicinal clyster that is made as follows: Take ease, and oil, and litharge, equally, and put to cook in a single vessel over fire, -L’re t�h: (thutir f. Jumplt en oudes man: CZ cechaise le ne l's forme est
Then take as needed according to your necessity, and make it with honey and water. And apply the charpierce pour ointments les... cillee aigue les oevres, si con nous avons apris eschalasse. Et si tu appliécharpiez les que nous avons apertisse au long: et prenet charpie qui estassee and les oeuvre piez s’es chierce en eauzez And let the medication sit for two hours, then extract by squeezing;
Do this many times until the breast is formed again, and let bone form within it;
And never use an enema with water of ashes, When this medicine is not present, take ashes of oak wood, and pour water over it.
Then mix it, and use it for an enema until you are sure that the patient is well saturated.
and if the sick person cannot tolerate it, neither Egyptian medicine nor water with ashes will be suitable. Commafuyssai:t. Do you may f la marse ben'obole (re the c: est ke that nusla mirjntry y ne e te les que don’s s ils line; at; et a... When you cleanse with honey and mead of sweet wine, that honey has the property to purify and wash. and the wine causes the wound to dry.
and when this is done, and you have ensured that the wound is well purified, If the rectum produces a black stool from what it contains
and you must take an emplastron made of rose oil and wine. or the enema with certain remedies and ointments, whose properties I have discussed in treating ointments.
 If you widen it with a bit of iron, and apply an Egyptian ointment poultice. or basilisk ointment, so that they may be widened;
and if the wound is too wide, then cut a hole and leave just enough for it to enter or for a clyster to pass through,
should be de s and o prassie t line is they are the ecorset so: When the bow is in full tension, do not hang any weight on it. and if you cannot cover the wound as you see fit, if the bow is not straightened in such a way that it lowers as much as possible where it is,
And if you cannot cover the wound from above as you see it, If fitted thus: that the bow moves slightly downward, and nothing remains of the bowstring. And take consolidative medicines to put on the wound,
by the ou t s; Then apply force to relocate the dislocated joint at the shoulder, making it slightly wider than before. It is extended with a soothing ointment over an additional cloth according to the size of the dislocation. And it is applied on top of the shoulder dislocation to alleviate swelling, and do not remove the large cloth forcefully until after many days once.
they witht; And know if it is poison or slight or sufficient, whether digested or undigested.
and take heed if the patient feels pain or numbness, and whether there is an abscess or not.
and when your treatment has extended in such a way that you see the nature of the wound through the chest, If you know that the breast is hot again and close to healing.
Then remove it in the morning or after a day, and when you uncover the wound, If there is another dressing, change it and reapply the ointment.
 If it comes from subtle humors after long times, do not despair of health.
For healing is nearing. For there are men who wrongly apply cold in their wounds, and those who do the opposite;
And if bowels remain upset with flatulence after many days, believe that the breasts are not swoln.
iste c; 41; f lor: c. If as an ointment it ends, for there is a large part of vitriol, and this is the last medicine.
Take the ointment that has ended, and make it with rose oil, and equal parts of old wine in substance;
Then put it into jelly and apply as such; It works the same for pains that are cooked swolled. When certain oil applications are absent
or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind it, and powder with honey while over the fire. and then in a cloth, you wrap it, and spread it on the chest, never applying arsenic long. of:
of: And it is used with simple or compound remedies: grind them, make into powder, and put on honey as I have said, and apply. And if the ulcer is long, and it is not healed by this remedy,
And if the ulcer is long, and it is not healed by this remedy, Therefore say that infection is primary, and it exerts pressure on the bone or hard limbs or joints. When treating a fistula as we have said before.
For the abscess of the nail
Apocrine is an abscess that arises under the nail of the palm's pocket, here de so they should not the are no d nger so:
When it is dislocated again and no care is taken, a swelling arises. And they grow and burn away until they reach the root of the nail, and perhaps they consume it entirely.
And comes the ulcerations up to the bone, until there is painful stench and the cheeks are swolebreast wide, and the color becomes dusky.
translation in t asm s vign; for. If it is necessary to cut away all excess flesh left from the nail. Then cauterize the wound afterward. The fire-cauterization is of great help when the bone is sound and the nail is healthy;
When an ulcer forms on the skin, it begins to throb, and swells. If it is necessary, place a poultice under the sore that throbs. And raise it gently to a higher position, and treat the sore carefully and lightly, Et place upon what remains of the burned and corrosive medicinal herbs to remove all.
And if the erosion is in the bone, and the skin peels off, because as long as the bone corrupts there, it cannot heal.
of, then lest t eck de les m that li cteles: Then treat until it becomes healthy again;
And if it is inflamed, boils up, and feels great pain, then one must first soothe it; Then trim the thick nail with a sharp tool across,
And guard so that the hand does not reach up to the cartilage just below the nail, for the patient would feel too great a pain.
and if it occurs, place something above it that provides relief.
the tre: And sometimes there is no bone or joint involved, not even once.
None of them originate at the root of the joint, where growth occurs in some we do mention. Those that grow on either side of our bones do not move. and i thad:
The size of one who is fleshly is lightweight in such a manner: Measure it at its root with a wide span.
He who is born in the joint's root is difficult to treat; use your thumb for this.
the b c f it; wa: Then set the bone with an appropriate splint, then treat until it is sound again.
The swellings that come with bone fractures occur through birth, or from the severity of a wound, or scorching heat, or similar causes.
If it is necessary to set that swelling, so that the bone may be mended according to its natural shape; . 0. Do not de la; if they; Ander; That, et so thatt of the skin ce que a certaine les bon, but c and there are the same; fornspier; When you place between two fine pieces of wood so that they are joined together, as is proper.
If the joining comes to either of its ends with the palm, cover that joinery accordingly as it should be.
Of evil things
the n't’s. ougre m not ce:
And more occurs with legs of those who go on foot and work and carry heavy loads than with others.
It is therefore that you should administer an enema once and then purify with salt of the balsamic ointment.
to you doe li kit is then le chole cuy. And the other method is for you to open the vein and stretch it completely.
The size as follows by this manner: raise the first leg with very hot water, until the large vein is sufficiently dilated. then stretch the limb from above the hip to the part below the knee for the patient in pain. as yout he said:sst et the gagnte li est de b (cui est jato make a;
Then examine and draw out the black blood from your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the patient's virtue can bear.
And then filter it, and command that he dye his wounds with healing meats staining them black;
And begin the evacuation and cleansing again when the veins are clear, without harm to the patient.
(X but en g. Then place it in a bath, and let the leg be immersed in warm water until it turns red, and the veins swell.
And if you do not have a bath, heat it on the fire and then apply a bandage to compress the veins long at the top of the thigh or in the area above the ankle.
Then work with the skin around the wound and scrape off any excess veins until it feels smooth to touch.
ous t n's, either le: the phl s.
Then insert the rod without, until it is elevated to the skin, and then attach lightly with a bandage.
Then wrap in another location three fingers above; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears. Then lift to the forehead, as you have done before, and attach another bandage as initially instructed.
theta; it is tre: (and or not m:
Then grasp and lift up to the second joint; then extract from joint to joint until it's fully freed, then cover.
And if you cannot pull out and raise it, then insert a needle through all the thick strong thread. And lodge and pull it out, then insert a rod through the hole, and turn your hand on both sides until it's fully extracted. by:
And when you have treated it entirely, place a cloth soaked in wine and oil over the wound site; treat until it is healthy again.
And if the vein is twisted and tangled together, and it is not straight as we have said: And if it is necessary to cut it twistedly, but do not pierce it; and treat as we have said before.
And if it is necessary to cut it twistedly, but do not pierce it; and treat as we have said before. The shape of the iron used to make a cupping glass is curved, and does not cut, but it makes an incision in the vein.
and is a large bulge, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but be thick as we have said, and this is its form.
From the civil vein
they; he donzer.
And sometimes it occurs elsewhere than in legs, as does happen from rot that arises under the hide.
If as it comes within the body with snakes and veins, originating between skin and flesh.
And if signs of this vein's onset are such that there comes a great inflammaturge in the leg. Then change position of the joint, and begins the vein to protrude outwards, like a root from a plant.
Once the head is repositioned, it must be wrapped with a bandage of linen about three and a half ells up to four ells, and the knot.
and leaves the linen on the leg, and every time it comes loose, wrap it around again with the bandage and knot. ; t When you cover it, it enters the flesh again, and brings about an abscess and putrefaction there, and a serious illness.
For this matter, it must be treated little by little until complete, and leave nothing of the body or flesh.
And it is never at any time when this vein is treated with 5 or more long palms. they leave the chest; ouger le:, and no matter: the c; If you don's. The most to not be pleased thatt s. I, so as far.
If it persists entirely; and the matter within should be emptied, then replenish with healing herbs daily for a day, then treat as one would an abscess.
And never should you touch the vein with dirty hands; especially when it is opened near the joint of the foot or ankle. and there comes much swelling, and from which pus flows; then treat it as we have said before.
they:
This illness is called in our land "ox disease" because it often occurs on the buttocks.
and it is a small worm that forms between skin and flesh, and moves throughout the body ascending and descending. and feels quite well from limb to limb as it traverses through the skin where it goes, and jumps strongly;
c quite the.
And there is doubt about its effectiveness, for when it moves through the body, it rises to the head and reaches the brain. Sometimes it may return, destroying the brain; this often occurs.
When you see them draining and extracting, one cannot force it when it moves:
dose tale;
Then place a cowpat on it and bind with a bandage; if the vein is fully filled in at its base, you will not find it. If the fire cautery is placed there, let it remain until it heals;
and its greatest harm lies in that it may cause an oil leakage as we have mentioned.
the misis f (m and so c; The Couvser the t, et a bles la s.
And it is proper to instruct the sick person in internal body cleansing with soluble medical substances for removing bad humours.
and if they consume rotten meats leading to putrefaction.
And the pain that arises from windiness and s which are to the w; And thus it moves from limb to limb, and I see what I tell you.
I was called by an ill woman, and found redness in the vein of her arm;
And shortly after, I saw it rise as well as a worm on the shoulder; m
The pain departs from there, and sets in the shoulder.
and then shortly after it spreads throughout the body until it reaches the other arm.
then he told me that it returned to circle around the body as I saw it.
 Indeed, I desire to maintain that those who wish well should move pain from one place to another. However, I have not seen it so, as in the woman.
and I thought that it was because women had dry bodies and exposed veins, the in which they are not s.
And they do not appear as expected due to this reason among those who are discharged, and have damp bodies and veins replaced.
And those who ite est recouvre lief seur les poiluz; and soient a les cheir. If gently pushed above and below steadily, and then wrapped tightly until the swelling subsides at its place. And cauterize there; if you do not see it with your eyes,
If a treatment for those who have feverish symptoms, like foul pills and serpentine herbs, and similar things.
Of arrowheads
Arrowheads are of various kinds, according to their appearances and the places in the body where they embed themselves.
The variety among them is such that there are some with large points, and small ones, and those with barbs, and tanged. it comes in the same bytie ones: And that which leaks from any limb does so in two ways: or it leaks from a principal member
Or as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members. When it leaks from any part of these organs, the sign of death that I will now tell you becomes apparent: s (or; that t; the les la par:S. And so you sayt not they nouns When these mal signs are not visible to you, and there is no arrow protruding from the wound, then treat the wound.
And if the sign of the brain appears when the arrow pierces and splits the bone, and a blood clot rises above where it is in the skull. is when there are blindness and headache and vertigo and reddening of the eyes, and inflammaturition of the tongue, and muscle spasm and mingling of understanding, and bile-induced vomiting. by c’s: in sondous text the dur they arentaine est thumpar; s'mermial and le tj. And leaps from the wound wet white like hairs, and as it dries like black charcoal.
And if these signs appear to you, proceed with the treatment, and extract the arrowhead if it is not fully embedded.
The sign when the arrow falls out or touches flesh is that it's close to the left arm, and feels as if it were lodged in something hard, not hollow. they don; please; If you mayn: the b (XIXt2. Md: Then there arises doubt as to death approaching.
And the sign of arrow wound is that its normal appearance does not have plain foam coming from the wound; instead, the throat swells, and the patient's complexion changes, they gasp loudly, and ask for cold water.
And if the arrow pierces into the abdomen near the ribs, then it is close to small intestines; and produces a lot of pus and great pain and gasping; and all limbs shake uncontrollably.
they le T1 is:t's (b J. Do so: M. The 5-e a, the pique by;llt'm and m, but n’d.
When the arrow falls into the belly and does not exit through the intestines, there is no hope for its recovery or extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder and the urine does not pass through it, causing strong pain to the patient; know that the wound is fatal.
The other limb, as it is made and the neck and throat and shoulder and joints and spine of the back and ribs and thighs, and the limbs appearing to be safe, according to various conditions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not poisonous, as I shall tell you how it happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
It happened to him that an arrow lodged in the base or near the root of his nose. I tried it; and [I] pierced from another side through the ear fat, and was without any harm or considerable pain.
t: they should on ce: Targl’s t (bours les et sfors that n'd est d; so par the line ses ti. And the arrow was reset, but could not reach further than the tip towards its end. And it was an arrow from a Turkish bow, made entirely of light iron without any ears; the yew was whole, and no harm befell it at all.
And an arrow pierced the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with ears:
Et de l's t�; puis ilk pr
And you encounter an arrowhead lodged within one bone, near the belly, fearing that it would be his death.
and then after thirty days, he showed no change in condition; I cut into the arrowhead, manipulated it skillfully, successfully extracted it without any adverse occurrences.
And if you see a house where an arrow has fallen on it head or back, and there is a wound just formed above;
and the arrow remains inside, not altering its natural position. nor does it cause harm in any of its natural functions.
and not the c as they so that s in a do
Thus it persists without significant pain, and there are many similar occurrences.
And pierce an arrow into one of the king's sides, which was located in his lower part. and it is slightly inclined to the right side; and the arrowhead is fully embedded.
:
In all this you must show subtle skill, and do not feel it yourself. And he felt no pressure or pain from his right ear. I thought that it was the tip of the arrow
est s. And I saw the hinges of the arrow.
And I saw the hinges of the arrow. I put the emploaster on his hands for a long time and bandaged the wound tightly, which kept the patient in great pain.
Until he felt the arrow within himself one day; and then he told me. I place on the wound a corrosive medicinal water for many days until it is opened.
and tried, feeling the head of the arrow returning to its place. then placed at the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicinal water until I could clearly see the head of the arrow.
them ift so bye lesse: the bostrange; and de le chi s a (s tissued is d.
Then you must spread out the wound so that I can insert pincers on it, and squeeze from both sides, and they cannot come out.
Then I did not cease to subtly apply and engineer various methods of treatment until on a day with well-made pincers, according to how the wound will appear at the end of this chapter, I treated it and left the wound uncovered.
zie c a; I will restore it accordingly; then the wound is closed, and the patient is completely healed.
Here's the translation of that line: "Or have I told you about the quality of arrow extraction." The translation is as follows: "so apply your care to what I do not mention here, for the book cannot fully instruct you;"
line me:s. True work consists of nine operations and tools, for dealing with extraordinary things that occur in this art.
I say that arrowheads lodged in the limbs are removed in two ways. either by pulling them out where they entered or from another direction;
in the text so that's dont monde emt and m d.
If it does not heal now, let the joint rest until it becomes supple again, and allow for drainage.
And similarly if it is fixed in the bone and cannot be removed, let it rest for some days, moving slightly each day.
And then when it heals, if it does not heal, carefully drill a small hole all the way through, until the bone around is fully penetrated, and then extract it.
ande: nus, soient loung et que il te me, all the s unt pour is. And if you feel it, then apply any suitable instrument;
And if you cannot for widening of the wound, and for deepening of the arrowhead; And there are no bones or tendons or veins, so that the wound is as large as possible; And extract the arrow if you can see it, and if there are ears at which it holds.
And extract the arrow if you can see it, and if there are ears at which it holds. If the bone is partially driven in by two parts that you can see, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as much as you can extract it.
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as much as you can extract it. is the s, they pxt a petit that mon: soforsin Latin ift et e t c;'s;
And if you cannot reset it once, let it reach the joint before moving forward and then extract it, as the extraction would be painful. And if the condition of blood causes adverse effects, follow what we have said about treatment in this chapter;
and be cautious of incision on the nerve and veins, and use a device as you know to draw out the arrow without danger.
so the bon tre t:grfquent and c. This is the greatest aid it can be, and if you cannot do so, follow as the signs show you.
The arrow that enters from another direction, or opens up something within it, or where the skin is swollen noticeably:
Therefore make an incision there, as long as you can hold with pincers, and then extract it: if the arrow is protruding now.
them irt by exam t Orel Zequere ben: C; if theisse.
If it cannot come out, leave it for now, then resume extraction until it can be withdrawn.
And if the arrowhead remains in it, remove it completely from all parts.
And if the shaft has been cut, and you see that you need to apply a dressing, then use this particular instrument for it. t s croix car ;
When an arrow is embedded, if it is with a pointed instrument entering in, to ease the extraction.
And if the arrow is touched, you must scrape all flesh around where the poison is, if possible. then heal the wound as needed.
If the arrow falls out or pierces the belly or bladder or ribs, and it is recent, cover with a cup if possible.
And be careful not to cover the vein or nerves, then extract it, and then close the wound if necessary. And care for it until it is healed.
est bonte que il fit de cat, thent un m; and: ca:
And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, depending on the quantity of the arrow shaft.
common bodily illnesses the text; it is nothers if you see:
This is to say: two bellows located behind the ears, called "herbéch". And the two arteries which are in the temples visible; the hairsis de la crople ce n’m, and les nece d that ones. When the vein is within the forehead, and the veins are near the nose. and the two vessels that lie above their eyes. and the two veins that are in the lips above the mouth, which are called "aqueducts." they should de lign:
The veins of which there are commonly five in each arm:
the one is the cephalic, and it is on the left side, and they call them "the common people's vein" (or simply: The main vein). and the middle one is called "fast", and is composed of the cephalic and basilica. And they call it "the vein of life"; and it is located on the right side. And they call it "the vein of the belly," and it lies above the groin. And it's that one which we sense, clearly palpable over the groin.
And the valvula is the vein situated between the little finger and ring finger, and it has two branches.
And in the leg where there are three veins: one is below the hollow of the left side of the thigh. and the second saphenous vein which is at the ankle of the right side, and the vein called "nose", that is in the aneckle of the other side.
it;
The blood of veins located behind the ears also helps with ancient plagues, and migraines. And its quality of blood, as I have told you, is that you must raise the head of the patient.
And its quality of blood, as I have told you, is that you must raise the head of the patient. And cleanse the area or where the veins are with a rough cloth; then securely tie off the patient's neck with a bandage. Until both veins appear behind the ears, one on each side depending on the head: Take them with your two fingers and where you feel hair above your elbow, grasp firmly.
then take the scalpel, and push it through the vein to the bone, then lift your hand along the entire length of the vein. de li's c s crovice ça:
Then strain and tie it, until it is properly aligned.
And I have previously said the incision and cauterization in the first book.
The healing of the two arteries that are located in both temples when it is ancient scurf. And swelling, and habitual paralysis, and watery tears from the eyes.
and its quality is such that it is just as I say: and it's the sickly who has his neck extended so much that both veins appear clearly; Et dis-car:
Then lift the flesh above the vein with your index finger towards you, and insert the lancet from under. And lift the vein upward, and the skin, just as you have done with two other veins, then allow blood to flow according to your need.
Then lay down the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then cover with cotton.
they it's the same f
The bleeding from the forehead is equal to the bleeding for headaches and other old-age diseases of the face, such as migraines and rheum.
and its nature is that the patient twists their neck until bleeding appears. then take the instrument called 'fossor', which has this form:
. Then instruct the patient to open the neck, and tie the vein until it is taut and one-way preventing any backflow with a broad flame.
However, it must not be that the flame is too sharp; and if straight downwards, because the bone is near, and occasionally breaking the flame when it is thin.
The drainage of the two veins that are in the temples helps with the eyes, and twitching, and redness, and inflammation near the eyeball, and diseases of the face;
The quality of their health is such that the patient twists his neck by pulling any ligament, as before.
Then the sane (sanity), and let there be health of the spinal cord, a little long, slightly wide, for it has no flaw.
And if the spinal cord is delicate, perhaps it breaks; then make the incision in the blood vessel, as much as you need, and then tie off at the edge of the cut, securely fastening it.
rofit the t themd to 9 If as a migraine and redness come to the face, especially when it is old.
then if the quality of health is such that the patient clenches his neck, then strain your left hand to it. and take a thin thread long, and insert it between the lips at the space that is between the two nostrebs, s sofid:
And do not move it too quickly or forcefully, and let it heal according to your needs, then leave it alone for a night, as it is restored quite soon.
: if he f. ici-ciel est c’on done;
The quality of sickness is such that the patient strains his neck from under both sides, as we have said. and let the master be present over the patient's head, and the patient sits on one of the seats,
Then sew the vein for a short distance long enough, then treat the wound promptly as necessary.
Then perform a new procedure on the other vein, then untie the ligature, and gently compress the veins moderately. And do not let the patient be bound, and leave him until morning so that the wound can heal.
From the illness of the livers The sickness of veins on top leads to dryness in the mouth, and gum decay, and splits in the lips, and bad breath and inflammation.
And the quality of such sickness is for the patient to sit before you, and strain their neck as I have said; the s't; they are not And you recognize them by how they are black, and because there is fine black veining around them. So that both may be treated together; and if you do not recognize them, causing doubt,
So that both may be treated together; and if you do not recognize them, causing doubt, If the larger of each is split open, and also make incisions on both sides above and below it, because they are made in the same manner.
From the swelling underneath the tongue Li swelling of the veins that are beneath the tongue is associated with the swelling of the head, and it's related to throat stretching, and eye diseases, and mouth ailments.
and the characteristic of swelling is that patients may feel pain between their hands in sunlight, and they lift the tongue, and look down each side for a black vein.
it m c (t; la :l.
The veins of which we commonly drain, are drained by two methods:
Or by pinching all with one of the following tools: either a broad leather punch or an olivewood sharpener, and it is called "needle-like". And they are both wide and thin according to the width and stretching of the veins. f;
It is necessary to open veins with clear blood that contains much blood and turbidity. And it takes the form of an olive-like bubble:
and is more subtle pointed, and used to drain subtle veins where there is delicate yellow blood.
.
And it is proper for the healer to sanitize thoroughly, and that he washes of the artery below. And if he cuts the artery, and bleeding occurs, then it is necessary to cauterize, as I have said. and it must not be sutured too tightly, but cut cleanly like a thumbnail.
the-t lesso scath: If you wish to locate any vein of his, or if you suspect it is in its place within the arm: it is clearly visible. And take care with the scalpel at the femoral artery as we have said.
And if you see the location of the sinew, then as well as removing the arm, you should touch the flesh until you can feel the hairs. You so:
When you see the vein swoln, do not wound it for that is an artery; flee from it then.
And if you see a swelling rising as the urine of a child does, and the vein is red and fine, know that it is an artery. Haste yourself away, and place your hand over it lengthily, then remove the hand if possible where often occurs;
s, and est:**llt a small.
If the wound is not closed and it bleeds, and there are no medicines available, tie off the artery if it opens, as holding back the blood at its source; then close the wound.
And take a piece of fresh ivy bark, and break it, then take one half and bind it tightly until the next day.
If the wound is not closed properly, it is good; if not, then use the treatments we have said, of powders that stop bleeding.
The inflammations are not always due to various positions of the small area of the wound, and the strength of the limb's joint.
The venous bleeding greatly helps by draining blood from above in the head and below in the body. for it is composed of the navel and head as we have said;
And it is necessary for the nurse to wash with vinegar where the nerve lies beneath, and if it pierces too deeply, he finds the nerve. And it swells and the sickness becomes severe, and sometimes cannot be cured.
And this opened nerve occurs many times, and if it cannot be found in any man due to its subtlety, then it is necessary that you clean the instrument carefully; and avoid the nerve as much as possible.
When there is a vein between the two nerves, it causes great pain.
The headache of the cerebral nature draws blood to the head and helps the eyes.
And it is appropriate to apply pressure to the olive or myrtle bone because it is the safest of all veins, for there are no nerves or arteries within them.
However, it is necessary to seek a lighter position, and do not strain anything if the first time does not succeed, and start again. And perhaps this affects some people's bodies in such a way that they must try the first time, but do not strain anything. The quality of healing is as you think it should be.
, so: if-;
To avoid future illnesses; And to make it well in one of the three veins that are known as orifices: namely, cephalic, saphenous, and femoral. And one should commence to bleed when the signs of fullness appear after breakfast and in autumn and winter after eating.
And if it must be treated within the first day or second, after 2 or 3 hours into the next day.
The treatment for illnesses is not fixed in hours but should be done when needed during the day or night, at all hours and always.
And it is not appropriate to treat children up until 14 years old or women who are seven months pregnant at most. the patient. The l’s the first, then they;
And when anyone wishes to heal themselves, no matter how, it is necessary that they cleanse the intestines with a gentle enema. If there is an excess of feces retained, so that the veins do not draw out the surplus from the intestines harming the main limbs.
It is not proper for those who are too lean from meats or drunkards, no matter how much, nor droplets.
:s.
Then delicately balance the humors, if they are too large, with foods and drinks and medicines, provided you have them available.
Next, place or bathe it, unless anything prevents it, to subtly adjust the blood.
and cleanse the vein where the wound is located, as we have said;
by.
And be bound and swung, and have the healer stand higher than the one being treated, and rub the arm two or three times.
Then strain the joint slightly, for if it is too tight or loose, one cannot correct it without discomfort.
And then rub the area with both hands until the veins become swoln and are felt.
t; That the vein does not break upon being struck with a blow. For there are veins that escape as quickly as cords in the hands of a shoemaker, and some have such great blood flow. that when you press upon it, if the veins retreat away from the pressure, and cannot be opened, then one suffers thus.
the issue; de l's ine:
If the vein works on the first attempt, it is good; if not, begin again a little lower than where you initially started, unless the bone is swollen.
If the bone is swolebe, and the patient hopes, allow it one or two days rest without binding the arm. Perhaps an abscess may arise again; do not bathe, then resume healing if it pleases him.
theta. And shed the same and there; short to t. T-t that they. <l ten their Melle ce by œuvre; (the ; of oureob;s e present after 1, with a; s as a dur; this en la crom;
And use a bit of haste with the work so that the wound may swell; for this often happens when the injury is small.
If you see the wound swelling, do not repeat the cleansing, and apply a little bit of oil, for it eases the pain in this place and is absorbed by the wound as if it were clay to the oil.
And thus administer the oil with each vein you cleanse, to stop the flow of blood.
ici
And if it comes to large abscesses that occur many times, especially when the opening of the vein is small. If you act quickly, place a damp sponge soaked in warm water and salt on it for an hour.
And after the blood has been drained from the vein, and if there remains at the site for several days any black or green discoloration, it does not harm. mane and: 1 the her plexi;
And many times there is an abscess and appearance of the sinew in the lower part: therefore place your hand on it, and if you find the area tender to the pressure of your hand, that is a bad sign. Then be sure not to place anything as we have mentioned on it, for perhaps there may be an artery involved; but give a dry poultice to harden the wound, then treat with another remedy until it is healed.
And treat each type of blood according to its quantity and color.
If the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see a large wound, leave it open until it becomes thinner; and if it's too hot, allow it to cool.
And one who is bald and bare should have blood drawn, so make the wound larger with wider slits.
And for those who are weak, do the opposite and strengthen them often with small doses, and it should be done by cutting crosswise, not poking.
This way of healing prevents blood deterioration and nerve compression, and it is effective whether the joint is long or wide.
And for those whose body needs the joint, you should give them pounded meal mixed with juice of red apples; if they are chilled, bleed three or four times.
And if they are of a cold constitution, serve them pounded meal in syrup with juice, or in honeyed syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and fragrant syrup.
And if it is swollen from the wound, after the loss of much blood, one must give an infusion of warm wine and a sweet-smelling subtle syrup.
And employ other remedirs that we have mentioned in the section on fainting, for the evacuation of blood.
And if he wishes to drain the arms, and bandage at other times as needed when greatly swollen, so that it is drained little by little, according to the quantity of its virtue continuously.
. This bone;
When one wishes to heal another part, it must be done on the second day or third.
For there is much blood within the body that has become heated, and it causes fever; therefore, one must draw out a large quantity and dilate the veins until they bleed freely. once you have healed all the ailments and placed your hand over his eyes when they are sleeping, that death does not come while it is weak. by th's:
And it is not necessary when you see the arm dislocated, to draw blood a second time, and if the artery is closed, press firmly above. If it is curved, quickly straighten the arm, for that would be bad.
But let it heal the second time; or if you do not reach to where there is no flame of blood, wait until the artery in the vein has ceased bleeding. After that they: ihe t;
If the vein is swollen, leave it unbound until the abscess is soothed.
And if it is necessary to bleed again for blood the second time, drain from there just as before, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The veins within the arm are drained at the location of the head vein because it is composed thusly.
c d but he t ecore et y marow nd theirs. And the text:
Then securely bind it so that the vein appears well, then cauterize now across its length, not too wide or too long.
And let the wound be wide open, and properly cauterize near the joint of the hand so that nothing can escape from it. Then place the hand in hot water, and allow blood to flow into the water until there is enough.
And if it is severe, do not reinsert the hand in hot water, for it should be put into cold water more often than warm.
byzard as (Xd't so far;
The bath for the sore on the right hand is suitable for all liver diseases, and this is how it's done:
Stretch the hand and apply hot water until the veins are filled, as long as you can see them. And if it's sore across (the palm), and you cover it completely with a poultice made of everything, do not cause any harm.
the same and you by the d
Then rewarm the hand with hot water if the blood is frozen in the wound, and it cannot be removed.
And when you have treated the wound as much as necessary, apply oil and a bandage to join it quickly, and do so for each wound.
The remedy of the sinew in the left hand is good against mouse disease, and do everything as I have told you on the right side.
iss�. Toi; c. If like diseases of the bones, retention of flowers, and disease of veins, and of old buttocks and legs, and similar illnesses.
And the nature of its health is such that the patient often throws up blood into warm water, and rubs over the vein until it heals. and lies above the joint of the foot; and the vein is near the ankle, and many streams go under the foot.
s c (e:
And if you are feeling under the foot, beware of the nerves that lie beneath, and tend to the vein as when grafting; let the swelling remain narrowed.
And if blood cannot flow out, reset the foot in water, and ensure the vein empties well.
And if healing fails on the first attempt, start again a little higher as the bone is still tender. ;
The origin of the sciatic vein is at the ankle bone, and its lining corresponds to the pain in the thigh when it's full of blood.
And the nature of its lining is such that the patient lies down and stretches out above the ankle by four fingers while bent.
because otherwise it does not open up; and if it opens, then the lining in all ways that you can see, and across. by Sons de la chamela (B; f.
by Sons de la chamela (B; f. If you do not reset it properly, select any rope or cloth to bind around the arm and back of the elbow, and towards the small finger, and protect from pressure.
And do so until you see the bleeding stop, then loosen the tie and place cotton underneath, and hold it in place; now it is cured.
Pouces de vache
Blood-letting is done with horns, or glass, or crystal; and phlebotomy is performed in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
And this phlebotomy that is done without pricking has two methods: it can be heated to high temperatures or just slightly heated.
and two others in the ribs of the neck; and the pus from under the chin. and the pus from the two shoulders; and the pus on the elbows; : And of the pustules on both ankles; and bleeding does not occur from ventousing, only small droplets scattered in the vessel.
And for this reason, no healing occurs without improvement, as with vein treatment; It is not necessary that it be arranged or warmed with fire or any sense of heat, in any illness arising from overindulgence, as long as all the body has been emptied.
And if by necessity of illness it is required to fast, or for habits, then let us practice each hour at the beginning and end of the month, and in every moment.
because there are those who, when they need to fast, become hungry;
And for those who experience swelling and redness on their face, head, neck, and in the eyes.
And those who experience a drop of blood in their mouth, and have a swollete tongue, and bleed; And there are those who think and see by wounds and injuries and other things.
And when we see these signs, especially when it is in the middle of the month, we instruct to attempt resetting after three hours past midday.
The saint juice of musk assists in strengthening the head... which comes to the eyes, and it is not necessary that this be after evacuating all fluids from the body.
and this purging is akin to the musk-based remedy for head strengthening,
And it is not necessary for those who are of cold constitution to use it, or have choleric temperaments, as it causes them great harm.
And therefore it is not necessary for them to use the veillarts, nor those who suffer from cold head ailments.
And those who are afflicted often become numbness, and for this reason the bladder must be placed slightly lower due to suspicion of compliance.
The ventilation within the neck is of the sinew and base of the skull, and for this reason it extends to the lengthening of flesh. has been cite: d’unet heu est to pain they can be l'intes untiz ee and, li the sainte of embet: ougamble. If you s; lesm de la en them. The m ventre dou it a, for hissed
And it needs to be done gently, for if held too firmly, there may be strain on the bowels or heart.
The enlargement of two ribs near the neck causes headaches, and otitis media, migraines, strangulation, and pain in the roots of teeth.
And it is near the bladder of the kidney; and you must instruct the surgeon to apply his hand correctly, not cutting the artery or causing blood flow from it.
that n’d c un les mains the:
The hernia of the shoulders is an illness that arises from heat and distension.
The hernias of the groins are as much as from three veins in the arm. Because it draws blood from these large veins;
And instructs the sinew to not stretch too much, for it is full of cartilage and veins and arteries.
The cushion which is above the buttocks also serves for hemorrhoids and disorders below, and it must be large and made of linen, needing to be well rubbed; and sometimes, if it were too delicate, it might break; causing great wounds.
If the veins of the legs swell openly, they draw blood from all over the body; they are effective for ancient pains of cold rain, and urination, and bladder problems; and they relieve the throbbing of the two shinbones, and both ankles, and in any case, they weaken the body after long use, bringing pain to various dispositions.
The way to apply the cuff is that you first put it on an empty vein and quickly squeeze it off, then place it hastily, and move evenly, continuing without stopping until you see the redness and swelling of the vein, and blood appears pink; then release, remove the cuffs, and observe the body'cuish position because there are some who have tanned skin and clear pores: if it is necessary to prick only once, make wide and somewhat deep incisions; squeeze gently.
And if the vein is large, it should be pricked twice: the first time to make a fine opening for the thick blood flow.
If the bone is very thin, one must strike a third time; and when we wish to draw out a little blood at a time, we only do so once.
And if we wish to draw out much blood, let us repeat often; and if the bone is thin, strike it deeply, ensuring that the cores are punctured cleanly.
And for those who have thick and hard skin and are prone to swelling, you must use the suction of oil poultices that are astringent and solvent. as abole tc's the t.
If it is with olive oil, of watercress, or of lily, or chamomile, or any similar substance.
And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of aniseed, or balm oil, or oil of anise, and similar substances.
And for those whom you are treating with tender skin and large veins, do not apply any oil.
But it is necessary to wash after ventosation with pink water, or cold water, or blackthorn water, or squash gourd water, or porcelain water, or any similar substance.
And those with much moisture should rise easily, or use myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
And those with large excesses should rise from old wine, or water of sea-holly, or anise and chamomile infusions, or other similar things.
and it is not appropriate to perform suctioning before or during the bath nor after, but an hour or two hours after the bath; and do not sleep immediately after suctioning.
And it is necessary that he rests when it should be suctioned and when already suctioned. And beware of those who are pale from illnesses, and whose blood is too thin and inflamed; with:
And small meats such as capons, and roast of chestnuts, and moistened meats.
And those with cold temperaments should take a syrup of honey, and moderate-aged wine that is neither old nor new, along with small portions of meat, young meats like capons, and small birds and partridges.
And on the day he exercises vigorously, one should drink more than eat.
that est they may be and l's the o:n ma muest; it’l’t. And it is necessary to subtly straighten them out, but one must not do so unless they have been heated with warm drinks.
The cups that are placed without causing pain are those placed over the liver, and joints, and gout, and on the abdomen, hips, and legs, because these limbs do not tolerate being struck there.
And it is done only to draw blood from one member to another. When we treat the hips as if they are not healed; to remove the swelling that is in the limb, just as we place pumps on the belly and groin to reduce the size of the limb.
and ease the pain when there is swelling or stones, then attract it by chance with an attraction to relieve the swelling, or remove the stone from its place.
and so do when placed on the liver and groin where there is retained windiness,
And these blisters are arranged empty for leaching only; and at no time are they filled with both fire and water, respectively.
As in illnesses of the lungs, and in such a manner that one fills the blister with hot water, or water to which he has boiled aromatic herbs.
The form of filling the blister with fire is as follows:
line; and s c’s the estnt e le se che:et la jumboze que.
And it is from an arrow, gently placed before so as not to startle the patient when applied to the limb.
and should there be need for a staff made of an arrow or iron crosswise, in order to place a splinting device.
And they shall vary in size both large and small according to the nature of these diseases and the condition of those who suffer from them;
For children's pustules are different from old ones, and for lean ones like fat ones.
And one must place this pustule upon the limb thusly:
grasp the candle of wax or some ointment, and place it within the pustule across the shaft that is inside the pustule, s.
Then place it above the limb, and position your thumbs as we have said, so that when you wish, a hole appears, and insert the bladder.
And press along the line as before, and repeat often if necessary.
In the bladder that is used for pneumonia, without any rod or tube, it's only made ready when filled with water, and placed on the limb completely.
s. icy as a1, and ebetire; If yout (that la Crot. The text conta, so m est they: OU:
Dislocations are not amended unless in limbs where one cannot apply cups due to their small size, such as lips and gums. and in large blisters of chafing, such as hands or feet, and similar ones.
and the quality of the user is that when you find dislocations that are in smooth waters, if they can be grasped.
the w the i believe le de la jf; If you cannot that:5 ben their: And then cleanse of veins and bandages, then rub the limb until it is red, and apply dressings.
And when they are plain and warm, if the location allows for placing a bandage, then apply it, as this is most beneficial afterward.
If not possible, lift the area lightly and thoroughly wash with water, then squeeze well;
the paragraphs issons.
If there is a multiple occurrence of pus, apply crushed vitriol or scurvy, and similar substances, until it is dried up.
Apply on the affected area with pounded fresh fennel leaves and let them dry up at their own pace, now seal it.
And if more is needed, take other materials.
And if the vessels do not wish to be drawn, rub the area with fresh blood or where you insert a needle until they flow. and then place them back in position, and as soon as they feel their blood again, let them rest.
and when you see that they bleed, then powder with a bit of aloe and crushed silex or ash, which will stop them now.
This book of fractures begins
These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and they involve the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear son of a bishop, that the ignorant physician should be immersed in this chapter, for they have never seen such writings or letters before.
I can do not effolk to make a w, as he castry chapiste de:
And I know nothing from it, whether by the knowledge of ancient books which I have studied so much that I have acquired its wisdom, and by experience, and through the customs of my life.
And I have described here in this chapter what is contained within it, and shortened it at the end, clearly showing the forms of remedies that are made, as I did in these two preceding chapters.
Therefore, we should say or preface of this book the essence of its words and chapters in which the wise place their understanding, staying close to truth so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
When fracture or dislocation or twists or sprains occur in any limb, one must support the injured party on both sides with a splint, unless something else entirely is required due to frailty of body, children, or old age.
If the tension is not too great or overly cold, one should avoid raw, cold drinks (such as water from ice), and fowl and horse dung, do not drink wine nor consume fatty foods, and do not eat excessive amounts of meat that fill the veins with blood, until there is no doubt about a hot abscess or spreading material in the limb; then it becomes necessary for the patient to resume their usual diet.
And when broken bones begin to heal, one should nourish the patient with foods that promote growth, such as those causing viscosity (as cooked wheat in water), beets, eggs, liver, veal stomach, and offal, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar items. In certain cases of dislocation, movement is restored quickly but then fractures occur soon afterward.
And know that aged and brittle bones cannot be repaired or joined back together according to their nature for limb strengthening, nor those as in young children's bones.
But do not cure, reset the large tendons that are strong and join the limb together, until it is reinforced as before; and perform all of your work, and for this reason one must nourish with fatty meats, as we have said.
to (a:
The fractures of the head are different from those of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. There are fractures that resemble an arch, and others like sharpening wood, similar to the tip of a pen for writing.
There are fractures that resemble an arch, and others like sharpening wood, similar to the tip of a pen for writing. And if there is a fracture with an open wound, and a fracture that's just a tiny split.
les. TSAdigulement res crubon de annex by his (aole.
Et il est connu que la fracture d'os se produit parce qu'elle est tordue et ouverte largement, et elle touche près du poignet.
Et quand il n'y a pas de torsion ou toucher d'en haut, et que le malade ne ressent pas beaucoup de douleur, alors qu'il n'y a pas de fracture.
Mais cela peut tout de même y avoir torsion, ou fente, ou petite fracture. ; d the so plee ond;
And know that the break which occurs with movement, and are the two disjoined parts, they must now be aligned evenly, as abscesses do arise.
And if an abscess arises there, leave it untouched for a while, until the abscess is soothed. Then make it equal to the movements that you can easily and gently do, and know that the restoration of it is easier than those where there are broken bones; then strain it as needed later on.
s; they thatd. the t2e are l's but  ben bon en tient byc;
And put the limb back into its natural shape so that when broken parts of the limb are separated, you reset them by all means in their places as best as possible, and ensure through your work there is no injury or pain to the patient.
And properly align both ends of the bones according to their best forms.
And if the patient's hand feels not quite right to you: clean it well, and do not strain or press it too much as those who bring forth abscesses and constrictions through their work often have done, as we have seen many times.
When the limb is at risk, properly instruct the patient not to move it, neither while awake nor asleep, turning or in any other manner. And ensure that the limb is so secured that it feels no pain. Because when it feels no pain, then it may not be fully healed yet, and you must place it in such a position that it feels no pain.
Because when it feels no pain, then it may not be fully healed yet, and you must place it in such a position that it feels no pain. the final the other so please that on her;
The quality of the broken limb depends on what I tell you.
That broken limbs vary in size and extent and shape.
the ou l’mn taktura t. ous m.
And those who are large, like thigh and leg: it is appropriate to encircle with a wide and strong ligature, for the wide ligature encompasses the entire large limb evenly, ensuring no uneven tension.
Then place strips of light bandage on it, three or four turns according to the limb size, and tighten with your hand slightly along the entire ligature, then go above the break and tighten less than before, so the fracture is gently separated.
And soften the ligature gradually and gradually until you grasp a large part of the healthy bone, then take another ligature and wrap around it correctly over the fracture site;
Then return to the part below the fracture and restrain it gently, not too hard or too softly, as we have said in the first lesson above.
Then place between the splints linen or cloth strips so they are all evenly spaced, then tie it above with one bandage, and then put well-made stays underneath if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is an abscess or swelling, place something warm to soothe the abscess and draw out the pus, and leave it like that for several days.
Then strain over the bones, and let them be wrapped in a bandage of moderate width made from wood used for making grooves, or reeds of palm fronds, following this pattern.
However, it is necessary that the bone placed over the break be a little larger and wider than the others:
And be as long as it should for the size of small or large members.
le OT some t 1.
Greater width is less tension, as it should be. It is necessary that the thread be of medium thickness, not too thick nor too thin, and made of flax.
Because if the thread is thick, as I have seen in the works of men who twist lengths for linen threads, it causes great error, for the spindle cannot be equal if too fine, and it must not have less than two spaces between each stitch.
And if the patient is in pain from the heads of the nails after pulling them out in their healthy places, then apply cotton or cloth scraps between them so they do not pierce through.
When the wound is with a fracture, and the bone is broken, I will describe the treatment as follows.
And remember that it does not require extracting all splinters from the fractured limb on the first day. For when the limb is large, it does not require inserting splinters until after 5 or 6 days, or more depending on the risk of heat setting in.
sh� t the covmuse th*; do:
Another method of ointment for healing fractures and dislocations and twists: take resin, laudanum, elecampane root, asafoetida, gum arabic, etc., about 12 parts; myrrh and aloes, about 5 parts; benzoin .viiij. parts; and in a powder form, honeycomb with beef fat; if the patient's constitution is hot, use this ointment as it has good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, benefiting many people.
Another ointment method for twists: take beef fat and myrrh, about 12 parts; myrrh and aloes, about seven parts; benzoe resin six parts; Armenian balm ten parts, pound well, and mix with water or honeycomb fat, then apply.
Another method of salve for joints and bones dislocated from their place, and alleviates arising pain, and the breaking: take fresh lamb fat and flour mixed with oil heated, and apply it thereon. These salves do not restore, but they are good to soothe a hot abscess, and properly relieve pains.
Another way to set broken bones: take dry leaves of fig trees and ground ivy leaves, grind them together, and make a poultice.
Another way to set broken bones and alleviate an abscess: Take the root of valerian, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour from each part; grind them together and mix with wine. If the limb is swollen, soak it in moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Another more effective way to set broken bones and treat the member during abscess healing: Take valerian roots, flax seeds, balm, mustard, mallow, violet flowers, and chamomile, from each part; grind them together and mix with saltwater or fresh water, or wine, depending on the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras states in his book that one should not apply anything on a broken limb for healing other than wax and oil mixture, and it should be of neither too hard nor too soft consistency.
And according to Galen, on must apply dry and slightly warm substances such as myrrh, aloe, incense, and similar things for healing a broken limb, as we have said before.
Another method of plastering for injuries and pain: take crushed mullein and chamomile flowers or feathers of birds, and wormwood, all in equal quantities, grind them together, and make the plaster with honey.
And then gently move it again afterwards, and be cautious to ensure the patient feels no pain, nor has moved the bone from its place; do not dislocate by force.
And if pain comes to the place, or itching, feeling of relief or swelling is present, hurry and dislocate, and remove the splint now; take a light cloth, dampen with sea water, and dip in clean water, and lift up the place, until the itching ceases, and pain is soothed. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then wrap in dry bandage, moistened with rose oil or warm water, and tie on a poultice, until you are sure of any hot boil.
And rest the inflammation of the limb, and be to the bone its pain, then resume subtle resetting, and a bit of plaster, and do not stretch it as strongly as before; and continue delicately until it is healthy again.
And if you see that an abscess and redness and pain and swelling are throughout the bone, and you need plaster and bandages, when you resume as you did before.
And if nothing comes to the limb as we have said, do not dislocate it until after three or four or five or six days; and never leave it unset for twenty days, according to what one sees, until the breaker is healed, and approaches the joint above.
Then you must restrain it more than before and the swelling increases as I have said earlier; and if you see that the place dries out more than necessary, know that no healing can occur. arise from hot water baths every time you loosen it, and do this each day, and soak a little longer.
by this method, you will relieve the swelling in the limb, and hasten what skilled physicians do to return the member correctly: it is wrong, and these methods are fearsome, and I see nothing else but pain and direct work.
Of various ways of breaking Many ways to break are there, with diverse shapes, and the causes are distinguished.
because there are breaks made by the percussion of swords, and the shafts cut all through the bone up to its marrow, as is done with an axe or stick; thus this manner of breakage is called "hachures".
it is not s and sentence of the f for:
If there is an impacted object, or crack or stone shards, or falling on stones, or other similar things.
And if there is a hernia that reaches the skin close to the bone, or above it, and this wound is large or small.
And if the bones are percuté in a l'encloset ele.
When the wound is made by being struck with an arrow, falling, or other similar things, and allows entry of the bone fragment downward, it causes the head to be positioned as hot pots are on their stands when they tip over onto one another; the arrows become lodged inside.
And this occurs more in those who have bones that are soft like children's bones;
and it happens in all these kinds of fractures where small fragments are not removed, as is the case with such injuries; and I will speak about them specifically.
And we know all ways of fractures from the pull above them, and investigation with attempts, and by the corrupted cartilage which is below.
The appearance of hair is known because when an bone is discovered and rubbed over with heat, it shows the black break.
In the treatment of a break, beware of any malaise by accident, and if you see no ill-fated accidents such as vomiting black bile, loss of mind, extension, paleness, fever ague, eyes protruding and turning red, and other similar dispositions, do not heal without doubt.
If you do not see an easily hopeful injury, and if you expect healing, then begin treatment.
And when the swelling comes to you first, and it is in winter, then remove the bone after the fourteenth day on which you can move.
And if it is in summer, then hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day so that the flesh underneath the bone becomes corrupted and come the accidents we have mentioned.
and the t� Ca.
When bleeding progresses and reveals the bone or abscess head, use whatever is necessary for treatment, and ensure to fill its place with milled cloths in rose oil. And allow the wound to rest until the abscess heads are soothed, and be assured of bleeding; then begin around the bone to excise, and this is done in two ways of treatment: one way being that you cut at the narrow edge frontwards, resulting in its shape.
And then make another incision wider than the first.
The second method involves having various types of pincers, some narrow and others wide, with points and made of iron wire; in light work, do not strike the head.
If the bone is hard and tough, it is necessary that you drill around it, making indentations with tongs without piercing beyond the skull of the head, ensuring a margin or circle at the tip so that the point does not pass through the bone; and you must have several, so each comes in its place according to the thickness of the bone, having tongs for all tests (types); these are the three ways of making tongs:
The quality for drilling around the bone is to place a tong on the bone and turn it back and forth until you know that the bone has been pierced; then move the tong slightly and do so all around, making a cut with the incisors between the punctures, doing this more delicately than possible, lightly, as we have said, until you come across the bone to your hand or any of the instruments that you have like pincers.
And when you have cut the bone, and pulled out a piece, it is necessary to remove the protrusion that remains from the bone to any other instrument similar to a chisel, but it must be more delicate and finer than the other chisel.
And if there is nothing left of small bones or scales, then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
And another method of treatment is what the Galenians call it, which is more effective; and this one is very strong, and that's my word. It is necessary first that you uncover part of the bone where the fracture opens up, and once you have uncovered that part, place it under the top of this lens-shaped instrument; which has the following shape:
And do not cut too deeply, and it has two sharp edges, with the cutting part towards the bone; then strike lightly from below using a small mallet, ensuring you are careful of the cloth that is underneath.
If it becomes loose towards the bangle, loosen it slightly with the bone, but do so gently to avoid any harm and fear.
If the bone fracture does not pierce through to the skin and is cut slightly above, with small pieces remaining, you must treat that severity again, and remove scales using a subtle razor of which you should have various quantities in order to apply most conveniently at each location according to the work and shape of the break.
If using many large razors first, then more subtle ones, continue doing so until it is well done.
In each of the other hair cuts and subtle breaks, you must treat according to their directionality; and this is something not easily repaired by those who have devoted themselves to this art.
And if the wound is exposed, it is necessary to take a linen cloth as per the quantity of the wound, and oil the yarn with oil, and place it on the wound. Then take another cloth folded twice or thrice, and oil the yarn with wine and olive oil, and place it over the first cloth; and do this more gently than you can, so as not to burden the wound, then treat above with a bandage, but not tighten until only touching the wound.
And leave it so for a day or two until the abscess has calmed down, then unbind, and administer remedies such as lily roots, wheat flour, incense powder, aloeswood, and similar things; and make these into a powder, apply to the wound, and thereafter administer medicines without causing bitterness.
Ensure the wound is kept clean, do not allow any ointment or bowel to gather there, for when bone joins above the brain's cloth, it swells and hardens, causing great harm; as when a stinging thing touches below, one gets irritated from above.
Therefore be cautious, if anything unexpected comes to the patient as we have mentioned, it is questionable without doubt.
And if blackness does not come as a result of the medicine applied, that it has effect, then one must take some honey and three parts rose oil and a piece of cloth, and apply it to the sore. Then proceed with the treatment methods that are appropriate until it is healed.
Sections that are never broken above or below the neck, for they are two bones; and one is cartilaginous and does not break but twists or folds, then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary to insert your little finger or thumb into the neck and align the break with your index finger, and pull gently towards you until the neck regains its natural shape. e; they c1 pbinn:bon les (P not. Est  far l's; The unblembrud the same; a n’tze ou their la car t.
And if the fracture is in the part above the neck and cannot bring the thumb to its place, it should be set as level with a small piece of wood.
And if the fracture is in two parts, do it similarly and hasten to restore it on the first day, if you can.
or if not on the seventh or twelfth day, when the swelling of the abscesses has subsided, then wrap it with linen bandages at the neck area, if the fracture is in one part.
When you bind another from the other side, if there is a fracture therein; and let the sutures be so large that they fill the pores with blood.
And some restorer has said that one must fill the sutures with butter, and turn each day; it does not seem to me that this is good, but it should be filled in making a lamb's wool poultice, and of mill powder; then leave the suture until the bone is set, and the cartilage hardened.
And at no time should one put goose feathers on the suture site, and if there is a cloth bandage around it, and hold the breakage, and blow away the bad spirits; as you see fit do so.
And if an abscess occurs in the nose while you work on it, then apply a poultice or cotton ball soaked in rose oil or a bit of diaconicon.
And if an abscess does not appear, then apply a poultice with spelt flour and incense powder, mixed with egg yolk, followed by light gauze, without tying it around the nose.
and if the break in the nose is small, and it is broken into tiny pieces, remove any foreign matter appropriately, then sew the incision, and treat with warm salves and balms, as well as suitable pastes and ointments for this.
If it does not have any injury to the eyes, treat with bandages and apply splints until it is healed.
Of fracturing of the jawbone
When the jawbone is fractured from below and there is no open wound, and the breakage is only slight, because there are bones inside, if you see it easily.
the c.jir et i est th: Jus are m; Flemra t le ouf s deme with T9 (C. Ise bente la loro qu's and that; y n'llu;
When the fracture of the lower jaw is dislocated on both sides, it is necessary to arrange for an equal extension by two parts until they are levelled.
If there are movements of the spine or dislocations, then strain with a thread made of gold or silver or silk; then place on the broken jaw a cerot, and place over it a double cloth; then place a large well-made pillow, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the mandible, attached securely where you wish, and command the patient to rest and consume light meats.
If you see that the figure is changing, and then dislocate it again within three days, and then set it back to how it was changed; then place a poultice over it with finely ground powder or wheat flour after removing the cerot; then cover the poulture lightly, and if the poultice swells, and the patient's condition does not change, let it be so until he is well; many times has been well in three weeks.
When an abscess occurs, follow what we have said many times.
If there is a fracture and wound together, ensure no bone fragment remains; delicately remove the surrounding tissue as advised above.
And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it to fit with your bandage as needed.
And when you have set all the pieces of bone, and it does not stay in place at all, so cover the wound if it is wide, and apply .i. stable splints to hold, for healing, until it becomes sound.
The strengthening of muscles The fractures break several times before the shoulder, and the breaks are in three ways: one is broken and separated into two parts, and there are fragments, and it is easier to restore; or there is a break with a wound.
Et the work is such when there is a fracture without a wound, so you need two assistants, one who treats the dislocated shoulder that feels weakness; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then place the fracture to your arms equally, so that it forms as it should, with no appearance or lopsidedness.
And if you need to extend further, place under the patient's shoulder a round rod of cloth or wool, and it should be thick according to your necessity; stretch and ease the dislocation, hold the rod in their hand, so that they align the fracture equally as it should be.
And if you cannot pull the head of the dislocation forward because it comes out on both sides, then let the patient lie down on their stomach, and place under the shoulder a middle-sized pillow; then the assistants lift the shoulder upwards until the bone is elevated.
And then address the break of your arm, and if you find any fragments, it is necessary to split them; and pull out the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join by any means, use a tool from one of the incisions that you have made; but place it under the fulcrum, for this instrument will prevent slippage.
and it resembles a spoon, not sharp, and is equally wide as necessary for the size of the bone and strength of the tool; and have two edges, as you see, one wider and the other sharper, just as determined by the shape of the wound when you treated the bones.
and when you are sure of a deep abscess, clean the wound, and if the incision is small or you doubt an abscess is deep, line the wound with strips of cloth according to its size.
When an abscess occurs there, if it fills with pus, then apply a cloth soaked in oil rose-colored and medicinal wine, and place upon it.
The splinting of a bone when it feels wounds and is not yet set involves placing an impasture of finely ground powder and egg yolk on the bone, adding light gauze over it, and using a stick beneath if necessary. Then take a large band about the width of a palm, then place a double cloth over gauze and impasture, then take a very thin stick three fingers wide in length and wrap it around that bandlet, ensuring the top part of the bandlet is aligned. Place the splint on the fracture, turn the bandage around the neck, and under both the healthy and unhealthy seat, wrapping each part. And when you see that the dislocation holds in place naturally, and it's clear that the splint does not move over the broken bone, then gradually increase the pressure every day; and once the ligaments are healed, release them.
Lay the injured person on their back and place something underneath them when they sleep, a small pillow under the seat to lift the dislocation upward; this will relieve the pressure of the fracture by supporting the shoulder, so you tie the arm to the neck, enscuing no accidental dislocation occurs until 20 days.
Then restart the splinting, if you see it's needed, and keep it on that way until it is healed; at most in 28 days, but sooner for some patients.
Of a broken shoulder blade
Occasionally the shoulder breaks or comes out of place and cannot be moved without touching; if you arrange it according to the pattern of the break, and the joint in its natural shape, in all ways that you can see; then put powdered molten wax over it with plenty of oil, and light bandages, and cover with a double layer of cloth; then place a wide and delicate rod slightly wider than the shoulder across it, so that no part of the shoulder is left unsupported by these linen strips, which you cut evenly; and then bind everything tightly with a large firm bandage, ensuring the rod does not move from its place, and check the sutures each day; and every time it loosens, tighten again, and make sure the rod is in place if it becomes loose, and rest the patient on their side; and the shoulder will be restored in 20 or 25 days. And when these numbers are completed, remove the bandage, as it is not bone that sets lightly.
And if a piece of the bone protrudes without breaking through the skin, and heals over, causing swelling and pain, then do as we have said in the treatment for an abscessed wound to soothe it.
From breaking of the shin bone
The foot is never broken within the body, but it happens rarely; however, it often breaks upon impact. When it is broken inside, it descends downward and causes great pain to the patient, weakness, swelling, heat, and sometimes vomiting blood, with open fractures in the broken bone, feeling very ill.
And the healing is that the patient lies on his back, and a pillow is placed between the shoulders, then press down on the shoulders, and binds the ribcage with both hands, doing so in all possible ways until it is rightly aligned; then place casts and padding over the broken bone gently, either with salt or another light substance, and wrap it in a piece of cloth so that it stays still; then return to the normal position on his back, and loosen gradually as needed, and let out each suture after an hour'amo, and if it becomes loose, re-tighten it; and if it needs to be undone for corrosion or pruritus at the site, pain, or abscess, do so quickly, remove what is there, and apply suitable treatment methods; then unwrap the casts, and tighten them as needed until healthy.
Of broken ribs
One must know that rib fractures occur in the large ones behind and above the spine, and they only bend due to being brittle; and one feels it well at the joints of the back.
And the healing is such that you set the fracture rightly, as it should be. Then place a splint and apply bandages if needed.
lesse de leur ne le t.
And those who say that it should be treated with foods that inflate the stomach in order to push aside the rupture on the other side.
And we do not make this that becomes cold, as long as it is brought to us, if it has come. And if one finds it there, then it must be set right.
And some say that applying cups to the place creates sweating, and it seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the cups may attract excessive fluids to the area due to its weakness.
; that mesme le se mar: a big they est not m (and there
And if the patient feels great pain that cannot be borne from the bone that protrudes, causing doubt in the patient, then it is necessary to make an incision near the site of the broken rib, and one must place under a tool for warding off syphilis; afterwards, one should cut through the bone, gently extract, then sew together the two edges of the wound if large, and cure with plasters until healed. And when an abscess occurs, apply cloths soaked in oil to it, placing them over the site; treat while keeping the area where the abscess must form above the rib or along its edge as much as possible until healed.
of the broken rib
There is no time for fractures of the bone in the neck and it does not occur that it bends; also to the spine of the back. And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, take care if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move them or extend them, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it. Know that in some cases it is fatal, but if they can move and feel well when they are stretched without pain, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and the patient will be cured if given care.
And when a similar case comes to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it will be healthy or not, take care if the joints are softened, and there is swelling like hands, and on their back they have windiness and egestion without desire; and when it has been soothed on its belly, it also has egestion without desire. And when it is soothed on its back and wants to rise, it cannot. Know that in some cases it is fatal: do not neglect it in its care.
And if these accidents do not occur, then the condition is more mild.
When the cure is that if there is an abscess hot, apply oil of rosemary or olive oil until it is soothed; then place under one of the comforting and drying poultices, bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; do not sleep on that part where they feel pain until healed. And if any bone is dislocated, cover the area with cloth; then reposition the two edges of the wound, if large, with stitches, then treat with soothing oil until healed; and if the shoulder bone is broken, known as "the shoulder of the cow," put your pouch in your left hand, place it evenly against your right palm for stability, then apply a poultice and bandage if needed; then immobilize, and if there are dislocated bones, treat them, realign, and care for the wound until healed.
For breaking of the thighbone
Occasionally the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it occurs, there's no need for slight reduction at the top; and they are long, and descend towards the pelvis, and come with pain at the site, swelling, and breaking further.
And the restoration is such that you extend your hand over it as long as it's over the break; and identify what kind of fracture and its shape; and if the fracture is only on top, then balance this break to make it naturally shaped.
And if the fracture is long or it slopes towards the pelvis, then make the patient lie down on their stomach until the restoration of that break is ready. And when you have put it back in place properly, then set it on the plaster cast, and next to a wooden or metal stake, holding the break steady so that it does not move; and fill the space under the ribs until they are level again.
And instruct the patient to lie on their healthy side or back.
And if an abscess appears there, do not touch it until the swelling has subsided; then proceed as we have previously instructed; and return to restoring normal function, holding steady as necessary unless there is any complication; this is how it should be done.
Of a fracture of the shoulder
The shoulders are what lie between the collarbone and the top of the shoulder blade, and if they are broken, you should reset it according to one of the two methods: wherein one is that you take a plain iron rod as thick as this.
And fasten two pins on each side, and place the patient under one of them; then pour some liquid onto the broken bone over the rod until it reaches the joint, and have a curved piece of wood in midway, then rest it against any object or let the servants hold it down; then put splints on either side of the break equally, as if clasped together, until the fracture is properly set.
Sze; the cest the ou d s the bente but  by this in the resulting the ca; they arentin contcme thestronce mil que (alsot; and so t1 s strait se t
If the extraction is more severe, hold a ligament below the break and on both sides of it, then extend each member to its part. And if the fracture is near the top of the shoulder blade, it must be set with one ligature under the collarbone, and another towards the back from the break; likewise, if the fracture is towards the arm bone, there should be a lightly placed ligament without strain until the break is equal on both sides and above the level, then align the break properly, and secure it with a ligature, unless an abscess occurs.
If an abscess occurs, do not secure it until six days have passed and apply a moistened cloth with oil rose to soothe the abscess; then set the ligature, ensuring that you place an immobilizing splint over the break, align the arm above the shoulder joint, and put your hand on the shoulder or breast. Wrap the bandage and secure it at the shoulder joint and the arm, allowing the arm to rest properly unless anything prevents it, or if the bone is not aligned.
If you doubt if the bone is not moving, use a more robust and wider than the other straps, and have between each strap two inches long, and be so wide that it passes over the break, then tighten the wrappings as I said at beginning on the chapter of this joint.
If you see the seat of the fractures and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour when you return the broken limb, and you doubt if the abscess is hot, let it lie bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine each for three days to ensure no itching or swelling occurs at that place where sores cannot come due to excessive stretching. If necessary, as we have said.
If no such incidents occur, do not reset the dislocation until after three or more days, and let the patient sleep on their back with hands over their stomach; then place an evenly made pillow of linen under the shoulder, and observe each hour during the day and night to ensure that there is no movement in the broken limb or softening of the bandages. If necessary by the virtue of medicine, give them the flesh as we have previously mentioned, so that the meat is at its most subtle; and when they begin to regain strength, let it be plentamoind. It is customary for the shoulder and leg to be reset within forty days altogether; then you should deslocate and administer baths and ointment medicines to direct healing. If the tightening is ugly and swollen, delay resetting for one day or two months.
For a fractured arm, wrap the limb with an evenly made pillow of linen under it; then observe each hour during the day and night to ensure proper healing without excessive movement or swelling. If necessary by medicinal means, give them nourishing food as we have previously mentioned, so that their strength is replenished gradually.
The arm consists of two bones, which are called the "foscile", one is small and supports the elbow; the other is large, and is located below it towards the smaller joint; sometimes only the large foscile is broken, or the small one, or both together.
When the small bone is broken, the repair and healing are easy, and when the large one is broken, the treatment becomes more difficult than if both were broken together. If only the small bone is fractured, it should be slightly extended to realign quickly.
And if it is the large bone that needs to be pulled apart more firmly; and extended on a support, raising the elbow higher than the others, while keeping the small joints lower than the others, and crossing the limbs across each other in the same place, with one support placed higher before them so the patient does not suffer any strain. Then extend the minor supports of the arm to the part below the hand or at a ligament, placing another minor support on the opposite side above it. And then set the joints evenly according to its best form.
And if in the break into pieces, place each piece back to its original position, and if any are out of order that touch the bone, and cannot be restored to their original position, then make a cut around it as we have said before.
And if there is a break with a wound, I have discussed this individually with the surgeon; take that treatment.
And if there is an opening with multiple abscesses, take this particular treatment I have discussed; apply that remedy. Then make a poultice of clay oil and white wax, neither too hard nor too soft; place the poultice carefully over each abscess until they are calmed down. Afterward, remove the poultice, and sprinkle the powdered medicine generously, then insert the splints as before, ensuring that the one for the fracture is more secure and slightly wider than the others; be aware it must have 2 or 3 splints in various configurations: whether the fracture is on one bone or two, ensure there are more stitches holding it, compared to elsewhere, and each day do not adjust them as much as mentioned at the beginning of this chapter; and keep the bandages that cover the fracture soft and moist, neither too tough nor rough; use thread made from linen, not too thick or thin, as we have said. And after some days, tend to the limb and ligament again. If any accident occurs to the limb, as itching that comes upon a member, you must wash the limb with warm water until the itch is soothed; and allow the limb not to rest too tightly. Then resume the binding, and if the bandages are softened and the bone freed, and other similar things, then proceed accordingly.
And if the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, you must soften it a bit and leave so for some days until the swelling subsides, then resume the binding.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, let him be bound until xx days or so; then place his hands around his neck, and make sure the collars are equal, and guard against movement and displacement, and he sleeps on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in xxx days or xxxv., and by chance in xx days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
Of a fracture of the hand
It is said that on the back of the hand and in the knuckles are few fractures, but many times they are sprained.
And when the sole of the hand is fractured or sprained, it is necessary for the patient to cross his fingers, and sit them straight ahead evenly; then he places his hand on an extended table, and extends the broken bones, arranging them equally as they should be well joined; and applies a plaster and gauze, if abscesses are present, otherwise he puts a splint according to the quantity of it needed; and it is wrapped in .i. cloth made of linen.
c.
And if the fracture is too far gone, it is necessary to place a pillow above and another below on the sole, so that the hand remains open and straight, then wrap it entirely around with a bandage, keeping the joints in between close.
And if the fracture comes to one of us at any joints, whether it is a sprain, position them equally as needed; and strain with pressure, and if you see fit, place a small straight pillow to lift the fracture without movement; and if the fracture is at other joints, like in the index or one of the others, align them evenly, and bind with healthy joints that are adjacent; or tie all together using one bandage, allowing for some mobility, or place a pillow underneath as needed; and be cautious during healing and abscess treatment, and also remove any swelling that occurs, as I have said.
For a broken thigh (femur fracture).
The bone of the thigh is often broken, and as it heals, one can see when it twists forward and backward; and the restoration involves using a leech above the fracture, and another below. And the patient lies on their face, then each healer extends their hand equally to their side; and this is when the fracture is within the bone.
And if the fracture is near the root of the thigh, then one leech should extend their hand towards the fingers and the other below the fracture. Similarly, if it's close to the groin, then the leeches should place their hands by the groin, extending upwards; next put a splint on the bone aligned with both hands until it restores its natural shape, then apply linen bandages and ointments without any suppuration.
And if there is an abscess hot, let it be soothed then return to your work and treatment; the lymph gland is made in part manner. It is necessary that you wrap around the break i.e., a bandage made of two or three layers doubled; and control excesses, then turn the leg until the heel reaches the root of the shin, and tie a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the kneecap, letting the head of the string go over it; then turn around the leg and thigh with the bandage, then place an olive at the break site, and put one on the bone of the leg; then fill the gap between the leg and thigh with soft cloth to apply even tension, then begin to tie three turns or four above the break; as you move further from the break, apply less tension; then go back to the two ends of the thread that you tied around the leg and thigh, and insert three olives (suspended) above them, then come back over the knee until you reach below it; if the bandage is not moved from its place, leave it as such, then make sure nothing protrudes or inflames.
And if this happens, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that poke out, then one can easily remove them; and if they cannot be removed, it is necessary to cut the flesh, and pull through forcefully; and treat it as we have said, until it heals.
At no time is the tail broken as when one inserts pins in it, like with shoulders and arms; however, in such restoration made, it does not always calm the patient's ailments.
And know that the tail is restored in one or two days, more or less, depending on the different temperaments of individuals.
Of the pathway through the knee joint
*  t in the small. But it; they.
And the restoration is when one places equally what is crooked in its joints so that they can be moved as desired; then place the splint and if needed, put a round pole for support, and hold it as it should be, then attend to all the preparations we have mentioned for other breaks, abscesses, etc., applying appropriate treatment for each condition until healed.
For the breaking of the leg
There are two bones in the leg, one is called "talus" and the other is called "fibula"; all fractures occur as they do in the arm, and for that reason the restoration is done just like it would be for an arm.
And if both bones are broken together, then the leg is turned from all sides.
And if a delicate bone is broken, it turns forward.
And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and swelling; then straighten the limb, make it equal, and tie the fractures equally; however, you must ensure that the breakage looks unpleasant, and there are many pieces, so that the extension be lesser and lighter; adjust accordingly with your knowledge.
And when you have completed your treatment, take two strips of wood covered in linen on one side and the other that are as long as the leg from the knee to below; then wrap them both around, binding it firmly so that the leg may not turn left or right, which is good; and no one administers a bandage along the length of the leg made of wood, instead they position the leg for protection against movement, properly treating the break where there is injury; and move each day the leg to see if there is swelling or any other accident; cure it until it is healed.
Of the fracture of bones in the foot
In the ankle there is no fracture, but sometimes a bone in the foot breaks and occasionally it shifts slightly without causing any severe displacement or issues.
If it occurs with the broken bone of the foot, and you see these bones rising towards each other, place such weakened pieces of wood on the ground, as if they were to go there; now put your own foot under theirs where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their places; then apply a splint and stuffing underneath, and place a small tablecloth with two flat edges over the belly of the broken foot, then strain it back into position, and once wrapped in bandages around, and other things as needed.
And when three or four days have passed, release the ligaments, for you will find the bones equal, whether they are broken or dislocated.
And if there are any broken bones, restore them as we have said for the bones of the hand; then place an iron bar on each side according to the length of the bone, and make it a bit wider, then place the small tablecloth that I mentioned under the belly of the foot, and straighten it back into position; and if there are two or three, or more broken bones, put a bar on each one according to its quantity, wrapped in one linen cloth, and strain the tablecloth under the belly of the foot, so that they should be well aligned.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things I have said for other breaks, as we have said; and treat each accident as it should be done.
For a fracture of the bone in the wrist
When the bone of a woman is broken and needs to be set in place, first make her lie down with her back facing upward, then support her from behind; then fill her vagina with cotton wool as much as one egg-size, and have her stand up slightly while lifting her hips little by little until the cotton reaches the entrance of the vagina, then insert a stick; if she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and once done, replace it; do this for six days or more: the fracture will be restored. If desired, take a sheep bladder, tie a flannel cloth at its opening, and fill the bladero with water until full. Blow into the flannel to deflate the bladder so that all air is released inside; her vagina will return to normal. Then fill it with cotton wool again and leave it for several days until healed.
And when the bone of the forefinger is broken, or in a woman, restore it as we have said with the thigh bone; and these fractures are not hidden from those who apply their skill and effort, and listen to my book. For fractures indicate various conditions on the right path to restoration: therefore pay attention.
In the penis, when it is broken, take a goose quill and insert the penis; then wrap with linen around, and leave for three days or as many nights, and it will be healed quickly.
Of fractures accompanied by wounds
It is necessary for those with fractures and wounds, especially if they are large like the bones of the hip or shoulder, that they be set right now, so that the methods we have mentioned bear witness to their healing.
And if the wound is sound but there are remains of glass powder, unless you have something else, then begin again to reset the fracture in that same hour or day, unless an abscess arises.
And if an abscess arises, leave the resetting until a new moon, as long as the abscess is soothed, and do not approach it on the following day or the fourth part of that time, for otherwise you would bring about a bad incident.
If the bone is broken and appears beneath the skin exposed, it must be gently aligned by hand with slight pressure to extend it.
And if the extension does not appear suitable to be put in place by hand, then use this instrument made of iron with six or eight prongs and its width according to the size of the wound; thus it is necessary for the surgeon to grasp three or four (prongs), depending on how many are needed for each fracture treatment; let them be smooth and slightly thickened so they do not bend under pressure on the limb at your work, with one end pointed forward, and thicker in front of it:
And they are called 'palainches', so that the shoulders must be placed underneath the visible bone; and it should be level with each other at all times as it moves back to its place. And if the fracture is subtle, and the protruding part of the bone cannot be properly grasped by the instrument, then you shall cut off the end of the bebone, so that the instrument has a chance to grip it.
And if you cannot bring back the bone as we have said, with the cap of an appropriate instrument, either cutting or sawing, to your ability; then remove what is lodged in the hardened bone and small splinters.
And when the bone is brought back and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place. Make sure to put a linen soaked in black sticky vinegar properly on it; do not apply oil or any other substance over the wound, as this could cause decay and contamination. Then provide dressings when you have restored the binge, leave the wound exposed, cover the entire area around the wound according to its size, and take good care that the wound is not strained with movement; many times, foolish medics have done these things, leading to death or corruption at least once. The tightening should be gentler and more soothing than other fractures.
And if the wound is severe or large and you doubt that there may be an accidental occurrence of it, as we have said before; if you find pain in the area, do not apply dressings but instead, wrap hard cloths around it. But when you see after a day or two that the wound has healed to some extent, take off what you put on and apply sanative ointment for sore wounds as tetrafarmacist's ointment and similar things.
It is necessary to loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is well-settled and healthy again.
And it must be fitted with an appliance so that the bow can bend slightly.
And if after three days it still cannot heal and remains loose like this because there are small bone fragments causing the pain, then you must cauterize the wound with a tent (or cover) and remove all those superfluous bones that cause the suffering.
If a fistula occurs at the site, or another type of corruption, it must be treated as described in this chapter before. And when bones are broken and exposed on the limb, like the pelvis or shoulder, for similar large body parts, do not suture them, because many times death results, but leave them until they heal; perhaps it will close by itself after 12 or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
Of bruises that come about the hernia
We often come upon this after the healing of the hernia, especially when it is near the joint, and an unpleasant sight is seen in the limb's appearance; and sometimes it cannot perform its natural functions.
Then beware if the joint is stiff: if you administer medicinal substances like aloes, incense, myrrh, and frankincense, and resin, or any similar things, whether you choose one of these ingredients or all together, and mix them with astringent wine, or an abundance of honey or oil; then place it in a gauze pouch, tightly bind it without untying during the day; then dislocate it again, and start over with another until the inflammation is gone; or strain on a well-formed piece of wood; because the property of the wood is that it dispels swelling above the limbs; and if the inflammamo
When the fiches are too many and weakly as it is proument: or li brisure of the eaument; for in such a lays; ne poite laisse; et desuirnent trop quarrerement multitudes et s, et ce il est de pierre.
And the cure is to make the patient eat, and keep the body supple, until the blood multiplies within them; and administer baths, and give joy and laughter; then apply poultices to the limb so that the poultice draws significant nourishment to it, and often raise it with warm water, until the swelling recedes from the limb; then let it return to its natural form.
And if the member remains twisted after healing
And if the member remains twisted after healing, and the bones are broken apart, and the shape of the limb is unattractive: however, do not believe the foolish who say that you must break off the entire limb anew, as many a madman has done on our land; such procedures are blameworthein, and they bring great harm, and sometimes death. Nevertheless, if the knots and twists are fresh, it is necessary to raise them with warm water, or mollifying herbs that have been cooked, like milk thistle leaves, roots, and meal of millet, and such things; and you make a .i. soothing poultice, as good as diaquilon, and take the musk of milk thistle, and mix it with linseed oil or sesame seed oil fat, and apply the poultice; or take figs' fatnesses, and grind them with flaxseed flour, and similar medicines that soothe stiffness.
At no time is there an infected bone from rubbing continuously and long with wet hands. And let the movement of each limb be amended every hour.
And if the twisted and hardened curvature is like stone, it also needs to be pried with iron, up to the bone; using a delicate incision tool gently; then apply poultice and study in treatment.
Here begins the book of dislocamen
t; that a. <l; and (pr; if the bon nd ; bys c; they has not s; after the ou; with the d. The car; but the la fleteze them bolecks, or other; the qut;
When dislocation occurs, if it is necessary now bring back gently.
Because if delayed, and the head swells, and perhaps when reset it is difficult to place back in position; therefore one must not move it at the hour that it is swollen: many times this brings on inflammeback and other pains.
Also, when this happens, then make the patient lie still, until the swelling of the abscess has subsided; then apply warm water and oil to the limb, then gently move it back in place, and care for each member as needed when healing comes into its proper place.
f:
Of the jawbones
Sometimes the jawbones are dislocated outward, and the dislocation can occur in two ways: either they are slightly misaligned from their place and softened a bit; or they are completely dislodged, hanging toward the worse side, causing saliva to spill from the mouth which it cannot contain, preventing closure of the mouth and swallowing of the tongue with speech.
Dislocation: ous les jawbone are they come uncuit enclosed properly to be removed from their place, et can heal them do not open up it so that out the saluties of mouth ou is too loosy and dislocated or reposition li close enough bone at lade with the teeth aligned: either as for it done and are they dose the estriven, you to remain properly in position. Dislocation until from place; they are not dislocations can be their own has come outrainsurgeon.
If it is complete and severe, one must reset it promptly, without delay.
And in such a manner that the minister should wash the patient's head, and place wool pads from one of his hands on the root of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth; if the dislocation is in two parts; while the other hand remains open to apply pressure equally. Then command the patient to soften their jaws, and move them in all directions.
And on it so, with warm water, et pours.
And if resetting is difficult, especially when both jaws are together, soak in warm water and oil, until they can be gently moved; do not push too hard while resetting, as we have said.
And when they are moved equally for the patient's comfort, and their jaw feels somewhat relieved, then place a cloth soaked in a mixture of oil-based rosewater and wax on it, and gently tie with soft linen threads.
and let the patient sleep on his back, with his head resting between two pillows, so that he does not move left or right, nor should he exert himself to eat much, but only eat light foods until the pain is gone and the jaws have been washed.
Then gently move what it wants to, and do not work hard in opening the mouth for eating or drinking, until the jaw is properly set and healthy.
And if the two jaws cannot be set back to their proper position within an hour and are not restored to their original places, fevers and usual sweats may occur, along with possible intestinal issues or unadulterated vomiting by chance.
And when you see this, then declare that it is a calamity; and many times those who experience it die within seven days.
Of forcefulness
The strength cannot dislocate the ribs within and below, nor is it ever dislocated without feeling.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back, and extends their arms; then firmly press the level with your palm, and it will return; then place upon the plaster and the bandage, and secure.
the same.  ;
And so similarly, return the head of the spine when it is displaced from its place.
Regarding the dislocation of the shoulder
Know that the shoulder dislocates in three ways: one where it comes out from under the collarbone, and another from below. And sometimes it dislocates upwards, but this is rare.
; ch s so that you ben que lesse se: the he will des muche pe’s c p and it is not cef; it may they do not modern with such as f. That line : (et so e have, I want lo C.
And sometimes it happens to certain men from a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated by this.
It is therefore necessary for you to examine it thoroughly until certain, and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that dislocation when tilted towards the elbow, and makes a difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their distinctive variety. .
If it is dislocated upward as well, it is not hidden, for you can plainly feel it upon touching.
and this manner of dislocation is not only to reset when it's new, or if the child is ill.
And the manner of the dislocated arm, then lift it upwardly the hand and put in its upper side as a ligni les poins duos; et le mete la mains de l’est en haut, li maugrontes pois mete poinz los.
If it does not return as we have described after some days, the patient should be bathed in warm water; and treat with soothing and softening agents like an infusion of altheae, fennel, and millet seeds in water, and then treated.
Then place a sling over the patient's back, and put an equal length of linen under their shoulder, neither too soft nor too hard, then position the footrest with the heel of the affected leg on it, and gently lift the head of the dislocated shoulder. Treat the afflicted side.
And other treatments should be applied to the head of the affected side so that it does not move downwards. The shoulder will return promptly now if you see the dislocation according to this method:
and it is that you make present a man who is taller than the patient; and he stands towards him, and places his shoulder below the one with the dislocation, and lifts the affected side upward so that the patient hangs in the air. and other ministers hold the patient's hand downward toward the abdomen. And if the dislocated side is too light, bind it with something heavy, and the dislocation now returns.
And the resetting can be done in another way: and it is that you insert a long stick into the ground so that its head is as wide as a small stone, and neither too large nor too small; First have the patient lie down and remove their clothes below, ensuring they are well-covered above, and let the injured person be lying longwise; then extend his hand to the other side properly, and the joint will quickly return to its place.
And if it does not want to return for all the reasons we have mentioned, then perform this treatment: take one bundle of two arm's lengths and four hands' breadth, which has its head rebound to enter in front below the seat, according to this form:
Then cover the long trunk with cloth to prevent it from touching the sick person, then place the sick person below the seat and position the arm alongside the long trunk; extend the arms above the trunk, and fix the shoulder on top of the trunk, placing the hand at the head end of the arm, then insert the arm under a rib of one row widthwise, and extend the hands downwards, allowing the body to hang on the other side: the joints will return immediately.
And when it is done, in any manner whatsoever, it must be that you place over the joint a spindle of wool equal, then apply the plaster prepared with powder from milling, with incense and oven hawk's egg, on all the shoulder and around it; then strain off the plaster quickly, turn the sling onto the plaster, and wrap the hand at its neck, so that the hands remain in this way.
And it must be that you eat little, as long as the limb is comforted, for it will heal faster; and then eat more after 5 or 6 days, and move it; if it becomes firm and not softened, then it is healthy.
And if the joint is strongly displaced due to moisture or another reason, it must be that you apply three burns with fire cauterization as shown before in this chapter of fire cauterizations.
If you perform all of this and it remains dislocated for over seven days, and the joint does not hold or lift the arm forward, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is pinched or stretched out or weakened; and understand that the joint will never be properly aligned in its place.
The dislocation towards the left side and the muscles, or behind, is caused by impact, elongation of hands, and other ligaments; treat until it is healed properly.
And if after healing comes tremors in the limb, and later twinges of movement, the patient suffers many times until those tremors subside, returning to its original state.
Of shoulder joint dislocation from a fall
It is said that the shoulder joint dislocation occurs at points and returns to those points; when it has dislocated from all parts, especially in front and behind, the dislocation cannot be properly reset as one can clearly see and feel it, and it dislocates according to each position. And when you reset the dislocated shoulder with its counterpart, if it is evident to you. Because the joint is raised and cannot bend the arm nor reach its shoulder at all.
. I ben ta the:
And the restoration is as follows: when it can be returned in such a way, extend its hand to your two hands; and its arms are spread out, and the fingers wrapped around according to the course of the cord, behind and above, joining the joint with its bones together or at the root of its palm until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, when it doubles its hand to its own hand and wraps the cord's root of the palm which has been dislocated.
And if it does not want to return to its place, provide strong extension; and two ministers extend the arm, and bind each with a cord, so that it cannot move at the extension; then turn the arm in both directions until you have wrapped a long and wide double cloth around it.
And when the hair reaches the joint of the joint with its hand, if anointed with any oil to soften the joint, then reset the joint properly until it is restored.
And when it is in place, if applied with dry paste and egg white, then strain properly, and hang the arm on a pillow towards the patient's malady, and leave for some days, then release it.
And if the joint is firmly in place, release it and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, start again with the dry paste and bindings, and let them be for some days until they are firmly set; then release it.
If it feels instability after the reset of the joint, and it moves again, then bathe and rub well, and press until it is relieved; or place a greased sheep's fat pad over the joint, leave for one day and night, then bandage, and let them take their bath. When it sweats, rub the joint well and then replace the fat pad, then allow them to take their bath; do this two or three times until healed; if you see swelling, put warm moist straw mixed with butter on it, and strain it. It will return to its normal position.
The dislocation of the hand
The dislocation of the hand occurs and its return is easy compared to other joints as well; it must be promptly returned to its place at the same time it is dislocated, whether the flesh is swollen or an abscess forms there.
And the readmissions require placing the affected hand on a table, extending its fingers, and aligning it evenly so that you place your palm at the appearance of the joint, pushing until it returns.
Nevertheless, you must ensure it is properly placed; then position the back of your hand on a table while extending and returning. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, place the patient's hand on a tabletop, and let the healer put their hand under the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that's good.
But if not, use the soothing strains of balm and allow it to rest until you begin again.
And if he cannot endure it, and you are unable to place it back in its original position after several days, the dislocated joint remains twisted.
and the patient is unable to grasp anything when their hand is soiled, and cannot exert any force at all: thus understand that the nerves or arteries are cut; there is no other remedy but to grasp with fire near the case, and perhaps it serves no other purpose.
And when the hand is at its place, then place it on the splint as we have said, then strain and leave for 5 days, then release and keep thus.
And if it cannot move well, and there is no weakness, then apply warm water lather, and rub until it is clean.
Of dislocating the fingers of the hand
Never are dislocated at each hand portion, never to the back of the palm or belly.
Then they are set and the dislocation is held by your fists until it returns, then support the head of the thumb, and bend towards the part where it is disjointed.
After leaving it for two days and then setting it level on the third day; and each night tie it as we have said, remove the bandage during the day, and move it occasionally, then reapply the dressing at night; do this often until it becomes straight.
And do the same if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it becomes normal again; and do the same when it is dislocated on another side.
Dilation of the spinal column of the back
When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, and there are several occurrences of it, there is no remedy, as death soon follows for the patient.
And the signs are that the evacuations occur suddenly without willingness and cannot be held in, causing many times a limb to become weakened or both thighs or one arm or another.
And the eau l’or, and are feignie la signes it is often come they occur with beaux cu the maintes le ne, ties: et li. 1 in both lesse que est maintenant times ou sces, et soi les a se, plus; si mues bours that de fois, par à l’otre enlignes maintes le ointons qui doit au peau.
The treatment is to restore it so that if the discoloration has come from childhood, there should be no healing or cure in its entirety.
And those that come from falling or blows or similar things, the old methods of treatment through great speeches say there is no benefit at all.
but I have shortened it according to my intention, and made ointments in various ways.
t:
And also those that arise directly between two ribs, which cannot be treated unless the one specifically located at the back, as I have said;
and there is that the patient's face should be extended at one place equally, and have strain away from them so they do not bend;
then insert a stick in the ground at the top and another at the feet, and tie a band around the joints of the patient's limbs, and at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles;
s but nonece;
And are securely closed as we have said, with the cushion placed on the spine flatly, until they heal.
And if it does not heal from this treatment, take a stick three arm's length long and chevroned at one end, place the patient on the side with the chevron facing upwards, then position the middle of the stick along the spine. And position the healer's feet under the other end of the stick and press firmly until it returns to its place; if you see this, make it into a wheel that turns towards the hand.
And it is that you insert two torches at the top of the patient's large arm on one side and towards the other two sides, with between each torch, above and below, a handspan width long.
and each torch should have a rod attached to it, which can be turned, and the torches must be firmly set in place so that they do not move; and between each pair of torches there should be another turning torch on which the rods turn, with two small torches, one handspan long, for adjusting the rod.
and then connect the rods among the ligatures at the torch towards the top, and the other rod towards the sides to the other torch; each assistant turns their respective torch along the entire length of the rod, and the master places the spine equally as we have said.
When they are even again, place a dry draugeret with plenty of wool, then the plugs, and then an ointment from a tablet three ounces long, to fill in the void left by the dislocation and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a ligature as we have said, and let the patient use subtle nourishment until they are well.
If at the end of their recovery nothing comes from it, administer softening and soothing medications with the ointment we have mentioned earlier; and do not ever give them a piece of lead.
And never does it appear in the back of the spine, and do not think that this is dislocation; and it's the bone that breaks, so you should not have any presumption: perhaps it would bring death.
Of hip joint dislocations
Know that dislocations of the hip and shoulder joints only occur as such, not like other joints; the hip joint is dislocated in four ways: inward and outward, and slightly forward or backward. And less so to either side.
And the recognition of inward dislocation is such that when the injured leg is joined with the healthy one, it appears longer, and has more deformed joints than the sound one, and the injured cannot double its knee due to fire. by what yout; The t; (s: ça tre-fle bout i m the line :
And the sign of the one to whom it comes upon, is such that this accident is contrary to those before.
And the sign of one to whom it occurs in front is such that they walk well on their leg according to completion; however, do not double the knee with pain, and if you want them to stand up, first ensure they can bend it, and hold urine retention, and swelling of the groin, and as they move forward, passes over the heel.
seg; c'sud leslso: 1 but they way the sole (et ce bon tous fjoss; e tella; that n’m (throchemde.
The resets for this type of dislocation are that you should check if the dislocation is recent and it stays according to its nature, without any care; and it does not require haste or assumption.
And in those whose dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation: if you hurry to reset the joint, push it inside and out, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will return on its own without needing further care.
And if it does not return this way, it is necessary to seek a strong healer and support the leg strongly with two hands or with a bandage on the knee; And other ministers extend their hand over the teal in such a way that they place their hands below its scales, then gently tighten a ligature around its thigh; and others tie the head with the ligature.
And they extend it lengthwise and widthwise all at once, so that the patient may stand upright for a moment and hang suspended.
This method of extension is common in four kinds; and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
If not, one must provide care similar to it. When the dislocation is in the teeth, ensure that you support the patient on their side, then place the ligature at the root of the thigh, and the part that has come out from under the groin, then extend the ligature upwards towards the buttock, and towards the forepart.
Then attach other members of its arms and envelop the larger part of the patient's thigh that has come out, extending it fully forward: now it will return to its place; and this method of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot hold it in the manner we have described, you must tie both of the patient's feet together with a strong sash underneaturally low (around 20% to 35%, compared to about 45% for non-Hispanic whites), and their access to employment opportunities is also lower.
Then hang from the head of a log and have two arms extended; then instruct one minister to embrace the neck at the waist, and have another set of ministers hanging with the patient who also embraces the waist, as now the joint quickly returns.
And when the dislocation is severe, if it falls on the patient, as we have said in those with gilbosis, and strains a band above the affected leg properly, and at the knee likewise.
Then place two cauterizations, one at the head and one on the feet, then insert a cauterization between the buttocks within the patient's form. And it is to apply wet bandages around it so the patient does not move, then extend each limb toward him, and the physician places the dislocation evenly in his hand.
If it returns, that's good. If not, put on a board as we have said in the fracture treatment, and lay the patient with the injured side up.
And when the dislocation is in front, it must extend the injured leg quickly, and according to what I have said; then place the physician's thumb above the affected side, then press with the other hand, and extend downward toward the knee.
And if the dislocation is below, it does not mean to extend the patient's arm or lift off the ground, but you must let them rest as if the elbow had been dislocated below, as we have said in lying on both elbebones; and be on its face, and the ligament is extended as we have said before, and one must put pressure above the joint onto the board.
and will be placed when the patient extends his legs and they are even; then put the buttocks together, and place the bellows, and tighten with a bandage so that the elbow does not move.
After resting for 3 or 4 days, then reset it and apply the plaster; if you see they are even, strain them as before, and leave them for 3 days; then reset it, and let it move gently until the member is supported.
For the dislocation of the knee joint.
The knee is dislocated in three ways: internally and downwards, and behind it; not forward.
And the signs are such that you instruct the patient to bend his leg to his hip, and if it does not return to his hip, know that it is dislocated.
And the restoration of all things is such that you make the patient sit up straight, and extend his leg if he can, placing your back to his face, and putting your foot under his.
Then take his thigh into your hands, and draw it in between your thumbs, then fold the two ribs of the thigh thoroughly; and other helpers extend his foot, until the knee returns to its place, and the signs are that he feels his leg at his hip lightly.
And place the plaster over it, and raise the leg to the hip, and tie them together firmly for iii or iv days, then release; and do not allow the patient to move until the limb is comfortably set.
And if the limb cannot be straightened well, treat it as we have described in the care of the thigh, until it is made whole again.
Regarding ankle dislocation
The heels are never fully submerged, nor ever fully drained, inside and out.
And the signs if it is that the ankle is swollen, and reaches out before the part where it is dislocated.
And lie down with hands should be spread gently when he is swollen.
When it is dislocated completely, one must make the patient sit upright and support them with a board outside the leg, above the ankle.
Then raise their foot towards you with your right hand, and then twice to the left hand, then extend it upwards, and gently place the foot back on top of their leg.
And do this twice as we have said, pulling and stretching the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, resume the procedure, for it will return.
If it cannot return like this, lay the patient on their back with earth beneath them, and firmly insert a stake between their thighs, wrap cloth around so they do not move.
Then dye the minister's thigh and have another minister extend their feet or a strap over the neck of the foot to tie it securely. Then extend each minister equally, and the stakes should be placed between the patient's thighs to hold them steady when extended.
Then set the bone back into its place in the dislocated joint, and other treatments include soaking the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will quickly return.
And when it reaches this point, apply the poultice and bandages above, strain tightly, and tie the cloth to the leg, protecting the nerves behind the ankle so that the bindings are not too tight.
Then leave it for two or three days, and if the bindings loosen, re-strain them; then release after one day or at most four days, and prevent the patient from walking for twenty days. If it goes beyond this limit, it is not reassuring that it does not dislocate again.
;
Of dislocations
When joints are dislocated, if they require significant extension without much effort, it is a simple matter.
And if the dislocation is in any one of your back or feet, you must make the patient sit on a plain level or table standing straight, and place their foot beneath these joints. Then press firmly with your foot until it returns to its position.
t:t it the I themd.
of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with dislocation, and one sees it to be restored, many times the patient dies:
If you are not overconfident in the treatment, if you are not wise in the art and have practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow to act, do not be bold.
At the beginning of soothing matters treat abscesses quickly, and let the patient be in God's hand, if you do not see hope for health. And when you see hope, reset the limb to its place immediately, so that the abscess may heal.
And when the limb is back in place, apply soothing measures for abscesses quickly and treat the wound as necessary with drying ointments.
rophon to marl’s, so pleviet t und the ou ougt;
And be cautious not to enter into fear, as I have said, for this will move according to your Maker, and for the health of your arms and body. Amen.
