Oh you, dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical science in its entirety and made it whole through explanations and by making declarations. And I have received in a vision that I shall complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work on hands, known as "surgery".
And since the work on hands is practiced in our region and has spread throughout all, it has been neglected to a great extent; only small descriptions found in books by ancient physicians who treated hand injuries are left behind. And from this arises errors and follies, closing off understanding and knowledge is displaced.
And it seems to me that I would like to revive this treatise with the order of exposing and declaring as well as abbreviation; coming together are the forms of instruments for cautery and other apparatuses from surgery along with preparation for their use, so it is necessary.
And because no good masters of hands are to be found in our time, the art of medicine has been displaced. One must instruct the individual to raise themselves in knowledge of anatomy as Galien says, until they understand the judgment of limbs, their forms and connections and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and sinews and their number, and their movements and moving vessels and resting ones, and where they originate.
And thus Hippocrates says that the one without a tool is very little, and with a tool is much; especially in the art of surgery.
We tell you in the introduction of this book that if one is not mindful of the matters previously mentioned, they should be careful not to stray into error and harm people; thus I have often seen many who engage themselves with this science but abandon knowledge and experience.
In this case I saw a mad knight who cut an abscess of hard pimples or the neck of a woman, and severed the veins in her neck; therefore so much blood issued that the woman died in her hands.
And I saw another knight who treated a stone in a man's bladder, and the stone was large; he took with it a part of the bladder itself, and the man died inside within three days.
And I have already been called upon to assist him; and I saw the patient's condition and the size of the stone, and if it had not been for his trembling, he would surely die.
And see another master who took care of a duke from our land whose leg was broken, and with the break there was also an injury; and the uninformed master straightened the break close to the wound using a strong lever, without leaving any space at the wound; and left it in such condition. And he instructed him not to dislocate it again; and remained thus until the leg was fully healed and the foot recovered, coming near to ruin.
I came called by him and was hurriedly brought to dislocate the leg; and when it was dislocated so gently, he felt no pain at all.
But in any case the decay was already settled or member, and could not heal it; and did not stop the decay from spreading through the limb until the entire limb was completely lost.
And see one other mirror which has collapsed an abscess inflamed by its lord's evil intentions.
For an ulcer, when it is filled with black bile humor, it should only be touched with iron if part of it can be removed from its place where corruption lies.
And therefore, dear son of the surgeon's craft, it is necessary for you to know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: namely, where there is danger in various dispositions; and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and peril.
s, the 1 so ;
Take your tools with conviction and begin treating the patients gently yet firmly, using the best approach so by God's grace you come to health and are praised; let go of hopeful diseases that bring great harm to the body; remove doubt from your methods so that in this life you may move on to a world of glory.
In some of his warnings, Galien says: "Do not take on bad diseases in care that you may be called foolish healers."
I have devised this treatise according to these three chapters.
The first chapters are of fire cauteries and medicinal water cauteries, and the chapters are organized from the head to the feet; and on the forms of swellings, and on welding with cautery, and everything necessary in the work.
The second chapters are of cutting and piercing, and suction cups and wounds, and arrow extractions, and similar things; and the chapters are organized and on the forms of swellings.
The third chapters are of repositioning dislocations and sprains, and similar things; and it is organized from the head to the feet, and on the forms of swellangs.
Thus we recall our work, it is necessary that I describe the quality of the aid and the harm of each composition.
I say that the quality of the aid and harm is longer in word and subtle science and secret answers; and on this topic many wise men speak, agreeing with it; but few pay attention to their words, for I return to the essence.
I say that caustic treatment helps all constitutions where there is matter; for two types of constitutions exist: one being hot with material and the other dry without it.
In complexion hot and dry together matter, some advise that cautery is of great help; others say the opposite: cautery does not apply to diseases arising from heat and dryness.
For the nature of heat is hot and should not be treated for hot diseases by warmth or dryness; and those who say otherwise claim that cautery greatly helps with hot and dry diseases affecting the bodies of men. For when you examine the body's humors in relation to the nature of heat, you find that the body is cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it through experimentation never.
And in any case, only those who have tried it and know the craft of cautery treatments well, as well as the diversity of people's temperaments, their conditions and causes of diseases, and occurrences and duration; regarding other types we do not fear them particularly, especially cold and moist illnesses. de lest rashtry that iste:
And know, my child, that fire cautery together is among the secret treatments and greater mercy than fiery medicinal cautery.
For fire is simple, and does not come forth except to the member that burns it, and harms no other limb if its name be known.
Hot remedies come from one body part to another by joining them together, and they bring severe diseases of poor healing to the affected member; and sometimes it kills the patient.
The fire does not do this because of its intensity or due to the quality of its material unless there is an excess.
And this is what I have found through experiment and long service in the study of my art; and so it lies on the truth of things. Because of that, I excuse myself for the length of speech, as I do not wish to reveal the secret knowledge contained within these texts or about fire, nor the quality of its workings in curing bodily ailments, as the philosopher demonstrates; but receive this in your thoughts.
And know this, son, that they are agreed upon when to make the cauteries, and select praying lines.
And I say cauteerization is suitable in all cases, as the harm that occurs can be alleviated by its aid; and especially if it's necessary to relieve urgent pains that cannot wait until greater injuries come upon the limb.
it is not to as d
And there can be things such that the disease occurs at times according to the complexion of the patient and the nature of the illness and its power; and are combined in him excesses due to the consumption of meats and similar things, unless cauteries are administered either where there is little excess and moisture, as with cauteries for gout and such ailments, so that pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last of medicine, and this is true; but they do not believe that cauteries have value after medicine, their understanding is false, and cauteres are the last of medicine because when we administer treatments in any illness and they are not effective, then we administer our cautere, and it works. Then well understood that cauteres is the last of medicine, not according to the foolish man's notion.
The ancient ones said that surgical instruments of gold are more effective than those of iron, and they did not consider copper as such due to the quality of gold and the superiority of its substance; and they stated that the blades of cauterization do not cause putrefaction but this is not true for I have tested it, and found that it does occur in some men; and surgical instruments of gold are more effective than those of iron, as they said.
And also when you heat the instrument of gold, it is not because of the color of gold and cools quickly; and if overheated, put to fire; thus there are enough obstacles.
And therefore we use the iron cautery as we have found suitable for our work.
Or I have ordered this chapter from top to toe, so that finding it is easier.
The olive oil cautery
c e; theyt that you est la ou lesse m troje l'm: the same as;
The form of this cautery is such that the patient be purged by solvent medicine, modifying the head iii or iiij times, according to what the virtue and nature and habits of the sick individual can endure; then reset the head of the sick person.
And then make the patient sit with a cross between your hands, and place their hands on some pillows; afterwards put the root of your palm to the root of his neck between his two ears; and wherever come your thumbs, bleed first and then cool the cautery which is called 'olivare', for this is its form:
And place it on the leu signiet d'encre, and make drawing and stretching your hand little by little while turning; then lift your hand gently, and look to see if you find bone one small piece; and if you do not see it, repeat the cautery until you can see the bnose as I have told you; after take a bit of sinew, and place soft and moist cotton in there, and put on top, and leave for iii days; afterwards cover with fine wool cloth soaked in butter; and let it be until the burn is healed; then treat the wound with ointment called 'tetrafarmacon' until it is healed.
And the ancients said, if an open wound persists longer, it drains more; and therefore move to help.
And some say that one must not tire the fire cautery until a part of the bone has been burnt through, and then remove what is burned from the bone, and heal it.
And others say that one must use the fire cautery until it is thoroughly exhausted, and apply pressure as to flatten the bone as wide as a woolen garment worn by women so that fluids can flow out; and the open wound should be left for long term exposure. Afterwards, it should be cleaned and bandaged.
And these two methods of fire cauterization do not seem to me entirely good in all cases, but rather in some people who have a cause for fear; and I think it best left alone. For the head is weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we witness with other limbs; and similarly when the head of the patient is naturally frail, and the first appearance of fire cauterization seems more healing to me, then I work such that in this way there is overall health.
From the pain of a dislocated joint at the base (of the neck)
When pain in the entire head comes chronically and lasts for a long time, the patient should use years and pills called "cochie," as well as cleansing of the throat, oils, and plasters; but if they undergo cautery as we have previously mentioned, it is not effective.
Be mindful if the patient's head is of a severe nature and not too cold; then you may cauterize below the previously mentioned cautery point that we have discussed above.
the m.
Of fire cautery of the head When sudden pain occurs in a part of the head and the disease extends to the entire area, and the head is purged by dissolving medicines, along with other treatments mentioned earlier for various illnesses, and all this proves unsuccessful: then you must perform cauterization as per two methods, that is with medicinal ague and pitch.
The cauterization with medicinal ague involves picking a wart of a certain size, and removing the scaly layer and covering it with two small pieces as if placing two eyes; then you place the paste on the temple where the pain resides in such a way that you can replace the wart paste under the skin. When it is replaced, ensure that it lies well and leaves it like this for sixteen hours; then remove the bandage and apply the ointment to the wound, leaving the injury as such for two or three days; then place cotton soaked in butter until pus comes out.
After the oil treatment until it is healed; and if you see any of the burning remedies that I have written or designated to treat burning remedies.
The fire cautery is as follows. Heat this type of cautery:
And is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a bell or it has .i. projection, and inserted into the painful area with a small opening; and hold your hand and slightly turn the iron so that half of the point you desire to burn is heated; and lift your hand when the artery behind, which is beyond, starts bleeding abundantly.
After placing cotton in the wound for three days, then applying moistened cotton with butter, and treating the wound with ointment until it heals; if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellaris," use at its sharp point, and be careful not to burn the artery in this migraine which is not an old one.
Migraine
When treating a migraine as we have previously discussed in the divisions of diseases, and it does not improve with medicine or iron, then you must heat the "cultellaris" cautery until it is white; and thus place your hand on the painful wound for half an hour and a day's length, remove your hand once, and strain so that you do not burn the artery nor reach the bone; beware of the jaw which moves when chewing, and ensure that the nerves maintain their focus and spasms do not affect the patient, and guard against excessive bleeding from the artery after it is cauterized, or if there is a fear of reopening and mainly in those who are unfamiliar with this method and have never tried it; leave the vessel halfway open. But I will tell you how to stop blood when the artery is cautered, and show where it opens as described in this book.
If you see that this cautery does not ease the illness and the patient is suffering, caulk it in the middle of the head as we have said, and heal the wound until it is healthy; and if you see, provide the cautery we have mentioned or extraction of the artery with the cautery that has .ij. blades; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
From ear pain due to coldness
When there is ear pain from coldness and we have applied soluble medicines and other treatments as mentioned in the section, and the pains do not subside, then use this caustic called 'points', of which here is the form: (Continued from another text)
After pointing on both sides of the ear where the pain is in them, and moving slightly above the root of the ear after locating it correctly, and having six points around each ear; treat the location until it is healed.
From the suffering of the mouth
Torture which must be treated by fire is only those that move from moisture, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not make a cautery on appearances coming from wounds and spittle of blood.
When treating this type of torment that causes swelling from venomous bites and head purging, as well as gargling, then one must cauterize the patient with three burns: one at the root of the ear, another a little forward toward the temple, and the third between the two lips; place the cautery on the healthy part, make an incision in the top of the ear just below the tip, and another of similar length near the temple; leave the cautery until half the skin is charred; this is the shape of the cautery.
And this is the type of incision we have described before, but it is slightly more subtle and one must make the knife a bit larger; after treating them as I have mentioned above until they are healed.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have described before, and there is no improvement, and the patient does not have a fever, then make three burns: two on each of the two ears, one in the middle of the head, and one where they are called "vessels" as we have previously said; afterwards cauterize below the mouth of the stomach; treat them as we have described before.
Of languor
For this disease, one must give the sick person large years and medicinal pillows for their brain; afterwards, remove all from their head, and place a sinapis oil poultice on their occiput as prescribed in treatments of plasters; here is the manner of cautery: do so as I have said.
If he is thus healthy, it's good; and if not, perform three cauteries below the head, descending to the neck, with two inches of space between each cautery; treat as you would others, and if you see anything pressing, make a cautery in the middle; and if work is needed, place two more on either horn [of the bone], and treat until healed; and it will be the kind of cautery called "olive-wood", as I have previously mentioned.
From coldness of the head It is necessary that the head be rubbed with ointment and as we have previously mentioned; after washing the patient's head, then make a fire cautery on the head and at each horn, and two behind and three above the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers much, and the illness is severe, so do four fire cautions above the spine of the back; leave it until the skin grows thicker, then remove your hand; after curing as long as healed, use the cautery we have previously mentioned called "olivare".
Regarding epilepsy
Epilentic patients should only use a heated blade if they are phlegmatic; it is necessary to first anesthetize the brain and other treatments we have mentioned in the section when the patient suffers greatly and endures great pain from medication.
If it is a child who cannot suffer, they should have gargling and chewing to often anesthetize the brain with good meats; after feeding them their fill, perform .i. cauterization according to what we have said before, and .i. cauterizations on the vessels, and each horn; if the patient suffers greatly, they should receive cauterizations as I have described for those with paralysis and softened limbs, on the spine of the back and neck, using olive oil in the manner that I have said.
If it is a child who suffers, they should receive a subtle cauterization as follows:
When caused by melancholy are the excesses or corrupted moistures and large phlegm, then one should apply the type of cautery we have mentioned to those with paralysis.
And if caused by melancholy are the declining excesses to melancholy, and the body is damp in a sickly manner, then give it something to drink so that the brain may be clarified, according to its condition as seen in the classification.
After the head of the sickly one has been cured; after making .i. tortex well made, like a circle, put it inside the head; and let the patient cross their arms, and be held secure from all sides; then apply the liniment, and anoint with old sheep's butter; and warm it quickly by fire so that the patient can bear to have it placed on them; afterward empty the cup within the head, and allow it to cool down; and do this once a week with another good regimen until they are healed.
When you see that the cauldration is not working and various points do not help at all with it, this method of cauldration moistens the brain evenly; then place cotton soaked in butter and lamb fat on it.
From the root of the eyes When the symptoms first appear as I have described in the division, then begin and give the patient something that clarifies the mind, and guards against all dampness, and makes them sweat or bathe several times fasting.
After the command to return his head, and he performs a fire cautery in the middle of the head, making two fire cauteries on top of the temples where the nerves from the ear are together, or if it is only one; tie off all veins and arteries that are above the crown, so the fire cttery should be long according to the width of the temple; and watch for bleeding, and if too much blood flows out, then clamp with a tourniquet as best you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incision how to tie them off; never perform a fire cautery or ligature below the two bones at the back.
In the body's tears
When the tears of the eyes are long-standing and accustomed, and over the veins or near the arteries that appear on the forehead; and one sees that they are from cold excessive phlegmatic humors, then perform the caustery as I have said at the beginning in the descending section for the eyes: i. a caustery within the head, ii. causteries above both temples, and ii. causteries or haiterels below both bones; and if there is need of more, carefully cauterize along each eyebrow with a small caustery.
When the body produces tears within the eyes
When you treat according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three doses of a certain drink (possibly a medicinal concoction); afterward perform a caustery or warm oil poultice on the head; and make two cauteries using an 'olive caustery' above each eyebrow, just below the hairline; and be careful not to injure the artery. And this is the form of the cautery called "clavelis":
When the oil paper of the bow is softened by illness and moisture, then apply the paste of this cautery called "olivea." Here are its features:
And if you see two cauteries above the two sorceries as long as the eyelashes are; and do not remove your hand except when one-third of the paper is burnt, according to the way I have said.
byz: On no occasion does the hair of the eyelids turn into a hedgehog, and prick their eye, for which one performs cauldration in two ways: that is with fire or with burning medicines.
For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
When they have grown and are even, then place the patient in a clean bed; after shave the eyelids to make them as smooth as silk, and let the beginning of the scar be similar to the veil over the mirror, then put cotton wool soaked in egg white and musk oil on the eye, then apply the cauldration using this form:
After cauterizing the affected area several times in small amounts, let the hair be burned at that spot; and the signs of the healing of the wound are when you see the paper retract, and the hairs stand to the height of an olive; then gently touch it with your hand, and leave this for iii. days, then put moistened cotton in oil until the burn is healed; afterwards apply a salve until it is healthy.
And if afterwards the hairs appear and the paper is softened then resume cauterization at that same place as before; and if the hair is falling out, continue cauterizing until the skin heals to its natural state and becomes even, without touching the wool.
The cauterization by burning medicine commands the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of myrtle leaves; then take French soap and hot lye, half a measure each, and grind them together well; apply it quickly so that it does not cool down, and spread over the form as you made with myrtle leaves, and put on the paper; and if the illness is in one place only, work for one hour, and the same amount of time; and remove any lice under the hairs; and apply moistened cotton in olive oil; and keep the head of the patient healthy and wrap it with his hands over the medicine, and press a little bit every time when the patient feels irritation from the medicine, as if of fire. When you have done this for some time, give the patient the proper medication. And when the mordication is over, lift the skin of wound; and if you see it raised as though it were lifted by the constraint of fire or incision; then it is well. If not, give more medication to the area or until the medicine has worked, keeping the actions equal, and sharpening the eyes; afterwards apply cotton soaked in oil until the scab heals, after which cleanse the wound with ointment called "dyafenis" and others, until it is healthy.
And ensure you carefully observe your work with great caution that the medicine does not come out from the eyes. And if the papilla becomes soft again, and the hairs poke at the wound, resume the medication for that area just as you did before; then cure it until it is healthy; and this will be the form of a bag:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to this, so should be your constraints; and do not return the correct path to those who seek knowledge in this art.
Regarding the treatment of a fistula with cautery
When treating a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and if your treatment does not help, then it is necessary to treat with cautery according to this manner.
the e la carizner so; after that. de a ben de son'sir cest par; yousilles que.
After pressing the fistula if it is open, treat both pus and dryness; and if closed, work on the bowels; after placing a hot caustic formatively, hold your hand to the caustic at the non-swollen part above the wound so that your hands do not go mad; and put the caustic in the oil's fatty substance, causing it to rot.
If you start the caustic treatment up to the bone, it would be good. But if not, then restart the caustein one more time, and if needed, leave it for three days; afterwards put cotton wool soaked in butter over the dry ointment until it heals, and after forty days that it is no longer sore, apply corrosive medicine until the bone exposes itself; then continue with the treatment as per your chapter.
And there is a way of treating a fistula that the ancient ones did not mention. Listen to the instructions for a fistula, and do as follows; after making an incision, place within it one fine quill of which the shape is like this: They make it the quantity of one pound; and hold your hand firmly or by the armrests, ensuring that the patient does not move at all, so that the plaster adheres properly to its place; and you must put cotton moistened with oil on top: if the plaster is correctly positioned over a fistula, it will heal miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery as we have mentioned, it is good. If not, one must administer a purgative to make it anew; and bring the faster back into its proper place on the body according to where it belongs.
Of cracks in the lips. Many times there are bursts of blood vessels called "hairs", especially in the lips of children.
When you treat these bursts as we have described in sections, and the treatment does not help, then apply a small scraping cautery according to this method:
And place the heated iron into those bursts until it reaches boiling point; then cleanse the wound with lard until it is sanitized.
the text them, a the by Tud: Mobere: chilly and there c s.
When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the eye socket or at the roots of the teeth, after it has rotted and grown red and become old and turns into a fistula; you treat it as we have said in divisions, and it is not effective: then you must take.i cautery according to the quantity of the fume; after making an incision or puncture of the fistula, and hold your hand until the heat goes away from it, and afterwards let go; and do so once or twice, after treating as we have said in treatments, until it is healthy; and if treated thusly, it is good; and if not, then you must uncover the source and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
By slight movement of the teeth.
When the gums are weakened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat with medicines and it is not effective: then place the patient's head on his own; after wash off the cauterization of which will come later in such a manner that you put a pinch on the tooth; and put the heat inside the pain at the root of the teeth, and hold your hand until the pain comes away from it feels. After remove the mouth filled with salt water, and stay an hour and rested by;
And thusly for this manner, the finger which was moving is secured, and the gums softened are held in place, and the corrupted moisture dried.
From the pain of the finger
When the pain in the finger comes from coldness or heat, and medicinal remedies prove useless, then there is need for caustic treatment according to two methods: caustic with butter and caustic with fire.
; and some and the same. I's.
The cauldrons are such that you grasp a vessel of iron or bronze, and it is thick enough so the flame does not reach the patient's mouth; after heating the cauldron, the pain will come shortly afterwards, and place it on the tooth with your hand until the cauldron has cooalled; do this often, for the pain will decrease that same day or the next. And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter during the application of the cauldron, then remove it quickly; and this is the effect of the cauldron.
When the scrofula is of cold humors and moistures, and does not obey by digestion through medicines, then dry the patch of caustic that follows as described in this chapter, and make two openings for fumes to escape from the caustic on the other side; apply hot caustic once, or twice if needed, until it reaches the fontanelle of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, place the caustic according to its quantity, and leave it as such for three days; then cover with cotton soaked in butter until the burn heals. After that, treat the area with ointments and bandages until it becomes healthy again.
When moistures prevail in the ducts of the thyroid, especially when it comes from cold complexion, then first purges through soluble medicines are needed; after that apply caustic at the root of the throat, and ensure you do not reach up to the throat but just a little. Afterward, make another caustic on the joint of the neck at the top of the spine as we have shown before; treat the area as described until it becomes healthy again.
When moisture prevails in the ducts of the thyroid gland, especially when originating from cold complexion, then first purging through soluble medicines is needed; afterward make caustic at the root of throat and ensure you do not reach to the throat but just a little. Afterward another caustic neck joint on top of spine as we shown before treat area until it becomes healthy again. When all diseases of the cold spleen are from moisture, and the patient has no fever or sweat, and it is an early disease, if there are two cauterizations on the sole of each foot; and another cauterization in between the nipples within both breasts; and there is a cauterization called "clavile" according to the form that has been previously stated.
And if you see it, do the cauterization by touching all the "points" called 'points' of which the form is as previously stated in the ear disease; and be the points up to xxx or between them. After curing the sole according to what has been said before, there are three other cauterizations following this form:
And for these are lighter cauterizations because you make them in groups of three.
The translation of "de la dislocation de l’ajutoire" is: From the dislocation of the shoulder. When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first address the dislocation immediately. After soaking the patient on his back and along his sides; then lift the core which is within the muscles of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated therein, apply the caustic that has two iron points with a shape like this.
the bones is also their en ths are the bon by ça benta the text they have &* (the in;
And at no time is it approached near to that nerve for which there are eight cauterizations.
After placing the cautery for burning the hairs with silver wire; afterwards let the patient rest and do not move their limbs for long periods until they are well comforted.
And if it becomes dislocated above, the thing that happens is little, then you should make a deep incision at the clavicle with many cauterizations; however, the joint is reduced, and there is no more moisture and the patient feels better.
n:cI s (uir; ifre t9 paragraph.
The ancient ones said one should perform root cauterizations of astragalus: take the longest root you can find, dry it and make it as thick and long as your fingers; coat with oil and hold in fire for cauterization. Place a large cautery between the eyebrow and neck, two small ones slightly downward on the area above the beard; two cauteries between the fifth rib and sixth, tilted back slightly; one at the pelvis, another near the stomach, and one between the arms, also two along the sides of the hips. Do not squeeze your hand but hold open wide as if smelling something pleasant.
And some ancient ones said that no one should use a fiery cauterization resembling shaving; they warm it and place it between the ribs until reaching an abscess, causing great pain as we have mentioned with liver abscesses. However, in this treatment process there is fear or immediate death for the patient, or a fistula occurs which cannot be healed.
In the treatment process, there is either sudden fear or instantaneous death of the patient, or an unhealable fistula occurs.
When treating the disease of madness that we have mentioned in its types, and if there is no benefit, then they resort to three methods of cautery which are all good.
One way is to make three or four cauteries in line with the length of the madness, following the figure of the liver cautery that we have mentioned before; and do not press your hand against all the cauterizations, but let the insane lie on their back.
and another way of cautery is to use the one with two nerves, as we have shown in shoulder dislocation; lift the skin where the madness comes towards the left side, and perform elevations from which you lift the skin according to its thickness, according to the length of the body, and let the cautery be wide according to the breadth of the body.
After placing the two inflamed nerves so that the crown is pierced on the other side, and then using the caustic hot iron, there will be four in total. If you see it necessary, cauterize with the entire caustic iron at three points. Then treat when it has acquired pus over a long time, which is equivalent to moving one of the previously mentioned cauterizations.
Dropsy, or edema, is an accumulation of fluid in the body's tissues causing swelling and discomfort. It often results from various underlying conditions such as heart failure, liver disease, kidney problems, or malnutrition. Treatment involves addressing the root cause and may include medications to remove excess fluid, dietary changes, or other interventebns specific to the condition causing the dropsy.
Cauterization is not for dropsy unless it's called "asclytes" (a method). When you treat according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your treatment does not work, then it should be done with four cauters around the neck, one on top of the stomnacth, one over the liver, one over the kidney, two behind the back above the spine, and one at the place of pain. The caustic iron should be placed close to the vein you want to treat.
After the cautery is left open to purge long periods of time, and do not abandon the care for the patient after the cautery; healing would accelerate, and together there will be two intentions with the help of God.
The form of the cautery for the abdomen is the key that we have previously shown; and for the back it should be oval-shaped, as placed here beforehand.
To reduce swelling in the fingers When the feet are swollen in one who is dropsical, and filled with pale yellow bile, it is necessary to cauterize on the back between the little finger and ring finger; lift your hand with the cautery turning. And do not enter too deeply, thus avoiding squeezing out the pale yellow bile, and let the cautery be as follows:
After performing on two legs two cauteries in each leg at the point of the hatchet bone; let the cautery be long, one below the knee front and the other behind, along the leg; leave the cautery so it is lengthened to drain the bile; afterwards treat the other sores as we have said.
For leucorrhoea: Apply a poultice of rue sewed up with linen and apply it at night on top of the womb, so that in three or four days it will cure completely by itself. Another way is to grind ruta grass in vinegar wine for ten days; then strain out the liquid and apply it as a douche after boiling it down twice.
When the solution of the stomach comes from cold and moisture, while the retentive and digestive virtue that is in the stomach and intestines flows out, it cannot be treated by usual methods; thus you see the patient suffering greatly and with strong vitality, so perform a large cautery on the stomach as previously described or stomach cautery, where the cautery circulates around; four small cauteries encircle the navel subtly to one central cautery, and two cauteries above the hips.
And if you see abundant moistness and the patient suffering, perform a cautery on the wrist, and one cautery on each thumb, and two small cauteries above the stomach near the large, for the treatment is effective when there is good assistance.
On the treatment of varicose veins
When gout begins, or there are one or more, and they are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and they have been treated as we have described in divisions, and nothing helps if you do not make cauteries: III on the spine at the back, those that lie all forward from below the almucantarat, and one cautery under the buttocks; two.
And if you think that his stomach is cooled, and the flesh does not cook, and the face swells, then on the face make a large cautery under the stomach, as previously described, and one under the liver, and another at the edge of all the other cauteries; let the cauterization remain long. Afterward, treat the limb until it is sound.
From the inflammamen called "theelul."
When treating an athelou, heat the cautery until it appears red-hot, then place it on top of the athelou and let your hand touch where the vein is about to emerge, from which the blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there are many atheloi, cauterize each as we have said; afterwards treat with beneficial ointments until they heal; and if you use a large cautery on an alchatim, it will provide greater aid.
Of wound poorly treated
to the oint lesoilethem al the la aul etre de li isntesne mors, and soet l'on dit ou li ongist sonnaultz.
When a fistula comes with an old and rotting wound and corrupted moisture, you must probe it thoroughly to understand its extent entirely. After heating the cautery that appears like a razor, apply it into the fistule according to the quantity that has entered there, then resume cauterization as long as the affected area remains raw and corrupt, once or twice or thrice, depending on the amount of aid needed; and be wary not to burn the nerves within. If the fistula reaches into the bladder or intestine, be careful with these openings, do not make too wide a cut as if it were fresh meat, remember that it is not in vain. After treating the opening until it is healthy, and if the matters are lodged for long periods, then understand that the leu is completely healed; and if the matters have been removed over time, and the bones affected remain rotten at their core, thus as we will explain about treatment in its location.
Regarding the disease of the kidneys the f.
Of the bladder When the bladder is weak and cold with moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then you make a cautery in the part behind the bladebody, where the hair starts to grow, making some on each side; they should be as long as we discussed previously. Make another cautery towards the back, or however many are needed; and shape them according to the form described before.
Of the marrue and b.
Of the hip
When viscous moisture flows from the hip flask, and due to this it moves out of place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the lymph nodes are found in the vicinity of the departure, thus one must cauterize the patient on the hip flask with a caustic resembling a circle, and shaping it before the hollow turning as such, that the flask be within the circle; and let the caustics be like those used to cauterize the stomach.
And if these caustics are not present, then make three large olives of caustic and let the caustics be as close to each other as all kernels; and cure until it is dry.
Of the pain of the hip When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient has been treated as we have said in the division, with no cure; and the disease is long-standing: then you must purge the patient of large humors with foul pills or other good appearing pills.
After the fire cautery; and its manner is in two ways: that is to say, with medicines having heat, and the fire cautery, which has many methods, among which one of them is as follows: you perform three triangular caustic burns on the hip joint socket following this form, ensuring a good depth and large size, and there should be space between each cauterization equivalent to the width of a thumb, and it shall be an olive-shaped cauterization. At no time is one made in the middle above the head of the hip, because there are four according to this form:
And if you see it, apply the fire cautery at the circle we have previously mentioned for shoulder dislocations; but do so in such a way that the circle encompasses the entire hip joint and all its edges are burned.
And this is the way to do it for sciatica when pain occurs in the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg. If it reaches the thigh and leg, place two fire cauldrons where the patient says the pain holds them, and one fire cauterizer above the ankle four fingers apart on the left side; let it be a cutaneous cauterization, and make the edges of the burned area even; if the patient feels that the pain spreads to two or three finger widths from the edge of the wound or near it, place them at the fire cauldron where they feel pain for three points or four times on the caustic called "points."
And if it worsens, and the pain is from below the knee towards the thigh, make a fire caustic or circular cauterization, and take good care in all your cauterizations that you do not burn either the nerves or the large arteries with them, and cause no greater harm or contraction to the patient.
And I have seen others who performed cautery on the ankle near the foot, and they continued until the leg was completely withered, as were the feet, which were pierced and corrupted throughout. After a stomach treatment from which he died.
And if the pain is in two parts together, perform cautery on one and then the other, as follows. // And the sage says of the leg cautery, herein lies the manner, make a piece of iron that is as large as a small oak nut or slightly smaller, with gaps between them spanning roughly the size of an inch; have these gaps on both sides and evenly spaced, and there should also be two pairs. Have well-made horseshoe-shaped irons; this is the form:
And have them heated until they are all red and glistening with sweat, then place it on the boiling water of the maligned hip, and twist along its lengthy ribs; perform cautery once every time you go around it and leave for three days; then apply an ointment dressing, leaving the open wound exposed for a long period of time until healed.
Albucasis says we use this little fire cautery due to fear of its nature, and few know who uses it; however, this is a good cautery, which can be endured, and where it applies.
From the pain in one's back.
When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or percussion or excessive blood loss, or resembling spread cold matter, none of these similarities warrant fire cautery unless it originates from an infusion of cold matter.
After the patient has been relieved of foul pills or similar substances, place him on his back where he feels the most pain; make three lines marked with ink, and in each line, create five or more cauterizations depending on the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; the cauterizations should be made according to the "point" method of cauterization. And if you do this, make three or four at the middle wrist like so:
This illness often comes in young children, and the sign at the beginning is that their backbones are narrow when they grow, causing fear; you will find this appearance on the last vertebra of the spine and above it.
When you see it and recognize it as a growth, then you shall cauterize with the loop of this type of caustic:
If the cautery is to equalize each part of the spine, and if you see, burn with the pointed cautery 2 or 3 lines between the spine so that they are close together. After healing as long as it is healthy according to what we have said, be careful not to perform a cauterization on an area where there is a bundle of nerves.
Pain in the joints
Pain in the joints comes from moistures that are spread throughout every part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, which those called "podagra" properly do so, and when it is caused by coldness and treatments with medicines cannot heal it, then they are treated with cauterization in this manner: make a wax cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
And if there is need that you grasp above the face of the foot, make a cautery all over the cautery so called "no point". And if pains come up to the knee and other joints, which often happens, make a cautery on each nail III or IV caudicums from each part; and at the olive oil cautery, and if more is needed, then do more, but do not keep your hand too far that the expectancy of color does not become red.
And if the pains descend to the knee and back, treat it with the cautery as mentioned in this chapter. And if there are pains in the hands, make points around the finger two lines; and if there is no pain left in the fingers, do so on each joint and on the hand's hair; and if the pangs come up to the ears or shoulders, cauterize each part, provide good care for the patient, and administer medicines. For if you give him proper care and purge phlegm, he shall be aided by God.
From the rush of blood from the spleen.
When ulcers come in the arms and swell at their hinges anew, it is necessary when you see them open to not close them that day; use things that relieve the belly so waste descends from the stomach; afterwards let him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to rub alcohol over his veins until they are healed, and reset the joints in both arms, and press down hard beneath the ulcer above the bone of the elbow, and at a sign that resembles three-fourths of a circle on top of the body; then apply the fire cautery as follows:
Until it is white and pus-filled. Then reset the ulcers to their place; and have the patient clean his hands so they do not return backwards; and work well on the thighs of the sick man, and put under him a cushion and a blanket over the thighs, and another under the feet that he cleans his hands with. Then apply the fire cautery to the sign with all your hand, keeping it straight and moving until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach on the first attempt, then continue again until you get to the baboon; be subtle in ensuring the pus does not come out while making the fire cautery; that you do not burn; and so the sick man does not die or suffer any other maladies.
And apply the cure aues est li s’en qui nus les grater le coure. Et lor ce covient tant que a c ie et ses chans ceste jors unt, si est cuers quinz ans de plye; et saigns cestos li tennains cure d’ent quant tu rase douze est dude les tigne suspece li se nonsi.
After 40 days, when he wishes to get up, he should wrap himself in well-made bandages and wear them for another 40 days; let him have good rest, work little and beware of excessive drinking and eating, and shouting too much; then after following this teaching, he will be completely healthy. And I will now say about the treatment of a tailor in his trade. Of abdominal surgery
When ulcers come in other abdomens and you see that they do not grow, make one incision with the hot iron according to its quantity, and be sure of its third part; then proceed as we have said; and none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized at three corners using this method:
But first locate the hinge point and make lines above and below the incision for width, and keep your hand in at all times during the bone sawing. However, the initial cuts are lighter and easier to move.
of long-standing pain in any limb When pain comes in any limb from falling or injury, and the pain persists for a long time without relief from medicines, then it should be treated with a caustic known as "the point" burner according to the length of the limb and its size, weakness, virtue, and location of twisting and pain. If the first cauterization is suitable, that's good; if not, repeat another cauterization above it because it is customary for them to heal in a place close to the patient, so you must make cauterizations until the patients are well again.
Of physicians' workmanship
The physicians' work is sometimes greatly aided by the caustic application, especially with diseases arising from putrefaction of blood and melancholy. Can you apply cauterization, taking care that it occurs in the beginning if possible, following our prescribed methods without delay, lest corruption spread throughout all illnesses; then perform 5 caustic applications on the head: one above the forehead at the root of hairs, and another near the front but at the end of eyebrows; two each between the temples, and one behind near the ears; allowing the hand and cauterizing instrument to reach almost to the bone, until sloughing is sufficient for gaseous humors from large lesions to escape. Cauterize as needed on the ulcer according to its present condition.
And if the disease is widespread and clearly manifests itself, then you should apply caustic applications as we previously mentioned: on the forehead chiefly, with one at the root of hairs, and another near the eyes; two each along the spine of the neck, five down the back spine, a large one above the buttocks and another close by; two each between shoulder blades, two over hip bones, two over knee tendons, and one on each joint of hands and feet, as well as in the palms' hollows; and be mindful not to burn near any nerves that are behind pressing against it. On no occasion apply caustic to the bone of the thumb or a large one at the stomach bone, nor another over the liver.
When you perform more cauterization, it brings the patient greater relief and benefit; know that the sick do not feel pain from cauterization as healthy people do, because their body is already completely corrupted. It's necessary for the cautery to be large or small according to the members and joints, as you will find in treatments of fractures. After treating a wound, apply flour paste mixed with honey and other remedcuations until it heals.
Inflammation
When inflammation occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and dressings, and it does not heal on its own; then you make cauterizations over the member according to its size and significance of the part; and let the cauters be slightly penetrating at first. Then apply liniment until it heals. Sometimes a cautery is made on the hand, foot, or back, where a nerve causes movement in the limb, thus causing inflammebility; however, none interfere unless one is knowledgeable about the body and the movements of its nerves.
Of fractures
When the disease called "fractures" is old and medical remedies are ineffective, then cauterize with a small cautery proportionate to the amount of flesh affected until it turns pale, and its color changes; then treat with flour paste and lentils mixed with rose oil and plantain leaves, along with blood from a pigeon's colon and a heron's neck, equal parts each; then melt them all together, bind with a cloth, and apply in place until it is healed.
The treatment of syphilis by cauterization involves using heat to destroy the infected tissue and stop the progression of the disease. It's important to note that such a procedure would be highly dangerous and ineffective, as modern medicine has far better treatments for syphilis through antibiotics like penicillin. However, during medieval times when this text was written, cauterization might have been one of the few available options for treating various illnesses due to a lack of medical knowledge and technology.
When cancer begins and you see it to be stopped, cauterize with the caustic that forms a circle around the entire area of the tumor. And yet the wise say that one should also cauterize at the center of the tumor; however, I do not think this is good, as I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, which I have never seen happen before; and more appropriately, it would be to cauterize around it with a caustic called "circular," as we have said in many of the treatises on cauterization.
Of the swelling that cannot die
When someone has an illness called "adubelati," and it lingers to die or because of the excess fluid it produces, or due to the patient'warty condition (that is, being too old) and having little blood, or for the time; then you should hasten its death: therefore cauterize around with many small caustics by pinching; afterwards leave it as such. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see it pierced throughout with cauterization, heat the cautery from which this form comes.
And place your hand within the midst of this illness called 'adubelati' until the keur has been pierced by the caustic, and be such caustics that the patient feels behind them in a manner whereby the course of putrefaction is directed away. Afterward cure it so it becomes perfectly healthy again.
The treatment with fire using iron
l's estceze ; m les ce be, s
Of those who come to the feet
Often there occurs a disease called "clos" in our understanding, which is a large growth causing pain to the foot. The treatment for this disease has two methods: fire cautery and hot water cautery. Fire cautery involves heating a probe like a blacksmith's tongs made of good iron that can grip all parts of the nail, with sharp margangular; then place it hot over the nail and turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail. Leave it this way for three days until it starts to produce pus; then make an ointment of mashed fresh herbs and leave the ointment on throughout the night, after which the nail will come loose and be pulled out from its roots. Then treat the wound with healing salve until it is healthy again.
If they are turned downwards the body, and it happens many times on hands and feet, then you must administer hot water cautery; and here is how: Take a jar of pitch or iron, or a blacksmith's tongs, place them over the nail and anvil (that is, for warts); put the jar so that it encompasses entirely around, then add some hot water, and hold your hand tightly, pressing with your hand turning until the edges of the jar reach to the root of the nail, allowing the hot water pathway deep down to the root; let the patient suffer a bit from the sting of the hot water for an hour; then leave it as is, and it will come off completely from all its roots. Do this again another time until you have removed all that are on the body, then treat with healing ointments.
The treatment for trembling
When anyone shakes from coldness of nerves or fever quartan (fourth-day fever) or any other, it is appropriate that you make them .iiij. (4) cauterizations or .iv. (4) along the spine at the back, one cautery between each vertebra; and one on a gland or nipple, and one above the stomach with an olive oil cautery; this will cease their trembling, and restore their health from the cold illness.
For purulent pustules
the bence c
When the vein is cut Many times there are great blood flow issues from an artery cut at the wound near the perineum, or in the incision of an abscess, or during cauterization on a limb, and similar things; it is very bad to stop bleeding.
And in any case if it happens to anyone, be quick to put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and strain very tight until blood flow is calmed from under your finger; then apply small or large olive oil cauterizations as needed so they are all red; then take .i., or a big one or a small one according to the wound and where it is located, and place the cautery over that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery until blood flow ceases.
And if it bursts when you lift your arm over the vein, and the cautery has cooled, then quickly take another one that is heated in the fire.
And continue to do this one after the other until the wound is sealed; and be careful not to burn the nerve that is nearby, and prevent any further harm coming upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, it cannot be properly closed just by itself if the artery is large, unless it is through one of the four ways we have mentioned: with cautery, or with extraction if it has not been treated yet, or with strong thread binding, or with medicines applied that can seal blood.
Who will provide the tight bandaging with cloths or applying burning substances on it, or other similar things, if not in vain.
If this occurs in anyone who does not have a mirror or present medicine, then one must place their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and extend it until blood returns above the wound and vein; do not move it, but often moisten with cold water so that it is very cold until the blood congeals and thickens and stops flowing; then make incisions as needed for cauterization and medicine.
We have told you in the first chapter all diseases that require fire cauterization, or burning medicines, and ointments; causes; promoters; forms of cauterizations; I have placed this chapter up to a foot, and I will go through this chapter by the same method so that it is easier to find what you seek.
And so, as I begin this section, it is necessary, dear student, that you learn in this chapter there is more danger and fear than with the first of fire cautery treatments, and therefore greater care is needed.
In this chapter's procedures, there is often blood evacuation when opening veins, incising abscesses, treating wounds, extracting arrows, cutting into stones, and similar matters; where doubt and fear arise, leading to death for some individuals.
And I advise you not to undertake recklessness. For many patients come in treatment. If they approach from those who have become so accustomed to their illness that they die easily due to the foreseeability of their disease and its severity; and one should fear such cases. Those who have lost their senses and say, "Wait, I am guarded," become desperate. It is not fitting for you to agree with those coming to you in this manner, but rather place greater care in your honor than in your greed. Do not act foolishly, but wisely from the things of which you are certain and have taken hold; employ prognostication and indication in treating your ill-fated ones so that health may be converted to them; this will aid you here in achieving good renown, glory, and memory in kingdoms.
Dearest son of mine, our Lords grant you good understanding and uprightness; and if you wish to seek the holy inspiration from His hand, Amen.
Or I have ordered this treatise in speaking by sections, as per the section on cauterizations that I have described from head to toe, so that you may more easily find what you will need.
Full of water, headaches
One must believe that this disease often occurs in children during birth, and when the labor is too strong, straining the child's head; it sometimes happens without any known cause.
And I have never seen this disease in anyone but children, and all that I've observed die quickly; therefore, it seems to me that the chapter is better suited for treatments of wounds.
cece ones t; the ou ca and its so. I cas mude in their en a c
If the moisture is greatly increased, and the abscess becomes larger, make two incisions shaped like a cross as follows:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs you see are swelling at each part's joint tops, and it still does not recede when pressed with your hand inside, then one must make three incisions according to this manner:
And after the incision, remove all pus. After stitching with thread and powders, add wine and oil, leaving it so until the fifth day; then release it, and care for the wound with bandages and ointments, allowing the head to swell evenly, and give the patient dry meat with a little moisture until the limb is supported and healthy.
And another way of incision is to observe where the head of the abscess and the assembly of water are, for neither always in front nor behind, nor always to the right, nor always to the left.
Cut then where the abscess head is and the accumulation of water, and do as you can with it; but be careful not to cut an artery; watch for blood flowing freely, so that the patient may die from bleeding and evacuation of fluids.
To restore
When there occurs in anyone a disease called "catarra" affecting either the eyes or the genitals, and the illness is longstanding, and medicinal treatment proves ineffective, then the final remedy is to use cautery by sealing off those two arteries.
It is therefore necessary that when covering the eyes, the patient raises their head; afterward, cleanse it with a coarse cloth until the arteries are visible, then extracting the collar of the neck with one cloth; next observe where the veins lie, and both eyelids should be behind each ear with few being replaced; then sign the eyelashes, then seal both eyes tightly with two strips of fine gauze until reaching the bone beneath it.
And if you see, place the strips under the artery and seal above, cutting as two fingers across its width.
And when the vein is opened, continuously pour out the blood.
And if the artery is not felt when touched, then measure the amount of space for .iii. fingers, and tie it up to the bone; and what is necessary with blood put out is .vj. spoonfuls, plus or minus a bit according to what the sick person can endure, and the replenishment of the artery; then examine the wound: if there remains no fistula on the bacteria, if an incision does not bleed, then tighten the wound and close it, and apply ointment until it is healed.
so they dole que les beniz; s qu’m l’s; Et: LVoir ce bon magine.
When a young migraine occurs and severe catarrh due to moisture from tears and heat in temples and old headache and similar things arise, it is treated by methods of medical care and all this does not help them; we extract the arteries of the temples and cauterize, as we have described.
And the method of extracting them is that the patient makes his temple hairs stand on end, and listens to the artery which opens in the temple, as it opens well by its pulsation, but it heals very slowly like in some men who are excessively cold; and if it heals, the patient strains off any cloth from their neck, then rubs the area with a rough cloth, and applies hot water until the artery manifestly appears again; then take the spatula of which this form is:
Then lightly scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then turn it up at the edges with pincers, and separate well from all sides by towels; and if the artery is fine, twist it with the point of a pin, then cover that part according to the quantity of its two heads. For if it's not covered, none will heal properly throughout.
And treat the bleeding of wounds for .vj. days until .iij.; and if the sinew is large, it should be tied in two strong layers of sturdy silk thread so that decay does not occur at the seam of the wound, and blood flow returns; then remove any excess between the two ties at the same time, and then, if you see fit, cauterize with a surgical caustic up to the bone as long as the head is cut off; this is the healing work, provided the sickly does not have fever and they are of warm complexion.
For caustic treatment is helpful to finish ulcers; this is why it's more useful for ulcers. When extracting arrows, fill the cavity with plenty of soft cotton and cover it well; and when you remove them, be cauterized with dry medicines that produce charcoal, and bandages, until they are healed; and if there is an artery, do as you work on it with a cautery, or fill the cavity with vitriol and strain it with your hand to make the wound close; and if no salve is present, place your gauze there until it hardens, and pour cold water on it until it freezes, and remove as much as necessary; and more easily in artery removal of cauterize the vein by this cauterizer sharp with .ij parts, but the sharper to keep them longer. When excessive farting occurs, it retains less warmth. And it must have between the two knives a wide space, and then when you have tied up both ends, heat the iron until hot enough to reach the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and they should be pulled apart at the eyes because this is not the proper way for this cauterization in all cases; and this is the form of the cauterization:
he.
When tears from the eyes flow into veins near the forehead's skull base, and medicine provides no relief when applied there, you see the patient's face reddening and feeling as if of tremors; and it is oily and moist enough that the hair on the eyebrows stick out, becoming hot from tear heat, requiring this treatment.
And they called the ancient "bruised cure", so perform on the patient with this ailment by hair at or near the forehead, then make three evenly spaced incisions across the width of the forehead; one incision should run from above down to below, and the other two are each as wide as two thumbs beyond the eyebrows. Avoid cutting arteries along those two sides. Place your hand away from the continuation of the jawbones, with each wound being three fist-widths apart.
From the incision that extends from the temple to the second incision; and scrape off all flesh that is between the two openings, up to the entire sac which is above the bone, then make another cut from the middle of the second incision to the other end, and then remove this spatulary.
If you insert the instrument called "culletail" into the first opening, and it is very sharp on one side, yet soft on the other side and not cutting, this is its form. And direct the cutting side toward the outer skin at the root, and the soft side toward the bone, and insert it until you reach the middle opening. Then remove all vessels that come from the head through the eyes as long as the incision is continuous up to where opens into the flesh, then make another cut in the middle opening to the other end; then withdraw the blood equally, and express there for the taken blood; then put a tent of fine cotton in each opening, and cover with damp linen cloths soaked in wine and oil and ointment, and ensure that abscesses do not form; and on the third day replace the ligature, and treat with large quantities of clean water decoction, then apply basilicum ointment mixed with oil rosso (red), and other remedies used for wounds, until healed.
Doubly remedy by rejoining them again
When they come from hardened catarrh habitually, and you see the eyes swollen and small, impairing vision, with burning pus; and hair falls out, and chiefly at the forehead there is great pain, and malaise causes sneezing; thus by these incidents, one knows that those matters and such catarrhs do not come from a single vein, but rather they cure where it is, as this.
And it is that you command the patient to raise his forehead, then make a large cut just over the forehead; and begin from the incision near the left temple to the right temple, up until the bone; and withdraw your hand from the nerves of the temps when they move at eating. And once the bone is revealed, let all blood soak into a sponge, then wrap cotton between the two lips of the incision, after which linen bandages are placed; then apply dressings smeared with vinegar and oil, and guard against hot abscesses. When it has been removed (the bone), you should rub the area until flesh starts to regenerate, then treat it with emollients that promote healing by means of charcoal paste.
In this manner: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts wax, and make an ointment; apply it to these wounds for healing completely.
For the stopping of ear bleeding
All that comes out of the ears is one of four things: grains, animals, stones from minerals or similar substances; seeds such as beans, peas, and lentils; or fluids flowing like water easily and similarly formed substances.
the U bys and her toud the ben any other; (e tder.
If it jumps up at the pinchers, that's good; if not, arrange for delicate extraction of a small double layer; and if it does not come out this way, make an eel bait with a headpiece or aperture in the ear canal, and plug what is around the channel with soft wax so that the ends cannot enter with the pliers; then properly treat it, as often comes up just as we have said; and if it does not come up in this manner, grasp where it enters, and place some instrument at a point to do so, and put a bit of cotton around; then press gently on the wart or whatever it may be, and remove with pliers. If it does not jump up after all these methods we have mentioned, quickly make an incision in the ear where pus is likely to come out and cause swelling; then the method of cutting is such that you first cleanse the patient's head, and draw a small amount of blood according to its strength, then seat the patient between your hands with their head tilted upwards, and make a tiny incision at the base of the ear near fat or whatever it depends; and let the cut be as round as a crescent until you reach the pus, then drain it as much as possible according to your ability, and suck out hastily into your mouth; cure until it is healed. And if there are bourses curez as the mal a lesquals it is not to be ablet de paroleis de semblanz que tu laie estant en ce li leu; et si qu’il iraignee seum espiens, et iri eulc.
Make an incision in the grain of salt. But do not attempt this when you think the granules are moist due to earwax, until you have done it many times; then extract them with delicate pincers and a sucker, as we have said, so that the extractions may be aligned.
Therefore when the water has thus gone into the ear, it behoovebo that the patient use sneezing of first condition, and plug the ear with soft cotton. And let them be in this same place where the moisture is present. If it comes out forcefully at once, that's good. But if not, then take multiple pieces according to the length and lightness of your mustache and scrape a bit over fire; and put one end of the patient's ear into his mouth, and let it pass through there. From another side, pierce another stone on top of the stone that is in the ear; and do not stop moving stones from one to the other until all moisture has gone out completely, thus it will come out fully. And if you see this: take a reed, put one end into the ear, and burn the other end with fire until the thinner reed is burnt; then make another pair of joncs as we have said in the chapter on stones.
In the extraction of the stone, if it is of small size, like a flea and suchlike thing, treat it as we have said in the section on division; but if it is of larger size that can be felt, prepare for extraction with pincers; and it's easier to remove those things that are in the ear.
In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and treatment of distillations, if the remedy does not help, it is necessary to examine the ear in sunlight; if there are no worms, use fine forceps, and if they do not appear, take the cone-shaped instrument that lies within.
And it should be narrow at the bottom and wide at the top. Then insert the finer end into the ear according to the amount of pain the patient is suffering, then move it gently throughout the entire cone; do this often until all worms are expelled. If they refuse to come out, stuff cotton around the cone as I have described for stones; and if they still don't emerge as we have discussed, administer distillations that the ancients tested in the excision of worms, and you will find them or treat with distillations. Distill oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument, which is shaped like this:
It should be made of silver or brass with small holes at the bottom and openings for distillation; and to press the distillation through a well-made copper instrument so that you can do it, then take some absorbent wool and wrap it around the tip quickly with cotton; then pour your oil or juice into the cone, and place as much of your medicines in the cone, and keep them in the ear; then put all the cotton through the wick, and press firmly until the oil is distilled or steamed from the ear; and feel it relieves the pain within, and the distillations are heated so on fire.
From plugging of the ears
No child is born without any protrusion in the ears; and this same thing happens to men by plugging of wounds or objects inserted within the ear, and such blockages occur at times completely inside the ear so that one cannot see it; sometimes there is no discharge from the opening, and the sight remains clear.
Therefore, if one cannot see it coming from inside, it is of serious healing in various dispositions, and where one can see, you must place the patient's ear to the sun; and look within: if you see an obvious swelling on this spot of skin with its shape:
the fact by  (and: a certainlys; they do so that d; this after their. Is n's
If the swelling is prominent in the ear, take a fine sponge and fan it slightly by the fire, then place it on the body of the ear. If you feel the swelling causing the patient to become dizzy upon hearing, gently pierce (it) and be careful not to press on the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the hole, and grease with Egyptian ointment.
Do nothing for a day until the wound is healed, then take a tent and grease it with rosewater, and powder with vitriol paste; if you see swelling of the ear, make sure to change the tent and move another moistened tent made from rosemary oil and wax until the inflammation has subsided; then heal as long as it remains healthy.
And if bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge and wrap it in cold water, then place it on the ear, and apply other treatments to remove blood loss which are based on distillation techniques.
From the collection of papers
This althelul that comes in papers when they are moist and dry, it is necessary to stretch them with tongs and pliers, and tie the stem of a catheter at its roots; then put the powdered mercury on their place.
And if it does not come off, so the subtil lenticular cautery burn, and after incision heal well; and often they are repeated, as nothing remains on their roots; and when they are burnt by fire, those roots dry out and do not return.
Of the grease
Many times come to parchment from the eyes things that appear greasy in shape and hardness, and thus this disease is called "drizzle," consisting of moisture large on both sides; its appearances are: be aware if drizzle moves from one side or another, it's a light matter to know; make them then wide apart, then gently scrape each part, then take with forceps and cut. If you do not seal without piercing the parchamois slightly, nothing will trouble the patient; and if the fissure is large, assemble it in a stitch, and heal until it's sound; but if small, do not make an effort, for the ointments restore it quickly and bring comfort.
And if drizzle descends into the depths of the ear toward the upper part, invert the parchment, and gather drizzle with forceps, cut and press from both sides; and if the parchment is pulled away by incision, it harms nothing; and when drizzle is cured, pour oil of salt water into it and heal the place that brings comfort until the patient is sound.
of the fat from the eyes
This is a fat that forms in the folds of paper, which often occurs in children but also affects some adults; it greatly irritates their eyes, causing them to have catarra at morning time and they cannot look at sunlight because tears rush to their eyes; therefore they lie on their faces downwards, sleep with lids closed, and have a film covering their moist eyelashes which comes from the exinach that is felt when pressing around the eye area.
The manner of treatment is that the patient places their head on a towel; then they take a linen cloth and make it into a circle according to the amount of exinach from each part, placing it over them; press with both hands apart so that the exinamch gathers within the circle; then make an incision in the sharp spatula wide enough as the wound made on vein's skin; and cut until you reach the exinach. In various positions comes exinach from the incision, depending on the shape of a piece of white fatty tissue.
Remove the entire piece of ragged cloth between your two fingers towards the end, and turn your hand to the right and left until it is scattered; and ensure you do not push near the tear, that you do not come with all the torn tissue up to the hair, that you do not pull.
And if the nail does not protrude at the beginning of the tear, slightly lift the tear as it appears; then remove it as we have said, moisten with rags and water, and place on the wound, and bandage securely.
And for those who grind the nail and place it to corrupt that moisture which has remained. Then treat until it is healed. And if there comes an abscess at the wound, treat with cooling plasters until it is healed.
From the hairs of paper
When hairs from paper sprout that are not natural and become aged, they harm the eyes, leading to familiar types of diseases such as tearings and softening of the papers and pus, until it causes destruction; and the treatment is according to four methods: by cauterization with fire alone, or by medicinal ague in accordance with what precedes or chapter on cauterization, and done either through incision and suturing or through plugs, as I will say.
It is necessary that you place the head of the patient in your right hand; then turn the paper with its hair side towards your left; if it turns, that's good; if not, pierce with a needle through every thread across; and be either by the margin of the paper or where the hair grows near these hairs, and draw one thread across all the paper, turning to the edge; then make an incision in the area below the paper, away from the misplaced hairs, up to the entire width of the forehead; then extract a thread, and place a small tent made of cotton wool and gauze underneaturess the paper, then press against the paper with a figure resembling an enche (a funnel), as in the bellows of myrtle, but it is necessary that the shape be according to the quantity you see elevating the paper that is pinned together.
If the task requires great quantities of paper as per how much it has been moistened; then make a cut throughout the entire length between the two lines that you signed, starting from the large rim down to small; and let one of the fissures be near natural hair growth in the thickness of a root, then insert the needle into one of the angles with the edge facing upwards, then scrape off entirely; then stitch both edges together using a single thread on a fine linen filament, remove any blood, and trim excess threads at each eyebrow as needed. If you do so, otherwise do not worry about it, leave the suture and threads for three or four days; later treat the wound without applying drying and tightening substances, because the paper becomes alive with the healing of the wound and its joining together but the stitch is movable (as old ones say), and this procedure lacks fear.
and it is that you mark the paper with a shape resembling the quill of myrtle, as we have discussed, using three needles pierced according to the form shown here:
Then take the shape resemble this way on which you use then are pierced so forthwith these cire afore that the of it is shaped according to quiset, pour.
If you cannot hold the forceps and the object is not equal in size, take a needle or one with thread, and insert it near the figure. Then insert another thread close to the large hole, and the second thread next to the small one, and bring together both threads evenly; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all skin over which you have sutured, as we have described, then sew the two edges of the wound closed, and treat until it is healed; and if an abscess comes from your incision, soothe with cerote and similar ointment.
However, there is no instance where the hair on the parchment has been converted: if it becomes necessary to use what we have described about incisions; but stitching both sides is more artificial.
The treatment of abscesses is as follows: and it is that you convert the paper and fold them inward according to what I have said, and then make two cuts by skillful art, and two fine ligatures as long as the paper and the width of the spatula are; and tie both heads with both threads; then assemble one and the other subtly on top of what is underneanno
If it is delayed and the sack lacks strength, then treat until it heals; and when the wound is suddenly closed and raised paper covers it so hairs can't grow, then you shall make the shape of two stems as per this figure and quantity of length and width.
The operations are such that you take a fine needle and thread some delicate silk filament, then join the edges and carefully stitch both together; making the lengths of the threads one palm long; then arrange in sequence another thin silk filament briefly, and stitch along the first thread; then place the patient's head on your lap so that under sunlight the operation can be seen clearly because it is a subtle and fine procedure, then push the needle through all the length at the root of the hair pushed against it, pierce the paper hastily as you pull over the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the filament, and insert that hair into the filament if there are one or two or three or more; then remove your hand until the threads lie flat on the paper with the natural hair.
And if the filament is treated and the hairs don't come forth with it, you will retrace the filament from underneath all of the thread that you have arranged, until the filament comes forth clearly to your sight; then you shall trace both the filament and the thread, and let the oil be left loose for two or three days, until the hair hardens in its place and grows a tuft on top; and if the hairs are short, accompany one long natural hair with that which is left as it was grown, till it lengthens and then loosened.
From the corruption of oil
When this disease called "aleacrati" or oil corruption occurs in the eye, there are two ways it happens: naturally and unnaturally. It can occur due to a sudden wound, surgery, or cauterization, as well as similar causes.
The method of treating it involves cutting the suture, freeing the edges of the eye, and placing linen swabs inside until clean; one must not use anything in its treatment that dries and constricts. If you do this, the disease worsens more than before; however, if you work with softening things such as fenugreek; and rose water or high-quality water and linseed oil are boiled, and ointments of melted myrrh, apply these to any of the oils, and wrap it in a swab.
And the essence of your care is to ensure it does not change entirely from its previous form; and these treatments we have mentioned are only directions for this illness so that it does not return in the same way as before.
From the wound caused by an arrow hitting fat or oil-rich flesh, where swelling is more likely to occur.
This illness known as "axacrati," is both natural and accidental in origin. The accidents come from wounds, cuts, cauterization, and similar matters; the course of this procedure is that you should take an awl with a double thread, attach it to the flesh at the wound site, pierce through from left to right so that both threads reach each nostril. Then stretch the skin over the entire needle, and wrap it with a spatulum (spreading tool) of appropriate width.
When the alignment of the bone returns as it should, it is good; if not, take a saw and place it in the crack, then realign the bone, creating two fractures or cracks within the bone; the head of the shoulder lies at the angles of the incision that you have made, so arrange them such that when joined they are as straight as a letter with one "tail" (like an "i"); then remove that piece, according to the amount needed to support and replace it, like supporting the bone, then join the two separated parts with a thread from wool; then apply the care we have mentioned regarding softening medicines and bandages until healed.
If the disease comes from a fracture or incision or cauterization, it is necessary that you make a clean cut below the hairline of the paper, and according to what has been said above; then treat between the two sides of a tent as I have mentioned; the treatment must be done according to the form of the disease, for its shape is very diverse, and skilled masters adapt devices in all ways that can return the figure to its natural form; similarly with the sickly people, based on what needs treatment and medications in various positions.
The matter of this skin as it should be treated and administered according to needles for different treatments and a variety.
When this welding occurs in such a way that the paper above is soldered with white lead, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it must be pierced at the tip of a rasor beneath the paper, lifting it up; and you extend it using tweezeburners, until you scrape off what's attached to the delicate spatulum, ensuring it is neither too hard nor too sharp so that the patient cannot endure if the spatulum becomes too soft or blunts the oil. Make your incision carefully, scraping away the adhered assembly as lightly as possible so that the paper regains its natural shape; and cleanse all of that assembled area without using dirty water, instead use fresh water with collier, then insert a linen pad between the paper and oil, placing soft woolen cloth in abundance above. After three days of washing it daily with pure collier until it is healed.
From the claw of the oil (referring to removing impurities or excess matter from ointments)
When the untient li on li eulz est le ointments qui sont les poignet ele oin a cuide pire, si s cuite, quant ils est cuidre que uis une pliau seigne la pere et nonse as toutes l’est.
The method of incision is such that the patient places their head in your hands, then work the eyelids; remove paper from your hand, then clamp with the nail clipper for double folding, and extend above. Then take a needle, put a hair from a horse, or goat, or cow, and a strong thread; bend the tip of the needle slightly and insert into the eyelash, pierce through the entire needle, tie one end with the thread and stretch upwards, scrape all the hair along the edge of the eyelash that tightens around the pore until it meets the skin, then trim any remaining root on the rim delicately and gently, so that after the incision, the body does not produce tears as usual; never ever extend only the eyelash with the thread, but also the filament, as we have said. Then scrape away all the softness of which this is the form:
Ensure that the incision does not touch or tear the skin and that the pore is not pierced; after the incunction, pour some sealed oil mixed with litargire into it, and leave until the next day; then treat as necessary until healing occurs.
And li chauz, puis the a ungle, and s. The following instructions, as nargite; et la ou lesse tu le pence. Then doet l’arest parfait li de rouges ane se vient est d argie te oint heal of the une gile, then c et pointe itt ce que unguinisle, si esoil; then, and les m jus le ting, ou. And replete eue la hooit li piet l’ocel, for un peu:
And raise the nail with subtlety, and if you see that it does not diminish and has spread therein, squeeze from your mouth into the oil collyrium made of litargire and red cordial syrup, and stuff the oil until the next day; then resume the other work according to this same method, until it is completely healed.
If nothing is contrary in the oil, as with a hot abscess, then let it break and first treat the hot abscess until it is healthy, then resume the work as before, until it is fully healed.
And if the appearance of flesh by the ear is greatly hindered in the oil with great harm, suspend it at a time, and cover part but not all, to avoid blood flowing from the eyes; then squeeze into the red collyrium made of litargiren.
From the arrow shot above the pupil
For some men, an arrow turns red once shot above the pupil. It covers the pupil and is restrained by papers and turned backward, appearing like a rose made of balustrade. The work follows such that the patient places their head in tension, then they operate on the arrow, completely removing any protruding parts with suitable instruments using force; after that, peel off the first layer, shaving all the way to the end, and ensure not a single hair remains at the surgical site. Then make an incision like we described in the fingernail and minor forces section where you remove the nail part. This is as shown by the form after this treatment.
And when the incision is complete and all arrow parts are removed, apply oil of seal or distilled red wax and similar corrosive medicines to the area, placing cotton with beeswax if necessary, ensabre so it's covered completely; if nothing remains, and the skin sores, treat the hot ulcer with things that calm ulcers. If you have doubts about a hot ulcer, leave the oil application and cure the ulcer with cooling agents until healed, then return to the surgical site as long as it is healthy, thereby properly placing charred matter in the oil by this method.
However, it is necessary for you to heal the weakness of each oil from natural causes and those from accidental causes in surgical work; and do not put your hand into any of these surgeries until you see that this limb has been affected by the procedure.
From veins, through the eyes
Red veins that are covered over the skin and impair vision and weaken the eyes. Therefore, when you first look at the oil in which sebum is, it is also thickened, and there is no other illness besides this sebum; then proceed as follows: instruct the patient to place his head on your shoulder, then gently tie up those veins along their entire length according to your wisdom, making them twice as subtle according to this form:
And there are two cones made by degrees in one body according to this form:
Then make those vessels weak subtly, and let the blood flow hour by hour until you see that these vessels are removed from the body; and ensure that you do not bleed at the tips of the stumps, and perform this procedure in the midday hour before the sun, and be very fervent in your work so that only those weakened vessels remain; and when you have done this, distil into the neck vein yellow and red to corrupt what is lodged inside the belly.
And if you cannot extract all of that within the hour, apply an ointment on the vein with things soothing to ease the pain and let it rest for a few days until the pain is relieved and certainty of heat subsides, then resume in this manner as long as it remains healthy; and this is the form of forces:
Of a fistula of oil
They call "arissati" fistulas: when you treat it with cauterization and medicine according to what I have said before, and it is not healed, then in it there is a trick whereby one cuts into the abscess above which it must die, draining all moisture that is present until the bone is exposed.
, and desu is ire it the s, ce que est arse of this medicine lium, then to treat, tu cture the m nus in a pest onct. But that you have soe de lesme; quid ustissolet, et le matrimes est ointron lissu d ses li duces de la, but.
And place it on the location of the decayed bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press with your hand a bit until you know that corruption is removed; and do this once, then restore its position with medicinal dressings.
If the wound is closed and pus appears, and the body of the bowels is hardened, remaining so for forty days, without reopening or forming an abscess, if no other symptoms occur, know that it is healed; otherwise, there is no other remedy but to return the fistula to its opening at the nose bridge as follows: and it is that you open the bone a second time with iron, and with aggravating medicines, and when it's opened take a drill according to this form, and let the head of iron be at three angles, and the shaft be tapered to the top as you see here:
Then place it on the bone near the temple, and keep your hand away from the oil a bit, then turn the drill through until it pierces the bwole and you feel the patient's discomfort if they hold their hand over their nose; then restore its position with dry medicines as I have shown you, and when pus appears and the bowels harden, go to the nose; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
From dislocation of the joint
If the bone is fractured all over and there is no displacement or thinning of the nerves, it should be treated; first you bandage the patient, then apply cups to suck blood without causing harm, using leeches if needed, then treat with a poultice made of acacia, aloe, incense, and sarcocolla. Then strain the joint, use linen bandages soaked in wine, doubling each one into four layers based on how much is needed; then apply them consecutively. Repeat bloodletting without causing harm with cups, remove the poultice and leave the joint strained day and night until the ligaments soften significantly; then remove the strain completely. Remove the poultice after a day and a night, if you see the bone healing, it's good; if not, reapply linen bandages, poultices, and cups to suck blood until sane again.
There seems to be an error in your last input as "de l’issue de la vusine" doesn't make sense. However, if you meant "d’une issue du drapage", it would mean 'from the bandaging'. Could you please clarify or correct my mistake? Here is a translation of the text:
When dislocation occurs in a joint that has been opened and appears to be filled with small particles like grains of resin, which is visible; then you should examine the area closely, as procedures involve inserting a needle at the root of the affected part up to a certain depth, followed by inserting another needle or using a doubled thread from the edge downwards; and puncture it, leaving the first needle according to its position. Then cover the place with the two-threaded piece and tie one end around the vein, securing it tightly; then remove the needle and apply a moistened bandage abundantly over it; leave it until the thread detaches from the vein, then treat the area with soothing remedies until the wound is healed; never should the wound be constricted by the vein at any part of a circle made of cloth, as long as it remains healthy.
And if the eye takes on a significant appearance, then carefully puncture with a fine needle that enters from near the edge of the oil (vein), and draw out clear moisture and lower the eyelids, causing them to open; then remove it until it is healed.
For if they are not completely healed.
This disease known as "alcunnati" is not the bow that appears in oil, resembling water flowing downward; it isn't just water. The manner of its appearance during treatment is to have the patient sit on a specially prepared seat and then take hold of the head with both hands until you see the bow coming towards your eyes; then let it be fixed, so that the light does not descend or scatter, and observe the things as they usually should; if they do not come down, know it is water, and if the alignment of the bow isn't set correctly as we have said. Then have the patient sit between your hands again, take a fine spatula and touch the corneous tissue gently with its tip along the continuum connecting to the cornea until the bow arises; when it has risen, let water mixed with honey flow into warm oil or boiled fenugreek in water or honey, then heal using another remedy until it is healthy.
of waters from the oil
laissis: qui sont les maint; Do nots elles le ;fferes qu’e est sce piz andre ce des:
After resting a little and the blood rises again along its second course, insert the bone with the instrument, and when it is firmly fixed and does not rise, gently extract around your hand bit by bit; then return some marble mercury briefly. Then put on more of the same substance wrapped in oil-soaked cloth and abundant ointment, and bind it with the healing oil. As we do now, those who are of our time apply a generous amount of comfrey poultice.
And if mercury cannot enter the bone due to its hardness, as there are individuals with excessively hard bones, it is necessary to use an instrument called 'alberit', of which this is the shape:
And then you should pierce the conjunctiva only slightly and not too deep, but just thinly, then pour in mercury as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient an agreeable bed, where he can sleep on his back in a darkened room; and let him be restrained from all movements, and feed him with light foods, and do not allow his head to move left or right or up or down, and tie them securely as per their natural disposition until the third day; then release them into that same darkened place, and examine his vision, and show him various things, and then put back the bandage on until the seventh day; and it is not necessary to do this during the hour of treatment or after incision now, but should you make it at that blood rise quickly.
If abscesses arise, remove the pus within seven days and treat with a compress soaked in a heating solution; when it is calmed, uncover the eyes and place an eyepiece over them for one day to shield from light, and reside in that dimly lit house. Then gradually leave the house bit by bit, and turn into your usual self; know that no students should meddle in this case.
And one of ours from Yrach told us that in this land there is an occurrence of being poisoned by the breath of almonds, through which water turns into blood, but I have never seen any such thing on our land, nor do I read about it in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a novel thing.
And these are likenesses to the forms of almond poisoning, as those who do not know them may see them; and they occur primarily like this:
And there are heads of this same subtlety, and the last in three sharp angles.
Of the fat on the neck
Of the mil a de l'en liquels esoies bours tuit et. ici les nus il est en qui la le coquite quelles pensez les anest à toutsion, d’a ewe si elle ou tu esprend: ne serfos.
And if there remains any thing that cannot be closed, treat it with all subtle and gentle remedies, so that nothing is left; and if the swelling rises or abscesses appear, apply heat as needed; and if malignant abscesses occur, quickly cauterize until they are bandaged securely and have lost all pus before placing oils, wine, or vinegar.
If the treatment fails and moisture reaches up to the palate, ensure they are unharmed; and if moisture does not stop as it should, know that there is an abscess in the bone above, thus remedies cannot be applied without cutting: then you must insert a piece of linen thread slightly thickened, which has been soaked with our hands, leaving enough space between each one; and place the patient's head on the end of the filament as far as possible, and draw in an odorous manner until it comes out through the nostratury inside the mouth; this is often done for children at school, and it is a simple task for someone who knows how to do it; then hold the head that emerges from the nostril with one hand, and the other head that comes out of the mouth with the other hand, and know each one as we are the thread. Do this until you know that our filaments have removed all abscesses, then pull out the threads, drain any blood, moisten them with Egyptian ointment, and return them to the nostrils as before; do so for three days or more, until the ointments dissolve everything left behind by the abscess; and then insert a cat's bladder in the nostrils for an unknown number of days until healed, and if needed dry medicines, use them. This is the form of the instrument used to purge the head, which allows distillation of oils and medicines into the nostril:
And it que quiau lainee cheveit dechies est cest, puis tuil oinquant est le vains et semblant une eul liquate lesmeut ousque cheur les mote puisse enlors a chauche ouli.
From the chariot over the nose
Many times a disease called "telul" arises at the top of the nose, and it grows and becomes quite noticeable; therefore, you must perform coping from the beginning, and remove the entire growth with forceps, then place a cautery or burning medicine over it; if not removed promptly as it grows large, be wary if it is hard, has a strange color, and poor sensation: do not touch it with iron as it is an encrusted boil, because when you cope once, great harm comes to the patient; and if the boil is from severe pain, not of unusual color, and you see that you can fully remove it, empty your fears and perform coping without worry, curing dryness and tightening conditions.
When the nose has been cut (operated) and healed
When solutions for continuation are found in one of these cartilage works, it benefits little, even though some men do. Therefore, as soon as this occurs to any person, check if the wound is fresh with all its blood; then sew together the two edges, and treat until they heal; and if the edges have dried on both sides, ensure that you scrape all parts of their flesh until they heal, then bring the two edges together, bind them tightly, powder between layers of dragon's blood dust, add incense, place a piece of frankincense over it to sear through itself, and treat with ointment until it is healthy.
The way of suturing is that you assemble the closure: either with needles as I have told in stomach suture, or with thread as I have shown you.
For abscesses on lips
Occasionally there arises an abscess of a hard stone-like appearance, smaller and larger in size; then you must return the edges, and divide it on either side with a pincer, treating each part separately; after making the incision for vitriol boils, until the wound is closed; and finally heal them easily, and treat the place dry until it is healthy.
From decay of gums
Often arises decay on the gums that the ancients called "albulus"; you must support it with pincer, and cut at its root, and let blood flow or other pungent and drying powders; then apply vitriol incision on the place, or if decay reappears after incision, and many times this happens, and the cutting is repeated: it does not return after cauterization; and these are the forms of sores to cover.
Of swelling
At no time are they gathered at the top of the gums, within the mouth between the gums, which are ugly and rough; also at no time are their teeth black and yellowish-green and worms, until corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth become foul; it is necessary that you make them sit between your hands, and their eyes be in your holy hand, and pull out the teeth or scraps as they appear, so long as nothing remains; thus do blackness and greenness, and yellowing and other discolorations, until they are healed; and if what is taken at the first cause is good, that's well; but if not, resume on the second day and later, until you have all removed; and know that teeth require various forms of medicaments to cure them, according to how the work shows it, because those rakes from which one suffers deficiency at the gums have different shapes than those used between the gangs; and these shapes and others are with you prepared.
It is necessary when curing teeth to remove their pain as quickly as you can, for it must not be delayed at all; because this is a matter of utmost urgency that one does not have an excuse to delay the extraction. Then when the patient is constrained to suckle, it is necessary that you are certain about the teething. Often the pain troubles the child, and they think it's an open or closed tooth; then they milk the gum; yet in any case the pain does not depart by this, until the evil is gone within them, as we have already tried with such patients; and when you are well certain about the teething, it should be scraped around the tooth thoroughly and strongly to protect the gums on all sides. Then move it with your fingers or with delicate tweezebrs intermittently until it is properly aligned, then firmly secure the tweezers; and let the head of the jaw remain in its healthy position between your joints, ensuring that it does not move.
After properly extracting the tooth without fracturing it, and if it does not come out easily, take any of these remedies and gently put them inside from each side as you did before. And if the root is pierced and mashed, it is necessary that you fill it with gauze where the holes are; and carefully use tweezers so that it does not break while extracting; and work very skillfully around the gum to remove the tooth.
And, mais les a los li rente qui est riens ; et par la maude coultee le s’a bonne so que il est enor le, nos eus rele le chenir l'ai n'est l'esprend, quant ils es de ce ceste quoi.
The shapes of the strangulations, where one must move the joints first, have pointed tips and large knobs, which do not double when you pull on the teeth; and these are the forms:
And they should have large members so that they do not bend when pulled, and be made of well-crafted iron, and have teeth to hold them in place.
from the roots of the joints the ou la qu; they that. The sethe s, and tigu  (pui; a ces sont by his pressme tirent there. And how far; I:<small; and to be
If the roots do not wish to come out with all efforts, it is necessary that you uncover the bone entirely around the root, and place the instrument called "althali," which is an iron key-shaped instrument.
And let it be large and sturdy so that it does not break, and if the root comes out through this, it is good. If not, use all other instruments which come in various shapes as follows:
And if you help with this instrument that has two handles, here is its form:
And of other things like those before regarding gums, and this instrument that seems like large pincers, which has the following form:
And this instrument must not break easily, and be aware that there are many instruments for gums; and also other instruments, which cannot be counted. The wise masters of medicine cleverly discover their own tools according to the nature of illnesses and diseases they demonstrate, because sometimes old teachings did not include an instrument suitable for all cases due to variety among them; if a bone breaks or in other places, then seek the instruments that are needed as I have told you, and assist with gestures, which has the following form: And they should be large and securely hold the bone, not to escape it but able to grip and extract; then restore the bone with appropriate medicines for such cases, and if there is rot in the bone, and it's small, use all this instrument.
When teeth appear not in their natural position and are unsightly, especially in young women, one must discern if the tooth is crooked or off-center afterward, and cannot be moved left or right; then straighten it. And if accompanied by a cyst with the tooth, take this instrument of which the form is shown here, resembling a small beak, made of iron with a sharp pointed end:
And apply the copious poultice for several days due to the hardness of the tooth and because you do not move others, and if it is possible to file the visible part, file as shown in this form.
And file as with the needles you make; and gently file the tooth little by little until it chips, then smooth at the end using a fine rasping tool, and if the tooth is too sharp and bites the tongue, file the roughness until even, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt speech.
When the teeth are loose
When the teeth become loose due to knocking or falling out, and the patient cannot press on what they chew without it causing pain, you should treat them with binding medicines that do not work; if necessary, bind them with a gold thread, as silver threads turn green and deteriorate, but gold does not change. The thread should be of medium thickness according to the space between the teeth; and if you need to angle the teeth, take the filament and wrap it twice around both healthy teeth, then insert the teeth in between them, doing so for any additional teeth until you securely reach the adjacent healtheen tooth. Then resume covering up to where you started, gently and skillfully pulling with your hand until there is no movement; keep a tight grasp at the root of the tooth to prevent it from escaping. Next, cut off the thread with pliers and reattach it, placing the teeth back between the healthy ones, ensuring they do not catch on the tongue; then leave them as narrow as possible for as long as necessary, and if they loosen or the thread breaks, restrain them again with a new filament. If it remains in place, it will serve its purpose throughout its life, maintaining the shape of the teeth and the alignment between the two healthy ones, and those you added:
And when the tooth falls out, reset it as freshly mentioned; do not interfere with anyone who is not wise and patient, and never shape it like a wolf's bone; place it back where there is a deficiency, restrain as previously described, and it will remain in position for long periods.
Of copper the ligament of the tongue
At no time is this ligament which comes from under the tongue or nature, in such a way as to be made so; or by accident of a quickly healed wound; and the workings are such that you operate on the mouth with the patient's head untouched, and lift the tongue; then cut the nervous cord wide enough so that the tongue is dislodged from its place, and if there is any hardness or knots within it, and this is of a quickly healed wound, then you twist off the lump and cut along the width as needed; and ensure that the incision is not too large for the artery below; and after you have done so, raise an eyelet of rose water and ease oil, or cold water, then place linen under the tongue; and apply a nightly poultice to the eyelids that they may close. And if bleeding occurs again, put saltpeter powder over the wound; and if it does not stop, cauterize with a tattooing iron which is good for this; then treat as required until healed.
And if you see it to be colored or black or hardened, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for this is a cancer; and if it is receding towards blisters, and there is moisture, then pour on the salve, and apply an ointment subtly, and remove it from both sides; and if it persists after your operation, cover with vitriol powder until healed, then return to your original work as long as you treat everything thoroughly; then raise the eyelet of soothing oil and calming substance, and treat other wounds until healed.
From abscesses of the throat
At no time come to the throat bumps that are called "godath", and they properly are the two almonds, and when you treat them as we have said in the division, if they do not heal well, take care: if they are abscesses of little sense and thin color, do not touch with iron. And if they are red and the root is large, do not touch with iron, also for the flow of blood; but let them grow until they are ripe, and then you will break them, or it might split on its own; and if they are pale in color and the roots are fine, prepare the instrument to cover, but first check if the abscesses rest calmly and are soothed. Then make the patient sit facing the sun with their eyes open, have him work his mouth, and have his tongue pressed between your hands with all the instrument; and it should be of silver or thin iron just like a knife:
Can you press the tongue with all this instrument and see the abscess? Take the needle and insert it into the almond, and pull out more than you can; then do not draw anything from the threads or sinews with it, but cap the instrument as in its form, which seems like a pair of forces; however, the head is bent, one end to another, and are very sharp, made of either untempered iron or fine.
And if you do not have this instrument with tongs, use a spatula of which here is the form:
And you shall have a sharp blade on one side and another name on the other; and when you extract one of the almonds, then extract the other in the same manner, and after making an incision gargle the patient with hot water, and with vinegar and honey, and if bleeding occurs, then gargle the patient with boiled pomegranate peel juice or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is closed; then cure it as long as it is healed. And no other abscesses appear in the throat than the two almonds, so remove them thus like the two almondnuts at once.
par le teste n’s asme and the.
Of the eye
When the inflammation spreads to the eye and it becomes swoln and elongated, it is treated 'perpendicularly'; if it is thick and round, treat it as an 'eyeball'. If it has been cured according to what we have said in the division, but the treatment does not help, and you see that the abscess appears calmed, and it is delicate; then it is necessary that you excise it. For there is great danger for the patient. Therefore, when you see this according to the manner I have described, concerning its shape and length, make the patient sit before the sunlight, press his tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier, insert a needle into the eye, pull downward, and excise at .i. of the two spots that I have said in the incision of the .ij. almonds. And it is necessary not to cover more than the excess beyond its natural boundary; for if you cover too much, it will harm the voice, and speech; and after the incision, use what we have mentioned with the two almond spots, and cure until it is healed. And if the patient fears being burned from this excision, then use a device to distract his senses. The manner of the liquid cautery is clear water. It must be so that the patient places his head in your hand, and presses his tongue with the instrument for cauterization we mentioned or 'cautery chapstick', and confit with clear lively salts; then apply the pressure of this instrument as follows:
When the cut with a lore cuit l'estement du coton le chautere lesme ceut que tu mallartemant de la medicine, et saire avec est unt il mete crierleu leue cite; puisque cote la tuit tout li rele ceut.
This treatment is more effective from incision than the cautery; if it is treated with fumigation according to this method, take calamint and yellowwort and origanum and rue and chamomile and arrondeau and similar herbs, and assemble all or some of them in a pot, and let boil gently; and the pots be well stuck together from strong clay, and among the pots there is an instrument fitted according to this method: And it should be of silver or brass, and one of the heads blown into the mouth until the steam rises to the eyes through the funnel, until the eye is thoroughly cooled; then repeat often until drying occurs, and ensure not to do this at the beginning of hot abscess opening as sometimes things happen; and never use it when there's a hot abscess. And if this instrument isn't present, take a funnel and place an eggshell inside its head so that the patient's mouth doesn't get too hot; because an eggshell does not prevent steam from affecting the mouth, and it is good cure together with health.
And many times perform the throat or spine of fish bone or any other thing; so that you see it then remove whatever you can see the instrument to all sunlight on the body. And if it is, do so that patient tongue at the stablié eternamons and placed in the stomach cooked piece meat inside the intestines; perhaps if he comes out of vomit away from thereof and take a sponge or any root lettuce or dry bread soaked and then let as soon it. And after, and then transfixed on herbs deemed is then.
And if the strumens are bent to enter more easily into the throat, raise the head high; and be careful not to touch the epiglote, so it does not move or stick in the bone; adjust so that the patient places the instrument, because it should be loose where there is ease; then push until fully inserted with the entire tool evenly, as long as it remains loose.
And of the swelling in the throat
And then the medicine, puis boute le estrumeau, ceu à tout les sansue l'est. Et se soufet de gorge quie dun autre la sansue tousse mote et cai lou malaide en la ie a que li sansue ties tote cheue s.
If it does not come out as we have said, then smoke the patient with aromatics using the instrument mentioned in the fumigation of oil; do this many times, for it will be easier to move. The method of fumigation is such that you take a pot filled with charcoal embers and cover it with a cloth pierced in the middle, and through that hole insert the shoulder bone of the instrument; then add your fumigation, and have the patient place their head in a container, closing their mouth so smoke does not escape but fills the space. The swelling will now go down, and if it does not come out, repeat the fumigation many times; endure thirst for the patient, eating unclean things and sour substances, without drinking water; then it will be necessary to extract it using this method.
The form of the instrument used to extract the swelling is similar to pincers that can enter into the throat when visible and resembles a bird's beak with roughness for easy insertion, and it has a shape like this:
If the shape should have abrasions; ensure smoothness or the surface where you can easily insert. And if it is rough around the edges are present in any irritated skin area, which would be cleaned with lint. Then remove the swelling by sterilize the equipment, then apply antiseptic and cover before using the instrument, soak as needed; etoilez esterilizide with alcohol:
There are many kinds of abscesses, as remembered hereafter from one and another in this book, and they are varied by perforation and cutting; and it is in two ways: the first manner being the same kind itself, and because it holds moisture. The second manner is for those wounds where there are heads or protrusions on the body. For the abscess of the head is different from that of the foundation, and the abscess of a jointed limb is different from those in joints, each having its own judgment in practice.
If at abscesses one must not pierce until it is fully healed according to its completion; and if with such that require piercing when they are formed, but do not die as per their completion, like an abscess near joints. For when abscesses come near jointangs, leaving them until they become hardened may cause the ligament and nerve of the joint to deteriorate, which is a cause of contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is near the principal member, delaying piercing until it's fully healed will harm the principal member; or if it is near the foundation, then pierce only once it's fully healed and not before as with others, to prevent spreading entirely and becoming a fistula; and cannot be cured over a great period.
And if ite ait quant perciex la tire, si on les maniere est semblant doumes oltieremme. ûs'en que tu ne li aspertenent: et li croistement li apoteme en l’aposteme du mesl; and cest lorz est as pienli ou il a lea tiz qui seiz li chiete, si le metre quant a la percer.
In those cases where there is swelling, it concerns the affected limb. And when boils are found in their place of origin, they should be allowed to drain fully upon completion of digestion as we have said; for if you perforate them too soon, they may spread poison throughout the body and become filled with abundant filth; and sometimes the membranes harden along with deep cavities. And in cases where boils are detected according to the size of the body part needing treatment, this is how it should be approached. For small boils require small punctures and openings; large boils, larger ones, and multiple slits based on the appearance of the size of the boil; and for those cases where it must be enclosed or covered like a blister, once healed to resemble cloth, and if there are such boils that are split into three angles, or as one would treat an umbrella bellows, similar to arrow boils. And in cases where treatment involves making round cuts, various incisions, and appearing similar to punctures.
For those without a head like superfebrile boils on the surface, it is necessary to puncture them easily; and if the boils are large with a significant curve, pierce them but do not remove all of the curve at once, instead, pierce one part; then bandage the boil until the next day, and don't touch any further treatment; repeat this process gradually, each time more carefully, until it is completely drained. Particularly if the patient is weak in strength or a pregnant woman, a small child, or an elderly man, be very cautious with these treatments. Always approach this chapter with great care, and once you have located your boil, cleanse the wound; then check if the size of the wound from the boil is small; and if it's a plain cut, dress it with linen or old cotton bandages; and if it'e large boils and there are many punctures, place bandage on each one so they touch. And if you have pierced part of the skin in the boil and covered it around, then fill it with old cotton or rag threads without moisture, and tie it until the third day; then remove it, and apply ointment until healed.
e the t:
And it is necessary to be known everywhere in the treatment of abscesses: but I have told you how one must proceed before treating an abscess, and here is the chapter.
The sores (les soros) referred to are likely ulcers or lesions on the skin which require careful attention and appropriate remedies according to medieval medical practices.
Small abscesses appear and are managed like wool on sheep, with many similarities; some being greasy and moist like hairs, while others are hard and pearly to the touch without any doubt causing harm by scratching. The treatment of the area involves using an instrument called "entromissoire," from which the form arises thereafter, containing whatever it holds within. If it contains moisture, it exudes above its length. And once the moisture is evaporated, scrape without leaving anything on the hair that held that moisture since it returns as soon as you leave nothing behind; then dip a cotton ball in Egyptian ointment if available; otherwise, use water and salt, and apply to the wound until the next day. And from there, do what is done again at night. Then treat the wound with suitable balm until it becomes healthy; continue this process until you're sure that no new pus remains overnight. If the abscess has a lot of grease, follow these steps along its length; drain all secretions and clean every part, and apply all your treatment of milking the area where it is located; if the tube does something contrary to what I have told you, do as I mentioned earlier. And just like that with an abscess if it's hard and pearly in texture, along with scraping and cleaning thoroughly as described before.
And the swelling above the abscess of a pus-filled sore is easier, for they have less blood in them. And if any of these abscesses or their heads lack moisture, and among these are some like the one I described from an old woman's head; and found the abscess as hard and rough as stone, unable to break it. If someone had struck such a place, they would have made a wound similar to that of a stone. In other abscesses coming or located on heads, whether those arising at the top of children's skulls or near the roots of ears, keep the openings as high and close by for pus to come out; treat them as they should be treated.
Of scrofulas (scrofula)
Of scrofulas often occur on the neck, and near the glands, and sometimes between them, and various ones; and they have a different appearance from their place, as the head and scarlet like the plague; and there are many of them. There is moisture, and some that contain malignant and do not obey health, so in it; and thus the one where you see good condition on the glands, and not too deep, nor go near throat artery or ducts, and does not as much ne adhesive to be, but a little then is it should heal, and them that if is. Of scrofulas, neither here of them; and they do not too thickened so the ones scarlet, you be done like with lame to go on the neck wherefore thou shalt thou I-goe ego et dexor one but neverthought no more than thee should be in it.
And if you open the vein or artery, and it does not allow you to work, then apply vitriol paste or powders that cause bleeding to the wound, compress the wound; and let it be until the abscess is eased and softened, beginning to decay. And when blood has been stopped, return to your task as long as you have completed it; then refer to the appropriate remedy if there are no small scrophules in it, treat and cleanse them. And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, do not cut out that scrofula at its root, but tie off with a strong double thread, let it hang without harm; then dress the wound with fine cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and cure.
And if you cut out the entire scrofula, it is necessary to gather its two lips of the wound and sew them up, ensuring there is no excess due to its size. If it is necessary to cauterize the root, do so as we have said; then cleanse thoroughly. Those scrophules that are full of excess, pierce where they appear open; and pierce similarly as mentioned before, depending on the location, then prepare dressings with ointment and similar substances, preventing it from corrupting what is left of decay; and when the ward has been well cleansed, apply healing salve until it is healthy.
And if it is clean until it to health as treated by: Ailment and you with ailments are gone. If the cured as much that remain, then is heal, do not they infected; apply oint them properly and cleansed after take out of it for enough as done so onght:
The ancients spoke and wrote of throat surgery; however, I have never seen it done in our land, and this is according to their writings.
For those who have throat abscesses, it is necessary that the fissure of the throat called "epiglute" be removed; and this aid cannot be done by these means because all the veins and the source of the patient's great heat are in those with abscesses within their mouth or throat or two limbs. When the disease is in the channel of the warmth, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that comes from strangling.
Then it is necessary, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, that we split from three or four circles or a small slit across, between two circles or by the quantity of the slit in its midline.
And if those eyes are cloudy from the cutting of the epiglottis, there is no change in coloration, and the vessels are long-standing on either side.
And if the master is fearful, then he should extend the skin of the throat to its full length, and cut until it reaches the spine; and avoid the vessels of blood, but if you see anything, then suture the abscess as we have said.
And it is shown by cutting into the muscle of the neck which breaks as it slips out and due to loss of voice.
and leaves an open wound exposed for a time.
And when the time comes where one doubts the strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound at its base and the string tied around the splint; then administer medicines that promote heat until it is safe again.
Until the throat is entirely plugged up, and the patient appears to be near death, and there's no pulse. Then carefully insert a plug into the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe through their mouth, and they will breathe through the wound, thus preventing death.
and they commanded the physicians to leave the wound open until the effects of the illness are gone, which takes three or four days. et:t ce feai.
And I will tell you what I have seen. I saw a maiden took a knife and stuck it in her throat, cutting off part of the esophagus.
And I went to call for help, and found her seemingly as dead.
and the in aiguited byzara: ougt if you m do not dele tus; Prusses f, nor so as it le de l’s.
I swiftly made a cut, stitched the wound, and treated it until it was healed.
and this did not happen to the lady, who remained hoarse for some time before returning to her normal state.
Therefore I say that in treating the epiglottis there should be no fear.
f and heal;
These boils are called "throat hernia," and they are large abscesses with the color of jet black, and occur mostly in women.
And there are two ways to acquire them: natural causes, and by accident; the latter does not have a known origin.
And the accidental cause has two ways: one appears similar to fatty tissue and the other way is similar to an abscess that arises from our arteries. by m. If you find it similar to one of our fats and do not flow to any vein, then cup it as we cupped us, and treat the area thoroughly with its cap, if there is any point. And search all around it, and treat it accordingly until it is perfectly healed.
of us
Many methods we have, of which I will tell all kinds.
The entire distinction between our method and removal should now be described in full.
I say that the onset is fever and heat lasting until the boiling over subsides, and the putrefaction is completed; then rest for the fever and heat.
With ours, there is no fever or heat or pain, and contains a sore that is its own pouch and is according to the color of the body, beginning like wax and growing.
And there are two appearances, or fatty growths, or wetness, with such a variety of colors as I have said in the section on divisions.
When you come to treat the patient, first examine and inquire about all the instrument called "intermixture", according to its form or chapter that is next.
And the manner of examining abscesses is to touch or find more moisture within the abscess, and turn your two fingers slowly until you know that the extremities have perceived the core, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then extract the intermixture, and take care in doing so carefully, as it is sharp.
If moisture runs short, let it have its color as I have said of other abscesses.
And if after the incision no moisture comes forth, believe it to be fatty, then rub it thoroughly across all parts and use tweezebees, and lightly scrap off each side and keep the coat where it lies that you treat it healthily with linen.
And if you cannot treat it cleanly, then cut it into pieces so nothing remains.
line est for la sct Pard:
If it remains there for a while and causes pain, apply the wound with various corrosive powders, bind the wound, and place soothing substances on abscesses, and treat other treatments until healed.
If it is large, close the two edges of the wound, and treat with that which inhibits scarring.
If it is inflamed or otherwise worsens and apply the lead of vitriol paste, let it stay on for two days or three, until the wound heals, then return to what was done before.
Look at the forms of entwined strands, and they are in three ways: large, medium, and small; and there are three quarters called "albaret," and one called "breb," and there are again three ways: large, medium, and small, to surround abscesses of fistula.
and they are like the needles used in witchcraft, made of citrine stones, iron, or silver, with yellow ones being more effective, ideal for enclosing abscesses of fistula.
and there are three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the openings.
The shapes of tumors are of many similarities, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and those with two heads having three different modes.
And those with three heads and are of three different types; and those with two heads but only one head, and they come in three varieties; all these must be at their place.
The heads of these that are cut are sharp, and among them some that do not just cut one side, which scrape the skin, so you cannot sever a vein or nerve;
And among these interpositions are the almonds reset in splints, so that the patient does not aggravate an abscess during their opening.
There are three ways to do it: large, small, and medium, as you see;
and do not use it except in cases such as legs, arms, cheeks, elbows, and similar areas.
And never is any small instrument made like stitching needles, in the manner to stop blood according to this method:
And it is placed at times back into position with sutures to veins and arteries, and occasionally they return according to this great form.
Not once do the breasts of any men become inflamed when they begin to be corrupted, as long as they appear like women's brecks.
the sont corpse que the pli, they dement isntemplet les n'e quinque la mainte li be the wounds est en t them as to become theys dont et ictes. Then becomes of it soigne, covent that are, the li gue pleurer d cide le desprendre, then un temps and li s, ce ne li menacque eels breuns que sont lore qui ils avoit lest, paroles est de; Then scrape the fat, and dress the wound with medicinal chalk, then bring together the two edges of the wound to stitch, and continue until it is cleaned.
and if the patient falls on his back, and becomes weakened by its size like it happens with women, so he makes two cuts above, by two similar incisions; so that one is held to the other at the end of both, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line b to line g; Then scrape the skin between the two lips and remove the fat, and do what we have said of stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary in the treatment, until it heals.
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not quite made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood loss, then you must fill the wound with a cotton pad soaked in corrosive ointment. and leave it until all remaining tissue and fat have healed, then treat it until it is healthy again.
Of abscesses of elbows
These abscesses that arise from the elbows are types of hard goiters or swellings that contain moisture.
Those which contain moisture must be cut according to this method, from line b. up to line g.: in the r m, and i think of the text so I want to de ist, the paind't de pati; bye lest jacbtas tre ous it that:sjnus;
And if the abscess is like that of hard swellings, treat it as we have said for slitting hard swellings, and if the wound heals with pus, prepare the fire cautery as we have said before.
Of the disruption of an artery
When the artery is torn and the skin is swollen above it, often abscesses occur, and just as well, there comes blood spilling from veins and abscesses.
by And when you feel it at your elbebows, there is an extreme tightness; and if it's on the nerve, it shows a reason for absence [of strength].
And it is foolish to attempt this abscess; particularly when it arises from the joints and bones and various other locations, and it is very large. Therefore, one must avoid the use of iron instruments, and those who are at the top should also refrain from them, and in those with a swelling of arteries above the long skin.
Therefore, one must avoid the use of iron instruments, and those who are at the top should also refrain from them, and in those with a swelling of arteries above the long skin. Then work on the tail of the ankle bones, and gently remove the artery from its sheaths until it is exposed.
Then insert a needle from one side, and pierce it all the way to the opposite edge, and tie off the artery with a double thread in two loops, as I have shown you in removing the two arteries that are in temples.
Then mark the level between the two ligatures with an intromittor until blood flow ceases, and then separate the abscess.
Then apply a bandage as soon as possible to prevent bleeding, until it ceases. Then treat with appropriate ointment for such injuries, until they are healed.
And if the abscess is near the vein's size, it is necessary that you bind to your hand whatever part of the abscess can be covered by the vein entirely. covne tre: Then bind the abscess, as I have told you, or between one of the two parts at the two heads of thread.
If you doubt whether the thread is broken, then push another needle through all of it from outside the abscess to where the first needle was inserted, and pull the threads apart in four places.
Then cut open the abscess until it releases its excess, then cut away any additional tissue and leave what remains.
Then place on a cloth soaked in wine and oil, then treat with bandages and ointments until it is healed.
For abscesses of the veins
As well as abscesses come in arteries and veins; they also come about as nerves when struck or due to excessive work, and other similar things.
that s andd the bo: 's they don’re; n’m not m.<now;
And when it is firmly held back, the patient feels pain, and it is not entirely throughout the body, but from under the head.
And it moves not at all in any part, neither forward nor backward, nor upwards nor downwards, and those who are dislocated cannot be joined with iron lest there may be contractions.
And those who are at the head or forehead cause swelling in the temple. 
If it is large, suspend at the sling and escharotomy, then the bone setting and sew up the wound along the stitching line, and care for it until it heals soundly.
Large heads hanging down Never happens in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "mold" due to its resemblance to worms, and the roots are fine, but the head is large; and there are both small and very large ones.
sirccs the ou; and there ; by themdoust*
I counted them and found in one eighteen ounces, and in the other five ounces, with the incision such that you must check if the patient is damp, and the flesh color of the tendon is bluish-white and moist and fine-rooted.
If the stump is wide, and be present with you the fire cautery. For in cutting there come often great blood loss, and if it does not stop, then quickly use a cautery.
and if you see the patient anxious and fearful of the incision with iron, then take one well-made thread, tie it to the tendon as we have said, and leave it for two days;
And then the restraint is applied, and continue to apply pressure on the thread until it reaches the joint, causing some strain; and if the roots are thick, be wary of the spinal cord, but adequately cover most of it.
Then cauterize so that it does not recur; then treat the wound and ensure you do not cover the inflamed area which is of a sickly color, with poor sensation, and red glare.
For it is an encrusted syphilis, and I shall come for the treatment of this sore thereafter.
When the mouth is greatly swollen
If the appearance of a swelling comes from a wound or cut made in syphilis, and it is under the belly and in some areas of bulging veins, as it occurs in other ways, or from blood flowing from vessels or arteries according to what lies ahead, or from inflammation;
And if it is from the course of syphilis and by the flow of pus, then the appearance of the abscess seems similar to the color of the body, and it is an easy thing without pain, with various openings. the t la, O;
If it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and easily pressed open with your hand without constraint; if it is by blood, then the abscess bulges out prominently and hard, and is sunk in accordance with a quantity.
If it is due to inflammation, it will be sensitive upon touching, and the appearance should be examined to see if it appears from arterial blood, or venous blood, or simply inflammation. If it needs to be left alone for healing. For there is doubt and fear as I have mentioned in the chapter on abscesses, both from arterial blood and venous blood.
And if the appearance is for the intestines or bowels, it is fitting that you instruct the patient to stretch his arm straight upward, and then wrap around entirely with a bandage. Then command him to lie down between your hands, Then go about the limb that you have bound with all the sinews. (X:
Then work on the majority of the abscess extended over the joint, and you insert your finger, and tie it tightly. If you find it caught in the joint, if it dislocates, and then place the intestine toward the lower belly.
C (cchief toile they so:k.
And if the arrow causes injury or veins bleed, then go around it smoothly, return to your work and take two needles, and pour two drops of wax on them, and insert the two needles opposite where you made a cross that you pierced.
Then stretch the abscess four times around the needles, and if you see it, remove the neednails, and let the wound heal as long as possible, and expel the dead flesh by itself. or you cut when it is thin and ripe, then treat as needed, and heal the abscess as we have said.
or you cut when it is thin and ripe, then treat as needed, and heal the abscess as we have said. And extract the blood or pus that you find, then treat the location as needed, and bind it in place.
The ulcer or sore.
In the section of ulcers, we have described their types and how to treat them with medicines and lancing cures. We will now discuss the venereal ulcer (chancre) that occurs in the genitals and requires great caution when treating; ancient sources say that if chancres are located where they can be removed, similar to those found in the neck or thighs, all must be excised at the onset. If they are large and old, one should not approach them because I have never seen any cured; nor has anyone ever healed them before me.
a t:s:
Of dropsy As we have discussed in the classification of diseases similar to dropsy, and how the assembly of water occurs, along with signs of each resemblance, the treatment that is done by medicine, and those treated by iron; it should only be so. One must not treat with iron for these two resemblances: namely tympanitis and hyposarcoma, as they are a deadly affair; thus when you medicate this resemblance of dropsy referred to as "eclites" from medicine, and the treatment does not take effect, look if the patient is weak or has another disease besides dropsy, such as wind in the stomach and similar things; do not treat with iron for there is doubt; and if you see a strong patient suffering only from dropsy without being too young or old, then so must you act: And lay the patient upright with his hands beneath him, and let the assistant press the abdomen to drive the water to the lowest part of the belly, then take a spatula made according to this form: The cutting tool should have two pointed parts. However, it must not be so sharp that it reaches the intestines when inserted;
Then check if the jaundice is caused by internal organs: if necessary, make an incision above the elbow 3 fingers wide directly from below the wrist; and if the jaund지 is due to liver disease, it should be cut on the left side of the elbow 3 fingers wide; and if it's due to a tumor, do so on the right, ensuring that the patient lies with their incision positioned such that excess fluids do not flow towards a weak area.
Then pierce the entire skin with the instrument and pour out blood, then lift your hand to all of the spatula between the skin and vein as one would during leeching a quantity equal to that of an olive or more; then puncture the vein until it reaches a length eight fingers long, which is where the water lies, then draw forth this instrument for which its form is: It resembles a fine silver chain, and is made of iron or brass lightweight, with one small hole at the top part; on one side, there are three holes; and two other sides each have one hole; it is shaped like a quill as if cut into a feather, and this shape resembles that which scribes cut for their pen:
At the top of this is the vein, so when the humors come to blood, then immediately apply the instrument; empty either half or one-third, for if you empty more than it should be in that hour, lest it might kill the patient through the resolution from its spirit, where it slips into the arm, or near death.
But with a void according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the disposition of the patient's vitality signifies, and his hair; then sharpen the instrument and hold back the water, which is now retained by the key that blocks the passageway above the armpit as I have discussed, so you pierce in this manner; then resume the instrument the following day if you see the patient suffering still, and draw a small quantity of water.
Do not do anything for another day, and avoid hair removal until it is no longer necessary but only a little water. And if you have doubts about the patient, and leave too much water, treat with burial or hot sand, and plenty of sweating or bathing in the sun, and drink wine; and administer medicines that dry out as long as he becomes healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after extracting the water, as I have said before.
Of the prevention of impotence On no occasion are born children who do not have any foreskin on the penis, or if it is small, or it is not in its proper place. If it must be done immediately so that it can be pierced through a very subtle spot according to this method: then insert a thin needle into the opening and securely tie and stretch in such way for three or four days; when they need to urinate, remove the closure, allowing them to pass urine, and then put it back. However, sometimes there is no need for this because the urine that comes out does not re-close the opening. If the foreskin is small, then it should be stretched using the method we have mentioned, so that it will grow. Those who do not have the foreskin in its proper place are circumcised because no one is born with the foreskin at the top of the penis, which prevents them from urinamoing until they lift their penis up; and they cannot ejaculate due to the matter not reaching the testicles, and this is a bad disease.
And the manner of treatment is that the patient lies down on their back, and they raise the head of the penis and cover it like with a shirt as long as the foreskin needs to be cut off; and guard against excessive bleeding which often occurs, and if it does occur, then treat the wound until it heals.
From boils of the penis Often these abscesses come in the penis and have an unsightly appearance of flesh; there are both malignant and benign ones; it is necessary to puncture them with a fine needle, then cleanse and bandage all thoroughly, then cover with cotton wool soaked in Egyptian ointment; cure with refined medicated ointment until they heal. And if the abscess is malignant, of filthy color and pus-filled, it is necessary to treat with fire cautery. After cleaning, if the abscess is inside the penis both partially in hair and partially on the outside, one must remove the abscess that lies within; and once removed, bandage the other part. For when treating all at once, there are no guarantees that the head of the penis will not be perforcuous, leading to blackening and decay in its area and a painful sensation; therefore it is necessary to treat everything that is black and corrupted, then bandage with a poultice made from ground peelings of pomegranates and dates, then cure with other medications until healed.
If bleeding progresses, then prepare the lunar cautery in this manner: The cautery consists of two positions together - that is, for bleeding and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and drawn back, you must insert or guide a metal tube into the penis to urinate among the patient's legs; and when hair at the top of the penis is softened due to those who have not been circumcised, or occurs from injury or abscesses, it then becomes necessary that you scrape with an instrument until the ligaments are loosened, and the head of the penis freed on all sides.
And if this is a serious matter to discuss it, then scrape with any spatula at the top of the penis and hair; then carefully separate between them, and place therein a subtle linen cloth soaked in cold water, ensuring it does not dry out completely.
On circumcision
Circumcision is not necessarily a disruption of continuity like other wounds; nonetheboever when we perform this work of our own will, and properly for children, it is necessary that we make the best possible operation, and the easiest to health.
I say that the ancients did not say about circumcising their children, for they do not practice it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Because I have seen the greatest part of masters and scholars performing circumcision within half an hour, and with force; it was often considered a novelty because there were two sheets, and sometimes one sheet covered above while another lay beneath.
Or it is regained inwardly, and the pain is doubled, and to the cleansing which is difficult by far cannot be assured at the point of the limb; and if the cleaning of the nail escapes by chance, blood flows out again, and this often occurs so that there is no need for further cleansing and I have seen it.
Of the cleansing that is done by force all along the thread I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the force cuts exactly as above and below.
The death is often from a sting of iron that occurs in the throat or another place; and you do not know the work until this thread has been placed there, and it is not enough to put force on the member, but as soon as it is no longer needed. Then make the dislocation between your hands straight and reset the strengths between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the strains. Then put your hand on the member and blow or scream, and pull it up until the head of the member is aligned; then cleanse well of the filth assembled there, then tie the joint securely with a double thread, then tie below one knot to another link; and hold as two points by the second tied point at the pocket and index finger, and join between the two links, then gently remove the breath while supporting it, and realign the head of the member.
Then make the dislocation between your hands straight and reset the strengths between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the strains. Then put your hand on the member and blow or scream, and pull it up until the head of the member is aligned; then cleanse well of the filth assembled there, then tie the joint securely with a double thread, then tie below one knot to another link; and hold as two points by the second tied point at the pocket and index finger, and join between the two links, then gently remove the breath while supporting it, and realign the head of the member. Then let the blood clot little by little, as it is a woman; and apply powder above and below the powder with a cloth glued from half an egg cooked unsavory water boiled with good fresh rose oil, mixed until the next day, and cure of another cure until healed.
The form of the strength in cleansing is thus: both eyes are held and sharp, and they are equally large like a pewter dish.
The error of mutilation is when the core within flees to the incision; therefore, it must be extended with your fingernail, so that the head makes an abscess; and cut evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then use pincers, and then cut.
And if it passes three days, and what is under the rod is swollen, let it be until the abscess has calmed, and lightly scrape; cut as you wish to move, but protect the area of the rod, for it will neither harm nor benefit.
Therefore heal the sudden wounds of powder as we have said or treated with powders, and if you cut beyond measure, and it goes too high, then it will not harm; heal accordingly, as we have said, until it is sound again.
Retention of urine
Retention of urine is due to obstruction from stones, frozen blood, bowel issues, or similar things that we have discussed in the section.
Retention of the retenue, si la soient dores, ou ondes. ous lou et non, et semblans de les coliez est nes qui vien lorons li m de l'oc unt il renez-il est des lez a li reteu, et l'omme colie parlix.
If it does not come as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must provide extraction with a tool called "seringue," of which here is the form: and be of fine silver wire like that of a bird's feather; and the tube should be one palm in length and half again.
The manner of urine issuance is to take a double thread and tie a small piece of wool or cotton at one end, then insert the thicker filament inside the seringue; trim the excess wool and secure it up to the top of the seringue, then anoint the seringue with oil or butter and ointment from Egypt, and make the patient sit on a stool, and lubricate the bladder and penis with moistened oil and olive oil and water tallow;
Then gently insert the seringue into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then double the penis over toward the bladder; then push the seringue forward to the bladeroid, and wait for the patient to feel like he needs to void as that is not how you want to proceed because where the thread goes is twisted; then pull out the thread a little wool by little wool, and urine follows the wool, then extract it.
And begin the syringing until the bladder is emptied, and position the patient properly.
Of bladder diseases
When there are scrapes or blood coming into the bladebe seen, and putrefaction is present, and you see to distill waters and medicines, do so with all the instrument called "clinester," which is shaped thusly:
It is closed, and if it has three openings: two on one side and one on the other as you see; and let the hole above which medicine plasters are such that they well plug the penis without adhesion, so that moisture can be drained when necessary.
and when you see the medicines in the bladder, place the head of the catheter into the urine, and drain at the outlet that is there; so you will drain the moisture through the catheter, then firmly reposition it back inside; thus the moisture will enter, and come to the bladebody now, so that the patient feels it.
and this is the form of subtle suppositories for which we empty the bladader; herein lies:
And it is of silver or lead, and the head is higher; from one arm the ligaments detach. Then take a sheep bladder and insert the moisture to be used for clisterization of the bladjar, then tie off between the two formed breasts with a good double thread filament, heat some part of the moisture on fire; then pour into the clyster tube the head. Then hold your hand over the bladder allowing all the moisture to reach it promptly until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
and if you do not have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment, make a circle in it, and drill roundly through; then insert a strong thread into these holes, assemble the circle as one would assemble a reed, and put inside what oil and moisture and water that you need, and tie in the instrument; do as if you had done with the bladder by pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
of stones
We have already discussed in the section the methods of stone removal and medicines together; and we have said the difference between stones with veins, and all signs, and which stones require cutting work; and on the bladder, and on the penis; and I will openly and briefly tell you.
I say that stones which originate in the bladder often occur in children, and it is a sign that the urine flows from the bladeback similar to water flowing through its subtlety; and there are frequent discharges, and they irritate the male genitals, causing them to hurt many times, then become strangulated; and these stones affect the foundations extensively. It is light for children's healing until they reach four years old, it is most severe in elderly people, and moderate between youth and middle age; and the treatment is easier for those with large stones than for those with small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, firstly one must purify the patient with an enema in order to extract all feces from the intestines because sometimes it prevents the stone from coming out.
Then take the patient by the feet, and make them stand and move forward slightly, so that the shoulder descends to the front of the bladder, and it protrudes once or twice from there; then help him sit between your hands well-placed, with his hands below his thighs, so that the bladeback is completely tilted downward; then grab and touch them inside.
If you feel the shoulder in the space, hurry to cut into it. And if it does not yield easily under pressure, grease your left index finger with oil from your hand, and push gently in young patients or on the middle finger for older patients; then press down firmly, grasp the shoulder blade, and when you feel it at your fingertip, move towards the neck of the bladaderiver; then press above your fingertip, and push back to where you cut.
And command the minister that he presses the bladder with his hand, and tells him to extend upwards with his right hand the fingers (to check for any movement), and with his left hand, remove the skin that is below the joints where they are tailored; then insert the spatula (a medical tool) gently: this is its form.
And form a space between the one who is between the joints and the foundation, not in the middle but to the left side of the nape; and it should be straight above the stone, and the feet should be aligned with the foundation or joint, and extend the length so that they are wide on either side by enough distance, and narrow within, according to the quantity of the stone, not too large.
Perhaps the pressure is on the foot that is at the foundation or joint, which does not require much effort; and know if there are pieces of stone with corners and edges: it should be easily removed; and those that are smooth, similar to a glint, and round, where the removal is light.
If it has corners and edges, make the size larger; and if it does not come out, you should use pincers that are like a file at the top to remove the stone so that it does not escape; or place a fine instrument resembling a rake on top; and if you cannot capture it in this way, enlarge a small hole with a drill, and if the opening is exposed, strain it with vitriol.
and if there are more than one stone, first place the largest at the bladder neck, then cut above it, then pierce along, then the smaller ones afterward. And if they are very large, let them be split further, resulting in a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies or urine flows downwards because the urethra cannot join; however, strive with the extraction or breaking apart using pliers until you remove it piece by piece.
and once you have completed your work, clean the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and restrain it, then apply above .i. cloth soaked in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water to cool the burn; then dress the patient on their bed, without removing the bandage until after three days.
And when you remove it, apply a lot of oil and water to the area; then treat with diafiniton ointment and basilicon ointeen until healed.
If abscesses arise in the wound and corrosions occur, and blood congeals in the bladder causing urine retention, known as a difficulty to pass without strain: then put your finger into the wound, drain the blood, for if it remains there, it will cause swelling of the bladasteroids are small objects that orbit within or near Earth's Hill sphere. The term "near" is key here; most asteroids in this context have an orbital path relatively close to Earth and thus have special significance regarding potential future space-development and human exploitation.
Then cleanse the wound with water and salt and fat, and help him in every way you can until he is well; it is necessary that all bandages applied to him be fastened around both thighs, and apply the remedies on his location.
And if the stone is small and it emerges from the penis, and becomes stuck inside; to treat this as I have said above, you must make many openings at the size, thus relieving through these cuts: I have proven so before.
Take an iron saw of this shape, with three sharpened points on one end.
Then take a thread and tie it around the shaft beneath the stone, so that it cannot be pushed back into the bladder; then insert the drill gently into the shaft until it reaches the stone; and turn the drill slowly by hand against the stone from another side; urine will come out shortly, then press your hand on what remains of the stone inside the shaft. It is quickly broken, jumps out with the urine, and is relieved for the patient.
And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then take a thread from below the stone and another above, then make the shaft between the two threads where the stone is located, then extract forcefully, and untie the ties, and cleanse the clotted blood found in the wound; and treat until it heals completely.
From the stones of women
It often happens that stones are found in women, and if it occurs repeatedly, the condition is serious, and there are three reasons to avoid it: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a well-informed woman who will uncover herself before the mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
And the third way is that perhaps one cannot find a well-informed woman in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone in women's bodies is more prominent than the stone in men, so it requires deeper excavation, and there is great fear associated with it.
s and muchc. The translation by their; the ce is also;
Et look carefully to see if the woman is a virgin: then it must be done with her duty or foundation and seek the stone; and if she conceals it, constrain her from underneath her duty, and recommend that she put herself in duty or as the sick person does, and wishes and presses his left hand firmly on the front of the bladder.
If she conceals it, then it must be moved gradually from the entrance of the bladder to below until it reaches the thigh root; then cut at the stone in the thigh root against the flesh where it has become encapsulated, and feel for the stone in that area; do not move her fingers over or under the stone, and let the tissue be left intact.
Then insert the blade into the thigh until you feel the stone and make an incision as deep as needed for the stone to come out; know that stones have many shapes: they can be small, large, sharp, blunt, long, round, and with grains. Knowing these resemblances helps in understanding their nature.
If the blood has ceased, then apply warm salt paste, and hold it for an hour until inflammation subsides; then return to your work, until the wound is strong, and have dressings as I've instructed in stone removal assistance for you in your task.
If the blood has stopped, and it is from an artery that was cut, apply powder on top of the wound and compress with bandages and bindings, do not repeat this twice, leave the wound alone unless the patient may die suddenly; then treat the wound.
And when the blood heat is appeased, and the swelling has subsided, return to your work, until the wound is strong.
Of a groin hernia
It is nothing but an assembly of moisture or white fascia, which protrudes from below the knee joint that contains the thigh; and it is called "syface," and never properly in the tissue of the thigh, if one thinks this is another joint; and it is the leather-like tissue between the white syface we have mentioned; and they do not possess such.
And the genesis of this hernia is from weakness in the joints, and that matter is spread out.
the arnt.
And these are the signs to recognize this gathering, for if it is as we have described with white sores, so are boils, i.e., a short length like that of an egg's figure, and they do not burst open immediately because there is moisture all around them.
And if it has moisture in the proper vein, so are the boils with part of the shaft, and for this reason one thinks they are another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white sore, it feels very well; therefore when you see to know the color of the moisture, feel all around carefully, which forms as before. According to what follows after the intermission, judge according to its contents.
According to what follows after the intermission, judge according to its contents. And when we treat it with iron, it is necessary for the patient to be cleansed as much as possible and replenished in body; then he lies on his back, on a somewhat raised object, and many layers of cloth are placed underneath him.
then he lies on his left side, and commands the minister to sit on his right, and extends the staff to one of the two ribs at the bone's curve where the collarbone is located.
.t tort� (e se culest annoit t.
Then puncture the shaft clean with water to one large hole, and draw out all the water, and then apply the unguents, and extend the shaft upwards; and do not touch the head of the bones, but only the shaft; cut it or in pieces evenly as you can carefully, if you do not cut it well smoothly, the water will return.
and if the joint jumps back during your work, when you have completed the task on the shaft; then join the two halves of the bone head together with stitches, and treat it as other wounds until they are healed.
And if you find the joint is affected by another illness, it is necessary to tie the vessels that are swollen, suspecting an excess of blood; then cut the bone from all along the swelling, and draw out the joint, and treat it as we have said.
When the bone is joined in two parts together, knowing that they are two branches; treat the other part equally as you did with the first one, then let out the blood, and apply a linen cloth soaked in oil to the wound.
and apply another linen cloth soaked in wine and oil, and place it over the two wounds, and lay covered with doubled clothes, ensuring all ligatures follow this method.
Then take two pieces of cloth, and layer them with shredded linen as per this pattern, sewing them together at the waistline of the breeches. One side should be stitched down to the base reaching up to the back, and the other to the part near the thumb; then on both sides of the armholes, gathering all into a string around the belt loop of the trousers.
Fire cautery is this branch of medicine in place of iron forging, and you shall take a small sharp cauterizing tool, and cut the skin's leather strips, and wet them as we have said, so that the white sack containing water is revealed.
If you take the fire cautery according to this method, and pierce that white sack with its pores, and scrape it with this hot sharp cauterizing instrument.
And cover it in all the ways you can, until everything is scraped off; and ensure that the flame does not touch the skin; and know that this work is more healing; and maintain the flow of blood from wounding with iron.
If no other condition arises, or abscesses occur or bleeding, treat the contrary condition according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to wait for this treatment due to its severity, perform a puncture as I have instructed, and it is so that when you are certain by the meanings we have said, healing follows.
If the patient is seated on the raised seat; then pierce the abscess below at the broadest part of the swelling, and make the puncture straight along the entire span of the body; and let the channels be wide enough so that all fluid flows freely.
Then apply cotton at the location, bind it, and leave to allow the remaining water to drain out, then treat until the wound is healed.
If the gauze bandage does not allow water to drain out of the wound's opening, it is necessary to insert a pen or instrument used in treating hydrocephalus, as described above; and slightly enlarge the wound, ensuring that the fluid returns, gathering after 4-5 months or so, and when reassembled as before, thus the patient will pass through their days.
For abscesses of the glands
In this part of the treatise on this matter lies fear in many arrangements, which seems to me that it is best left alone.
and I will tell you the workings and appearances of an abscess.
I say then that many abscesses come from the body and especially the joints; and this is most often the case.
It is known by excessive bitterness and chillness, which is spread among the joints, or from impact.
And its appearance is according to the color of the body; there is no pain, and it is a severe abscess.
And sometimes it may be frightening and painful abscesses of a bloody hue, without any blood vessels or vein swelling coming from us.
When it is near an artery, it can be known by the appearance of hematoma when you squeeze with your hands. and one must not merely touch it.
Those who are swollen with veins can be recognized by their condition upon the touch of fingers.
at. And it is that you cut the neck at its roots, then lengthen the vein upward, and draw forth the blood through a white thread, releasing the ligature from all parts of the vein.
If the vein is already softened by these threads, then it is necessary to draw out the vein and cut.
And if it is hard in the thread or within the vessels, you should release all of that vein and cut roundly.
And if the birth of the humerus is behind where it should be, one must cut off all and remove the nail as we have said.
And when your treatments are complete, if you wash the wound with clean cloth in rose oil and wine, then apply other remedebies until it is healed.
From an abscess of boils
This is an encapsulated abscess wrapped in a membrane resembling a pearl, with the softening of boils. and it causes severe pain to the patient as it heals;
bytels lesse:
Et always we shall tell you the treatment for it, according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary to make the patient sit on a raised seat, then apply the support bandage around his ankles, and wrap it around all the limb which is close to the genitals, and tie the master knot, and extend them fully.
then cut a slit in the spatula sharply wide across the length of the limbs, ensuring they are exposed.
s.
Then insert a needle where necessary with a double thread, and at the first location where the vein appeared, secure it firmly to one end, then tightly bind it to the other. Then wrap bandages around directly, according to the body's length and treat the corrupted ulcers.
Then heal the wound as you would with others or bind a bow, ensuring that none of the tendons rot.
e ne la c le t. So far: (1 : the shuer esttuit en p�s fas mgroud ou ça; If the bone loses its support due to the incision of veins, it dries up and cannot be healed.
From a ruptured sack The remedies for this condition involve surgery where the burst sac occurs or in the abdomnent area near the wings (ribs), because the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the sides.
the her
And the signs when it is of swelling, so there occur gradually and over long periods, not suddenly. And they are equal abscesses reaching towards the root, because the spleen hastens the intestines.
And the signs are when it's from the severed spleen, causing sudden pain at first, and diverse abscesses appearing below the skin, due to the issue of the intebines and the body part afflicted by the severed spleen.
And no more times within the intestines and are held therein, causing great suffering to the patient, especially when it is pressed.
And in these treatments with iron to cause fear, it is necessary to dispel it.
And the manner of treatment is that you instruct or warn the patient to return the intestine into its place at the wound with his hand, if it can be pushed in. Then cleanse on your hands and gently wash between them;
Then extend the head above, and cut all the skin of the hollows long. Then insert into the kidneys of the loin hooks according to what you need to open the wound, and they should be such that the bones can come out.
Then skin off the saddle which is from under the hide of the hollows, as long as all of the white saddle flesh remains exposed.
; cannot be d; it that youn: The b the on the good n'he said le Troms. Mith;
And depart the one who is behind the head, and enter between the second sac; and move it with your right hand inside the skull's joint cavity, and extend the white sac to your right hand upwards, and lift the head entirely from all the sac of the back towards the waist. And command the minister to extend the head upwards, and detach that which is behind the joint;
And if your legs have intestines wrapped or hard white sacs, and you find any such thing, then blow it into the belly below.
Then take a needle with a thick thread made of nine strands, and push it into the back part near the scapula, which is after the hoof skin; then cut the sinews that are visible with threads, as long as there are four strands. Then join them one on top of the other in a cross-shaped manner and fasten the scapula, which we have said is behind the hoof skin, with a strong bond from two parts. Then wrap the sinews with threads and bind them from two parts so that no small worm can enter inside, lest an abscess occur. And place the ligature according to the first bone joint, with two spans of it, and after these two bones leave the suture that is under the head of the condyle, which is large as one finger.
Then for the other according to its roundness that it carries; then cut into the part which is under the skin of the condyle, as long as it follows without deviation, and the bow, as we have said before.
Then prepare a fine linen with oil, and apply to wounds, and also prepare the ligature that we have mentioned. On any occasion are cauldrated the festering sores as we have said, after incision, due to concern over blood flow complications.
For this often happens, and leave the bandage until it dries on its own; and if it delays in healing, apply warm water as we have said, until it dries.
then treat the wound with further care until it is fully healed perfectly.
les et: M; t unt. Flower que I'i that th ndroit.
In this branch, I have never seen anyone who dared to perform the treatment with iron.
And the ancients said it is made like the branch that is connected to the vein, in such a way that you bind the tendons after measuring above the hole slightly at the exit.
Then cover it with my handkerchhemiscups and treat the abscess of whatever works there until the tendons bleed; and heal as we have said, until it is healthy.
At no time does the roture come to the ankle bones, as we have said, and they open up; and none of the intestines escape through the joints, and if any do escape, it is little, and heals all hours.
And in every case, if it lingers too long at this spot, the wound or abscess forms until the intestines escape.
And this occurs due to the extension of that abscess which is at the ankle, as we have said, because it extends, then softens and swells the hairs and opens up.
And the treatment is through cautery as we have previously said; and it has never been treated with iron in this manner:
And the patient lies on their back between your hands, then cut out the swollen area of the rupture to a width as per three ounces (doses).
And then extract the sack which is under the skin that follows, then take a thread and place it over the apparent area of the sack.
-toun: 20 for ee t'll.
Then extract the head of the shaft, and do not cover it with linen or any other material, as I have shown you in the treatment of a ruptured intestine.
Then treat with wound care. And when you bandage the threads, if a fistula forms and heals the wound, until it is healed completely.
The fistula is tight and has no external opening in the course, and the fire cautery is less effective at this location, and closer to being curable.
From the softening of the skin around the joints
Many times the skin around the joints is softened in some people because of moisture inside that becomes mollified and appears milky; when one wants to clean it, make the patient lie on their back with the affected area exposed, and clip off the overly mollified skin from the natural skin; then stitch together the two edges into a single seam, and if you look, do so first by removing the excess softened skin in three or four neatly placed sutures; then cut between the sutures, and treat the wound as with other wounds until it is healthy again.
From the act of pounding
Surges that wounds are healed by our methods, and for this reason I would not like to speak of them in this book; and there is no need for more than two ways: one where the physician responds when asked about treatment and care, and the other because we often need animal cautery aids such as goats, sheep, rabbits, and other beasts. Thus I say that wounds are treated in two ways: by attraction or by cutting. In the method of treating by attraction, make the animal sit in warm water until its joints become softened and flexible; then grasp with your hand as much as you need to reposition them and feel no more movement. For cauterizing a cut: it is necessary that you hold the skin around the joints with your left hand, then tie the suspender, and cover each claw after they have been properly scraped; leave out none of the subtle sores or small abscesses underne. This method of treatment by cauterization is similar to healing by attraction because at times nothing may be found within the joints during attraction, causing the animal desire for copulation; then treat the wound until it is healthy.
Hermaphrodites are individuals or organisms that possess both male and female reproductive organs, allowing them to produce either spermatozoa or eggs, depending on their species' biology. This condition can occur naturally in some plants, animals, and even humans (though human cases often result from specific genetic or hormonal factors). Hermaphroditism plays a significant role in the reproductive strategies of many organisms, allowing for diverse methods of reproduction such as self-fertilization or increased mating flexibility within populations.
by the they are healed and igne:
Of the tempting nature
The nature of temptation is an inflammation on the natural part, when it's too ugly to look at; and women have it as big as a hand, and that is the treatment. It must be tended to with moderation in application to your hand or fingers, applying gently; and do not use excessively so that bleeding does not occur, then treat again with other remedcu until healed; and another inflammation at the mouth of the gums, and its edges, and perhaps a sudden outbreak, and is like the appearance of an ulcer, and for this reason they were called by the ancients "malady of cowpox". If it must be tended to as we have said about temptation, then treat until healed.
Erratic refers to something that behaves in a way that is not predictable or consistent; in this context, likely referring to the erratic behavior of an inflammation.
If the nature of woman is uncertain because it has not been pierced or if the opening is small; and it is natural from birth, or occurs accidentally due to illness that comes upon her; or it's due to a cauterization, or by a subtle flea or worm, and it forms completely in the marrows, or on sides, or above, or wherever it may be; and it prevents conception, pregnancy, and sometimes having children; and recognition of this is through observation of moods. If there are signs of imminent discharge, they occur at night or during sleep. If it'pertains to a subtle flea, and the woman has been infected for two months, then hasten, and place her on her back with legs apart: extend both index fingers fully, and be over the discharge; then take wool, turn into oil, and apply it to the area until all the fleas come out, and are covered by the discharge. Then use medicines like dragon's blood, incense, abundant frankincense together, so that she may not conceive again each day. And if the flea is hard and large, then you must cauterize as though it were a leaf of myrtle. If the discharge is due to an injection or infusion, suspend with onion juice and honey; and use antiseptic medicines like dragon's blood, incense, abundant frankincense together, so that the wound may not close. Then dress it with a wide linen bandage, ensuring it does not heal prematurely; and treat with other remedies until healthy. And when this occurs in the marrows, cauterize according to these instructions unless there are gangrenous abscesses. Because for an infected abscess within the marrow, one should never touch with iron.
When hemorrhoids occur due to excessive strain or pressure in the veins of the rectal area; and it results from natural causes like aging, pregnancy, chronic constipation, or obesity, causing discomfort, pain, and possible bleeding; then you must first address the underlying cause.
Swollen veins are openings of veins which without customary care, and when swollen veins become ulcers; and we have already discussed in the division their appearances, signs, and symptoms, and I will now say those that respond to treatment. I state that hemorrhoids and ulcers, when they are fully out in the anus, do not appear by touching, but only heal with iron. Those at the mouth of the anus can be felt, and these can be treated. Therefore it is necessary that you place the woman in a cold house, then expose the ulcer to tongs, and cover the wound in its roots, then powder with medicines containing blood-restraining substances such as dragon's blood and incense, among other things; then soak its parts for an hour in cold water. If bleeding occurs during this process, it is best to let her sit in a decoction of sumac bark and pomegamel husks, gallnuts, and similar substances, and then make flour from barley, confiscate with honey and oil, and place on the wound. If it heals, that's good. If not, apply blisters to the back and breasts without iron; then take linen, and grind into juice of plantain or agletwood mixed with old wine, and apply as a poultice at the site. And when the abscess is resting, treat it with ointment until healed; and those called "albathir" are red and have an appearance like rough skin, so they must be covered in the manner previously mentioned for hemorrhoids; then continue treatment until healed.
Abscesses of the anus
faire;eze t5 ilve cema (scostilic!sturrecerange ces dieleisanttiza maderst*lltichierseci9fiss and’
Of childbirth
In the art of midwifery, it is essential first to know the natural shape of childbirth and recognize the signs when a woman begins to feel pressure in her lower abdomen, desires to urinate, and smells an odor; then quickly realize that the birth will follow its natural course; therefore you understand that such childbirths occur according to their natural pattern, with the baby exiting first from the head, followed by the buttocks; and when you see these signs, it is appropriate to gently press her abdomen so that the baby emerges quickly because as soon as they begin to descend over the head, the buttocks follow, and the feces are naturally expelled through good molding; and those which come otherwise do not arise naturally. For sometimes they come on their feet, and strong is the body or the neck, or hands, wherever it comes out from her abdamoen or anus, or even turned by chance at her collarbone, and in other unfortunate ways; therefore, in childbirth, one must be wise and subtle about these matters, guard against error and deception, and I will show you all the figures on how to help them.
If the baby comes out naturally from the head and the mother labors heavily, and the strength of her veins is weak, then she should sit on a stool or be held by women; and prepare natural oils such as fenugreek to cook, and then put it between her thighs the small suppository of this shape: Et fendez la secondine, et coupez jusqu'au ongle tant que le moiteur qui s'ensuit soit corrigé; et prenez le ventre de la femme pendant que l'enfant descend, et si il ne descend pas, alors administer un lavement à la femme avec une solution muscade et fenugrec dans l'huile d'anis ; puis appliquez cela au ventre et provoquez des vomissements pour deux heures : maintenant extraire l'enfant. Et s'ils sont les deux mains qui sortent, il faut qu'elles soient remises doucement petit à petit; et si elles ne peuvent entrer, placez la femme sur un siège, et soulevez ses pieds vers le haut ; puis retirez le siège du sol, et maintenez-la debout sans lui permettre de vomir en se levant ; et si les mains n'y parviennent pas, et que l'enfant meurt, alors coupez les deux mains à la couture qui est mise ici auparavant, et extraire l'enfant, puis remettez-les graduellement.
De l'extraction de l'enfant par les pieds And as cest the first line to translate it comes this piece of semblants choses a la guérir lor maintes fois avient le mors. ici: et les oinzies et les eveux sont li vint. And then turn it slightly by turns until they are equal;
Then, take some pieces and extend them slightly by turns.
If it does not obey, then command to press gently until the condition is relieved; If broken open, so if God wills.
And if not as we have said, if turned a little at a time until it is in its natural form. For then it should be gently.
the d line of the c, quire: And apply this oil internally on the woman's body inside and out. Then the patient should lie in clear water up to just below the ribs;
byque en Angt cont by Rasir Ou: (c; cannot be or they can try the Islamd: Then have it sit on a chair, then make it sneeze and hold its mouth and nose, and the priest touches its belly lightly, for now the child has moved. From under the child's knees When a child comes to this state, then the healer places his hands briefly and briefly.
line:f; oug by themd (and le. It is necessary to engineer its return. If it cannot be returned, raise the woman and go there.
If she cannot walk, make her lie down on a bed, and stand her legs apart.
cannot the text if they are the text the isnt; la pekinz sans est et les sont nots li.
And if she does not bear a child, make her sit on a chair, then carefully attempt to return the hand. And turn the child so that it follows its natural position, make her sneeze, and instruct her to breastfeed as soon as the child begins to eat solid food.
After birth, place the baby's head on its side, and spread out its hands, with the face turned toward its mother's back. if they: a English:
When they are equal, then place upon the muscle-like substance of wine and oil as we have said, and instruct it to move little by little.
And once you have done this, if the patient sit on a chair, then command that she coughs; and let her sneeze. In the same manner for all subsequent cases.
In the same manner for all subsequent cases. When it comes to this manner of treatment for the second stage, remove the nail on your thumb, as long as the moisture is drained.
And if a child lies on his face and neck, remove the swaddling cloth so it is not held back, allowing the child to move.
Then put the child in bed as needed, and command the woman not to nurse at any time.
From dislocation of the knees Surgical procedures cause many cases of dislocation, but never three or four at a time; this is not an unusual occurrence and seldom happens. Two are considered strange things, and they do not survive, if only rarely.
the t un lieu T.
And no time do they arise as naturally as a bubble on boiling water, as we have said.
And if they arise sharply, with the remedy as we have said, and let it be a subtle bone-setter, doing promptly and lightly what is required. and make so that it may move to health. the liits ça de la:
the liits ça de la: At no time are they formed from the maris (bones), whether one or two or three or four or five or six or seven or more, up to fifteen, and they are all shaped like a child by the measurement of the right sacred measure.
And it is necessary that the barber understands all this, for sometimes similar things happen to him; If he does so according to what is fitting.
Of a dead child
When treating a woman of a dead child or womb, as I have described in the section, and there is no relief, and you are compelled to work on hands; If it is necessary for you to know if the woman is of sound virtue, and has not had an incident or fears of death;
If it is necessary to lay the woman supine on her back with her head tilted downward and legs raised.
And the minister treats the twin of two parts, ensuring they are not separated before birth and managed during the delivery of the child.
Then rub the mouth of the molar with oil from myrrh, hellebore, and flaxseed, then apply these oils to the patient's hands as well. d with some.
And take care if the child is born with a condition such that it descends upon its head. if the tonsils are swollen in their eyes or neck or mouth or under the palate or below the beard or throat or near the ribs.
And thus is it lies and heels are soiled and of its sides or by his cassem or le nez, or the eyes d’his lions. or les nez sur la teeth or tetor est sus nays; or on the jussoies as it does not eulz se fles ou en ailz et li pains on he toes.
And it is proper that you tie the sling with your right hand, and place the pillow between the fingers of your left hand, and then gently press his arm against all sides as we have mentioned, until he reaches an empty state.
Then place against another sling if necessary, so that the extractions are equal:
And then extend evenly by moving from one side and the other to loosen it, so that the occipital bone is formed for holding.
And if a part remains dislocated, and you anoint one of its edges with oil, and push it into that part, while pulling the other part.
And if there are no points remaining dislocated, put this occipital bone higher up, and do so until it slips out entirely through its entirety.
;e If it becomes necessary, wrap around a cloth so that it covers entirely.
Then apply the cast to the joint of the sole or heel and so it is necessary that you do the same in the other hand with two feet.
Andres; (not too he la t . Do not ;s that s que dout ougner; That o they are their; the: If it is necessary to insert the splinting spatula between your two fingers, make a headpiece and extract water. Or turn to the instrument called "almídach," from which it forms with threads or paste that follows thereafter.
And in this way, make him into an infant of natural large head size; tretaired.
And if the head jumps out of place and is forced back with strength, it may be split until the moisture causing it has been released.
And if it cannot be removed entirely, cut by parts as you are able to do so.
And if it is swollete in the belly or under the ribs, then you must pierce until the moisture drains away.
; they all the arn’re t:  ons the And so far the w. The Probar: Mobsergloonus; 0 (or vckta combt; it TA quL't. After; you can do(an/her et la ou l'colte in English
If it is difficult to access within the abdomen or udder, one must use a cloth wrapped around the hand for extraction. If it causes the abdamen or udder to distend, until the moisture is removed from therein.
the croielle with that; and of est s. The able les maint de l’est ongle to the w draper le ventre tad forment: If the patient's hand is caught at the root of the nail, pull it up to the edge of the cuticle. Then he inserts one or two pins and secures them.
And if the edge of the cuticle is pulled back due to an abscess which has formed there, it should not be disturbed. sofk le est ougt s li Kings dont that: And the injuries are bruised and swollen with moisture, making them soft and damp.
And if a child is under their ribs, and you can place them upright as we have described in the living child.
And soi tu ne men li dure les est is ones, ce de ou ite ting for the leu: and it; and you to be the s cauterle, we are too much too many pieces too, you have, here. So that l'arles est a la m rite est en se soe li vint.
And when you have accomplished this, if there are any abscesses as we have mentioned that arise in the bone, then
and if blood flow occurs, it should be applied with a tight bandage, and other treatments are administered.
And I saw a woman who had given birth to one dead child, then she conceived another, and the other was born dead as well. t time de c.
I was called to treat it, and pondered for a long time, but could not heal the wound.
I applied strong attracting forceps, and extracted one bone at first, then others after some days. I was very puzzled because their belly had no bones.
the t de et les so that est f, ou:
Se il le peçoient trop tost, si parle li eulz a l’om; The wound was treated and the bone set in its place until the woman improved significantly;
And I have recorded this chapter only for those occasions when masters come across an unusual case and know how to provide assistance.
To return the head of the bone to its place
Then comes the form of compression, at which one can read books; and two turnings are two shoulders of two limbs. However, the horns should be more subtle with restriction, and made from slate or boxwood;
Also they are: And among the two limbs, be dislocations of the same type that are firmly fixed in both, about half a palm's length or slightly more.
And these two dislocations are positioned at the mouth of the joint to open when one turns the two horns.
Another form, similar but more subtle and lightweight, is made of ebony or boxwood according to the appearance of pincers. And has two heads with two dislocations, as you see, one inch long and two inches wide;
the same with: Then place both dislocations together within a sling, and hold the head of the instrument between its thighs; Then work your hand on the entire instrument evenly, as you did with the tongs, according to the quantity that opens up the mouth of the sling, until it achieves what it desires.
These instruments are all of the same kind, and they have multiple similarities; and when the surgeon has prepared them, so much more quickly is the work done, and higher in quantity at home.
; they other. And:
When the second finger is caught during childbirth, it is necessary to instruct the patient to retract their nails, and then blow out of condition, and hold your hands to the mouth and nose. and if they fall through this, well and good.
And if not, take a pot and make a hole or lid in it, and place herbs that can open the mouth of the mare (the patient), such as chamomile, rue, anise, lavender, sage, and dandelion.
All these herbs, whether some or all of them, are cooked or boiled in water over the fire; then place a linen cloth or porous sponge into the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the vessel.
and let them breathe it until steam comes out from the vessel; then make them sneeze, as we have said. If his right ear becomes inflamed again, apply treatment promptly. If after this treatment it remains and is not healed, as commanded to the nurse that she moistens her left hand with oil of wax or with an emulsion of egg white, then apply it back into position.
and who brings the splint; and when she finds it again, gently pinch and extend slightly straight, so that the bone does not protrude during removal. but he must move it lightly to right and left, and then pull; it will come back and relax.
And if the mouth of the maris is extended too much, we have described blowing and smoking with herbs.
and if it isn't from all this we have mentioned, then take care not to err in your treatment.
themesprovenir les mueutment c'il li lesse est mentioned tout lest the ou il is not that heuemt du ce le jaude et paus au sois mentioned de s, to prise the boils:
If you relocate and reset it, but if in doing so there comes a bad smell to the stomach and head, then the patient suffers vomiting.
If it is necessary therefore, fragrant incense should be used here: none of the old methods have tried incense of wormwood and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman for retention of seeds and semen is this:
l’s. 1.
And let there be the smoldering above the charcoal, and the scab until it is consumed, then start anew with another.
To uncover the foundation
Some children are born who do not have their head properly shaped, but it is filled with subtle sacs. Then it is necessary for the healer to pierce at the site of the hernia with their finger, without using a styptic agent or antiseptic, and ensure that the puncture does not touch anything.
Then place the cloth in wine and oil, then apply the salve until it is sufficiently dry.
And if you doubt that it does not heal, then apply a bandage of lead and let it remain for days, and the child may be bled when it is ready to go back to bed.
At no time does this swelling from a wound or abscess occur; if it happens, address the suturing: treat it as we have said about the thread of lead.
For the drainage at the base (of an organ). Fistulas that originate from below the foundation are swollen and grow bigger than those close to the foundation, or within the space of two parts.
the covser l's are they should de la so; This:
And at no time are these abscesses present; and they are known by what is expelled or windsustenance when the patient makes an expulsion, and occasionally in his urine one finds them.
And if to abscesses that penetrate up to the bladder, and up to three-quarters of the penis; and they reach up to the hip joint, and our outer thigh.
And thus one finds an abscess at the base, not perishing: Et c'est qu'on perfore son index ou doigt du pied, et on y met une aiguille fine d'acier ou de fer dans le canal quand il n'y a pas de torsion.
And if there is twisting, then insert a slender thread-like object, or that is, horse hair, as long as you feel the thread or hair with your finger.
And if you do not feel it, nor does pus or gas come out, as we have said: Sizes ensuring they do not pierce; if you hurry with the cure.
And when the fistula reaches the bladder or the urinary tract, if it leaks urine and cannot be stopped by medicine.
If it is pierced to the hip joint, then blood flows downward; .
In these perianal abscesses there is no proper remedy that does not involve work, and the foolishness of men who meddle in them.
In cases where there is no fear or old injury, with hope of healing by using iron as I have tested.
and that the patient lies between your hands on their back; and you lift their legs up to their thighs, with their thighs inclined toward their stomach. then place a tent of linen or cloth if there is twisting, until you know where the tent lies.
by this; Droit.
When it is perceived at all, then you should discover or feel between your thumb and index finger the sinew or artery; then know that it is present. If one does not move it so that it cannot be healed.
Generally one can well heal anything, but seldom does this occur.
And when one makes it, they heat the caustic subtly according to the size of the fistula, as previously mentioned. And heat the entire caustic in the fistula until it reaches near the base; and make this three or four times, as long as you know that the charred areas look like an owl's feather.
And then treat any swellings with a poultice until they are healed, and apply ointment soothing and cooling.
If it is thus sound, it is well. Otherwise, it cannot be made whole otherwise;
And if it is between the bones and does not pierce to its foundation, and place a thick covering of leather or felt between your fingers where you see the abscess beneath the covering. If you have placed isnt to the arm. ous la braz est ce que s’aperture en l'est heu ou se boute les bras avant, and des tient: si tu as et ades: est cestele de les trest of, li echons le en ceut a vilet onsis.
When released, it will twitch, then relax; next, pluck the misaligned hairs that resemble a bird's feather, and leave none behind.
If it does not yield, cut between you and the flesh; if fire or medicinal cautery is used.
For the fire cautery causes two things: this is to say, the scorching of these congested hairs and the stopping of blood flow and drying up of moisture.
s. iews (et l’tir the ou n’nt st and se tel lex by a but they are *;
Then treat the wound with sudden compresses of hardened fat, and these are dry medications.
For when it is restored, it remains secure and does not return.
And if a fistula comes near to the root of its foundation, and is distant from the body, inspect whether it involves the thumb or wrist.
xtulet:s and to la so s, and so as it son les mar: Bie ce tes quadt.
When you cauterize as we have said, or if you cut until the bone is reached, or if he can see it, then apply bandages and treat as first.
And do not cut too deeply that you may harm the structure holding the foundation, and let evacuations come as they will. Then treat it, as we have said;
Then treat it, as we have said; with the bonte t. The old by, as they, but: thont you see oneslault; the uterma ben tre et if wet ; line isnt pas sa phlement theirs de ceestued and he c. They should ou. Then mold the misshapen bone within the wound as you see fit.
Then study how to close the wound and maintain the abscess in the lower part of the foundation; if it is an easier task for the patient.
And never close abscesses in this manner: and it is when you place the tent on the abscess, and it is or near the foundation below the skin above, If you take a tent pierced at the top according to this form: And insert a twisted thread into two places, and attach the tent with all the threads until it reaches the top.
If it is torn at the edge of the base foundation, then extract the thread from that pierced area and sew up your two or foundation.
the is the s;d tougs de le c; sofan f;
And it is not held at any time, as long as the children hold these pieces between two, and chew.
Then treat the wound until it is healed and cleansed.
If the abscess does not burst, then pierce it in all ways that you can, if it is not too thick-walled.
the t;
The form of the spatulary thorny which is made for creating a fistula is sharp and pointed, one end being cutting. And on the other hand not, for it is neither fitting nor what one must do, as you see here:
Hemorrhoids are in two ways: some are within the foundation like a grain of resin and there are small and large ones, and often with it blood. When there is one or more [dislocations], they affect the foundation and its head; but those that are dislocated have little moisture.
and remain there briefly or with a bit of yellowish water or blood, and they have the body's color.
and the treatment for those with it deeply affecting the foundation is to command the patient to urinate often while lying in beds until their foundation becomes firm again, and then the veins become visible. ; ous Connerd Hx exemple:
If they cannot hold them due to their moisture, take two strips of cloth or cotton, or a piece of camlet fabric. And extract them from both sides, then bandage it, and dust with hot powders that are in place for the fire cautery. Or you may cauterize them as instructed by the chapter of fire cautery, then heal with other remedies until it is healthy.
this.
When the patient suffers pain, and if their veins are strongly rooted at the foundation, then the treatment is easy. And that you prick them with your nail or pliers, and trim them down, then heal as we have said, until they are healthy again, and fear the incision by iron.
If it is necessary to dress the wound according to this manner: take a twisted thread, and put it on a needle, then pass the thread through from above and pierce the needle on the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread away from the needeled end. Et si elle soit grande ; et attache fermement le fil, puis nouez-le, et retirez l'aiguille, puis faites ainsi avec toutes les autres, et laissez un peu de sang pour évacuer l’excédent.
Ensuite, placez sur la base un drap mouillé avec de l'huile rose ou dans une couverture, et posez-le sur la zone, puis demandez à la personne de se reposer.
Et détendez-vous jusqu'à ce qu'ils cicatrisent, puis traitez avec des onguents et autres remèdes jusqu'à ce que la blessure guérisse complètamoinably.
Immediately with great force or foundation Many times it happens immediately in the intestines due to natural constriction and when the illness is old and medicines are no longer effective.
If it becomes necessary to scrape at the end of a gangrenous toe or under a fingernail above, which you do not allow to become moist. the is done that ne:
If it cannot settle, resume the resetting more forcefully than before, until it feels quite settled, and let them be scorched. Then care for it until it heals.
caressé escorde, si come the long as on them; quant esterse les long. A mouse is a small creature placed before the body, and it moves quite often.
and never apply a cold poultice, causing you to feel as if you are dead from the tremors, spreading through the entire body, more so in your hands than elsewhere.
the t they. Then turn your hand around to cover the entire area while grasping it entirely within the tremors, and place it firmly, and reattach the tremors at their roots.
And if you see it, make a chain of iron or steel according to this form, and be subtle underneath and across on top.
Not perceiving it, hold with both hands, and squeeze them; And if you see it, cauterize the tremor as before or with a fire cautery.
le: by the Nd (t Never have you made an enema of silver or copper, or melted wax or ointment; and never have you applied these small and large plasters according to how they are prepared.
Those that we prepare in the treatment of children who are weak and painful are small.
The form of both small and large enemas is to be above wide, or the belly is tied according to this manner:
. 2-t, and bon fralement they line, and so far.
And let the stomach or womb be filled with remedies from a bladder of an animal or parchment, and be pierced entirely through small holes.
And between each hole there should be space, then insert a strong thread of twisted wire through them x or so times around, and mend the belly as it would resemble a goatskin. And when the remedy is inserted, tie it with a strong thread in front of an instrument, then enema; and this is its circular shape.
the durte; a l's (prest ce. Thist in a bon after; by that et hellui; se est en t.
Then the physician grasps with his two hands together until all is lifted, then extracts the clyster, and elevates the patient's legs towards the head.
And if the physician wants to issue it, as much as he can; and if it lasts for an entire night, then there is greater help.
And if you issue the clyster in a disease of bowel movement, and the physician wants to issue it promptly, then do so until they are well again.
And if hemorrhoids are present at the foundation or abscess, provide a clyster as subtle as for one child;
and this is the form of a subtle clyster to which the body should be restrained;
Of wounds
In the section on wound care that we have mentioned earlier; now we will discuss treatments for hands and general ailments according to their completion.
I say that wounds are varied depending on what they are caused by, and based on their origin or type of injury, and why they occur.
the them of:
Or as they are made according to the laws of the body, such as a wound that bleeds from the neck, or the head, or the thigh, or the abdomen, or the liver, and similar limbs.
And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and begin with simple head wounds, for recollection shall come to the practitioner.
I say that when a simple wound or head injury occurs and the bone is not fractured, be aware if it's from a fall of stone or similar things, and the skin is entirely torn, resulting in large wounds. And you gently probe the abscess: if it is quickly emptied of blood from the wound, and filled with healing substance opposite to the wounded part.
And soothe the patient with wine and hearty foods for nourishment.
And if he does not wish to be fed, provide him with a small portion of food and do not give him wine or meat.
un the sant s. ousze c'Em; ke fulcons.
If there is no abscess present, apply it to the wound if it is fresh and all blood has been expressed, and not moved by air or powder, which I will say something about later.
If the arrow has been moved, apply some salve until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like a sword's handle and resembling such, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, then bring them together by sutures, as I will say about abdominal wounds, of the suture.
If the wound is exposed to bone and flat, holding only slightly by suture; then treat the wound with medicines, and restore hardened skin in place of hide. And instruct the patient to eat hearty meats, as you have tested with cooked wheat and similar things like hairs.
And if you find or detect rot in the flesh and it does not reach to the bone, suture all affected areas, then wash out thoroughly;
If it has an artery in the wound or vein and without a cord, and cannot be tied off with medicine, then find the artery, and if you discover it to be dislocated, bind it tightly with thread. And if this does not help at all, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: you should apply this powder which dries as soon as the heat has moved it.
And the method of powder is as follows: take incense one part; blood of dragon two parts; quicksilver three parts, and grind finely. And apply to the wound, stretch firmly until it is well dried and reunited with all its blood.
And then securely bind it, leave without slipping, unless it swells; for the medicine is not removed until it is healed.
et;l fid que est so faire let.
If an arrow has moved the wound, especially if it is still there, do not put any of this powder.
but apply with some soaked ointments or ground barley flour made of water and honey, until it heals. then proceed to the treatment of other ailments until it is healthy.
can’sd (donnerla sole ke that. Tudus ; they mustt and no short: ; the same a: f, but neither on:
Et I shall tell you hereafter about fractures of the head.
Of the wound of the neck
If a wound comes on the neck and it is straightforward, there is no distinction between it and that of the head, but if the veins or the artery are cut.
that. Iz sans f hereby the with h they are t s chest to be not d. Do not put anything cold on the wound, for the substance of the veins is cold, and their continuations are with the brain, which is the highest part of the body.
but apply the medicine wrapped in soft cloth soaked with warm water, and mixed with rose oil, and boil it in warm water like this. and for other bones of my body according to this manner, and wet poultices.
the f:
If wounds are deep and filled with pus, pierce either at or lower than their location.
And if the arrow is stuck, and blood flow occurs, then remove it, extract it, and cauterization as needed.
And if the spine of the throat is stuck or the windpipe, and breathing becomes guarded, which affects the flesh. If the head is driven onto the spine of the throat, do not touch the throat but reset according to its natural shape. And then apply steady pressure until it is set firmly in place, and leave it for several days; then treat with fresh ointments until healed.
And if the wound has caused damage to the bone, you must do so accordingly; And if there are bone fragments, whether you can extract them all at once or some that cannot be extracted, leave until the wound scabs over. And it shall be opened and aligned properly;
And if the wound is fresh, apply powder as I have mentioned. And if there is bone and a fistula in the wound, treat it thus as I have said in its chapter.
Of the wound from a spear or knife
If it is a deep wound from a spear or knife, and the wound exhibits signs of suppuration, if you see that the patient is weakening: then understand that the wound is deadly.
And if it is not deep and the wound is fresh with all its blood, do not apply powder or bandages to stop bleeding at once. the sct s la: CII0 cayer as that ne ce t. But apply an attractive balm, and let it rest for two days.
And if you have no ointment, place a piece of old cloth in the wound to absorb moisture.
and make the patient lie on the wound for three or four days, or more. : When you see the proper alignment of the bones, know that the wound is healed. Treat with tent and other treatments until they are healthy again;
And if it cannot be healed or works, then know that there is a fistula; treat as one must.
the st:
If it is large, by stitching; and if small, with powder, and if embedded in the bone, and composed of certain parts, so treat the wound, and remove any splinters if necessary. And if not protruding, let the wound heal on its own, and lighten the extractions.
and with other injuries to other limbs are the judgments as we have said.
The second disruption of the belly
Dislocations of the belly are large, medium, and small.
from a major wound never occur an intrusion into the intestines or their vessels, so that there is no ingress.
ou iciens; f come the text a de as, and sayi.
For this reason when it is reset multiple times within, if they are not returned little by little. For the reason that the intestines swell quickly when they feel cold, thus return more often.
And because the spleen wounds, for it is moved back to its place among others.
les qu's: thtard� ne la ben; et s de ce omissa and the text f;
The two common sutures appear on the abdominal wall.
and the suture of other bodily wounds, along with two specific sutures, are shared among other injuries.
Moreover, they are more closely associated with the abdominal wound; and I will say each one separately and explain them.
in a many s soe: ould: Et to reset this is by one of the two methods: Or due to the smallness of the wound, as we have said. Or because the intestines are swollen by cold.
And when it is cold, warm it in a certain manner: thoroughly wet a sponge or a piece of cloth with pure water only. or boil it in clear water and add salt and pepper, 
At no time do you make it constrictive, and it is moved that one should loosen to expand.
And when you see the swelling break apart, if the intestines are cooked soft or hard and not properly done. because by this it is attached to a small object.
.
And the first treatment is to straighten out its size, And none should cut it with great necessity or purpose therein.
and this is the tendency to split:
If he cuts deep into the skull without reaching the brain, and look here for the form:
And when the wound is expanded, and the bowels are protruding out. If you reset the arrow according to its natural form at its proper location, If you have the ability, for this is movement.
When the wound is wide and it's located below the belly area, If it must be that you lay the patient on their back, And raises its legs higher than its head; And if it is located below the belly,
And likewise if the pulsation of the belly is in one of the two parts If you come to understand that the affected part should be higher than the other.
And therefore it is fitting to follow what I have said about large and medium wounds.
For small wounds apply what you have prepared,
Then hold between your hands the pious minister who has trimmed his hair on one hand. and bring together the lips; *
* And it is that you choose a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound. Then leave at the head of the wound two spaces apart, and insert a needle where there is sufficient strong thread. And pierce both heads with the tips made from hawthorn wood.
Then strain a double thread through both needle eyes. Then join together the two heads of the wound promptly;
that as s in: Then tie off the thread as you did with the first stitch. and continue doing so according to how many more needles are required. until all wounds have been secured;
the text doit be it as a, and lief. For the fine needles cover the entire surface, and those too thick cannot enter well: Therefore it is necessary that they be moderate in size.
And it is not proper to insert the needles too far from the skin and into the flesh.
They do not cover or move the wound before the suture.
Then protect the heads of needles so they don't irritate the patient while sleeping. and place dressings or cloths at the heads of needles to prevent movement. noce they and so that dose dele de l’s, or.
And this way of stitching with needles is more convenient for small wounds. Because there are inserted a needle or two.
The second stitching method is common, the le; should be s:ne, the covard in  by hand if you say; it; please and they said d t them f:duludise. And when you have perceived these four together,
And when you have perceived these four together, If you reset with the needle at the part where you began, in the manner of tying knots;
and place space between each stitch the thickness of a small finger;
m; butt; le est, nerse;
And I sewed a wound where a man had an injury to his belly.
which was painful from a knife cut. and the wound was more than one hand's breadth wide. t le unt f; to meet them so the est que they n’s armge a de la boule qu’s lese se
And the wound was within the belly. I brought back the intestines and waited twenty-four hours more.
And the wound was sewn up to fifteen days, and it healed, and became healthy.
.
And did not apply ointment, for I was at a place where there were none to be found, nor any medicine. And without more pressure on the wound, I wrapped it with two pieces of cloth during the day, and washed it with honey water until healed.
Here are the two proper methods of surgery:
byr; and there*
When it has felt the head to be straight, if you have placed a screw at its base or where you have inserted the needle.
and make an incision on the other side down to the inner recesses of that space.
and the goal of this suture is that you cut in a similar manner as a peltmaker does with fur, that c:t;
The second manner of stitching, as Galen himself says properly,
if it is such that unites the two parts naturally together, and they apply one of its head to the other head, in this manner:
are: and other the t; also that they may be so much of, en the ben, then a de la, and all ond't in which. And let both shoulders hang loose; Then turn the needle and make a puncture on the part forward up to its core. As both shoulders hang loose;
pa bousoient that. And there and: don’t ts.  (in the t, sof a t.
And this is the common method of reduction, and it is most used.
Galen says this word, and no one attests to it.
That we must sew the belly with two needles, each having thread;
. The text that are not in li est: ougui.
And you must know that when bleeding occurs within the belly, If the cut is more severe than other wounds on the belly,
The judgments of the wound are such as the assessments of other wounds:
And it is when you find a fresh wound with all its blood, as well as if an arrow has moved it. If you reset the intestines and their edges, then apply powdered burnt charcoal over it.
If you reset the intestines and their edges, then apply powdered burnt charcoal over it. And if an arrow has moved it, then apply any available ointment until the wound heals. don: Then treat the wound as with others, until it is healed.
And if you have no medicine, apply honey or lint, as soon as it begins to bleed again. And move (the wound) twice a day until it is healed.
the t, and what c much at one: don's.
et se tu doutes que la plaie fait communauté avec les principaux membres, If it is appropriate that you grind linen lightly in oil warmed with heat or rose oil, or the edges are shaven, so they shall be trimmed with a plucked.
And if he feels pain or swelling in his arm, which often occurs, If the wine black clysters are exhausted, and especially if swelling extends to the intestines;
And drain the abscess, and assure that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
The intestines called "jeun" cannot heal when they are troubled. and it is because of the swelling of veins that they occur, and due to the subtlety of the entire body, and the proximity of its essence to nerves.
And if the cerebrus falls from the wound, it is returned as well as the intestines when fresh.
by m (C. Docte; There are veins and arteries present;
then cut what is between the ligaments. and place the two heads hanging from the part above the wound to ease the extraction when the sinews come loose, and the wound gaping.
be it comes as f not cane them a lign bette a le :th d’s li;
When the intestines are inflamed, and the wound is small, if it can be restored in certain places,
for I have seen a man who was injured by the belly of a spear;
are to be ondça. In orderly: And it was infected and became a fistula, with discharge and swelling as a result.
I provided treatment according to what seemed best to me, and continued delicate procedures until it was healed, and the ulcers were soothed.
And when I saw that it was healing, I suspected that the patient might have harm in his belly; lard:
And some experimenters say that when there is a small wound in the intestines, it should be bound in this manner. Take fresh fat from large bacon, then gather the edges of the wound. And when the fat has melted in its mouth, if it does on both lips,
next apply another heat as before, until the wound is completely healed;
a li quid: to shoulde; The head aches within the intestines, bringing no harm to the patient.
and one can bind the intestine with a fine thread cut from an animal's intestine.
in such a way: the t; And then bind to the top of this thread a thin twisted flax cord. Then insert the thread into the needle and sew with intestines, then stitch in place.
And this method of wound closure is not further than according to the ways of trust and hope;
the evez ym: m. The de sof; and est vacc la ter sonte de de les;
of a fistula or if it exists Say that any wound or abscess, when it ages, is to be called "fistula" universally. and especially if it bleeds and pus flows out.
as a it iste de huj; they can be anye: And it is as if plucked like the feathers of a bird.
and sometimes with clear bow shot, and other times thickened. at times little, and other times enough;
by: It is only by one of the seven causes:
That is to know, due to smallness of blood or body. or because of its malignity; it is not so that does: all the pain and to ccurre. When there are too many bowels; When it is crushed, and the matter is of poor quality; When the medicine is not good for the treatment; For this reason, putrefaction is a form of plague; Or it may be due to the property in that area where late digestion occurs, and health arrives slowly, naturally fleeing; Oraces be the digus nottures de are they rist, or too much to late, et leste ce qui c, itt and which were soire, or;
And I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments of medicines in the divisions.
Or it is necessary for me to inform you about the treatment of an abscess made by handwork.
It says that an abscess occurs in all members of the body; should s ; Tumble and ife de sofat. When to the jaw or intestine, or bladder, or any of the ribs. Or to the spine of the back, or any joint of hands or feet.
And all fistulas of this kind are minor healing, with only labor and ignorance.
And if there is no fistula that reaches the length I have mentioned, and you are confident in the healing. And if you observe it is known, then take a tent made of flax or iron, should the fistula be straight.
If the abscess is twisted, then search with a delicate thread of linen. for the swelling bends around its twist;
but if the abscess has been pierced and you cannot well search it with threads, s (prət: t is se corre c
For moisture can easily pass from one porous area to another, and it is cleansed.
Then firmly grasp it within your power to determine if there is bone or nerve involved, and whether it is completely dislocated.
And ask the patient about the pain felt when pressed by your hand, and where he feels it located.
And when you truly know the location of it, and if it is far from a joint, nerve, artery, or vein, In any of these cases which I have told you, if using the cupping as I have instructed.
In any of these cases which I have told you, if using the cupping as I have instructed. and for the foot's other side and corrupted joints that are within; and then treat until it becomes healthy,
t:ulonsme. Then apply tight bandages with medical gauze, and wrap up to the head of the fistula.
Then apply tight bandages with medical gauze, and wrap up to the head of the fistula. so long as the medication dissolves the excess material that is lodged at the bottom.
and then apply healing unguents with sanctified wax until they are sufficient.
If it is not secured by this method, then cauterize as we have said.
If the bone is rotten from a fistula, then cover it. If veins or nerves trouble you or your main limbs, as we have said;
and if the bone is exposed, with infection and blackness, let the king wait until all the decayed bone has healed. then proceed to treat any strange things so that they become healthy;
And if it is not safe, then return to its original position as before. If you do not go beyond that point:
and if they don't have such as much longer than necessary. And remove all decay, then reset to its proper place;
And if it is thus healed, that is good. But if not, be aware that the decay is too advanced, and you cannot help therein; to ou, and if they are:
Et si il y a un petit os corrompu, et que vous le tiriez avec des pinces. Si le drainage (ou 'estrai') doit être effectué avec un instrument capable de percer, alors il faut en choisir un approprié à la taille et à la nature du vaisseau ou des tissus concernés.
. And then it, andou so quell arsenaze the charpieces en les instrument de est bandages, soit à une lign; ici, alors tu cauz. Fondés les sais to doe, et les gui:l, ou tissung la maint la maint i cans :ment le chiré le ust.
When moisture acts contrary, there is no error or fear. If the joint slips and there is heat and pus, then remove the bones.
And if you cannot remove them at once, put something on the wound to prevent infection, in the same de l's.
Then if they will have their bones more easily,
And if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh. Then you should remove all decay so that none of the blackening remains in the bone, et if they c, ou:
If there is significant portion of the heart affected, and it reaches near to death of the bone. If it must be cut out and covered completely to the affected area, and then treat until it is dry.
touché die que t they dont that si ; you to the c, et soie as lest be not, and jad anse est pas; If you give an example and help in your work.
There was once a youth approximately thirty years old who had pain in his leg from a cause that came within the body.
as long as substances entered into the leg and healed from a large abscess, and there was no better way to open it.
incur, then f. Inle: And they filled much material therein, which became a fistula, and brought forth abundant discharge that all sought remedies both wet and dry for the body.
And many a person put their hope in this treatment for two years, but there was none skilled in hand surgery.
Until I came to him and saw his leg and the remedies he used for its care, C: or not so that she:I'uesst 1. And the body of the young person would turn red, and had a citrus color.
I pitched a tent in one of these outcrops, then searched all the outcrops.
And I found that one came toward the other from all parts of the leg.
t c (in t-tiz ac? and they 1 ; by n's; And I found it ruined and smelled bad, and the decay reached up to the inner bone.
I was that which appeared of the decayed bone, and thought there was no other decay present except for what I removed.
And so I began to heal the wound with powerful medicaments over long periods, but could not close it.
by as possible. 20 if the s de la bone pires le bo med; that so f gue se coruste les d. Thet: they line mar the c; a set ord ils ne, and how far, butter; (seze ke; Please don’s can be no by.
And I found continuous decay in the bone, and the socket, and then the splintered bone, and I tried to rejoin them.
However, I couldn't find where to join along a span of the bone, and it betrayed me completely. Then I restored it with remedies; and it was made whole and securely fastened quickly.
the quat and f: C. The ou but ta. And n' And due to fear of his death which I have. For often there was bleeding profusely, but he was completely healthy.
For often there was bleeding profusely, but he was completely healthy. and in the place of the bone emerged a hard cyst, which was of good constitution and had no harm or contrary effect at all, neither on approach nor arrival.
that line byfe an so far and the said ece vi TMother with ulze c; And uncover the bone above where you see the skin, ensuring the flesh does not cover the bone. and place a splint or tablet under the bone to support the corrupted bone. and it must be done as long as one can see and feel the decay, and do so repeatedly.
And if the bone is corrupted, does not open, and the corruption lies within or on a part. If it reveals the entire wound; then place a piece of iron upon it,
and then move the corruption from one part to another, and let the suture be as long as the corruption slightly, as we have said;
And if there is a rupture at the joint, repair the corrupted joint, ensuring that the bone containing it on either side.
And if there is a rupture in the connection of the two joints, ensure no other aid than with bandages;
And if the rupture is at or near the end of a hand or foot, that matter requires significant attention. . D; his. Do they may be unt l's to the same de f, and so: And cleanse it in all ways you can, but let neither the vein nor nerve oppose you.
And know that the incision tools and needles to mend these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance. And thee les os: then poudre that li bonde de e s os parle le n’est li os and and les mesur to laissons ce que cut os. ia l'os et l’avez a lores, and ongs the boines os istes sont and f, ete healing of their are And sois that it comes: And so that bone, ores and un peu ce mes les poids thems ce que os et cite la oste. And for each type of work, you must provide your instrument.
and tools that the work will reveal to you the instrument which you need, according to your knowledge of this art. and he witnesses to the ways of illnesses; If you consider the instrument needed based on what is appropriate.
If by fire The head burns or due to heat; or because of coldness;
When you have applied the treatment for erosion with medicinal remedries, but they do not prove effective. If necessary, cover that limb up to its source where erosion occurs. if the sick person has passed away due to this or from a greater fault in the limb;
if the sick person has passed away due to this or from a greater fault in the limb; And the signs are such that the limb turns black, as if it were touched by fire. And after the blackening, then comes the rotting of limb to limb. And it takes hold throughout the body; if you rush with a knife.
When it is by the impact of any venomous creatures such as sea scorpions, snakes, and similar beasts.
If the erosion is at the joint of both thighs, and it cannot be moved, do not give space for it to reach your hand.
And if it comes to the hand, cut the joint, so that corrosion does not reach up to the arm.
And if it comes to the arm, cut around the bone; and if it passes the bone, then death ensues. and there is no healing effort without regard for its quantity of effectiveness.
; c soign se lasde ne ceus que ben it OU tra court lines or. The letter they  theirt� the eyes by four to: Cite aschinformir t... (do not that lessejnge the sentence say le tre bence fula, either line.
And if it comes to fruition or pierces, cover the entire wound. And if it rises up in the leg, protect at the knee joint.
And if it comes upon the knee, there is no other remedy but for the patient to lie still and allow time for healing.
And the manner of using a cup or sling for the limb is such that you bind it above and below. Extend one finger along one line of binding towards the bottom, and another finger extends along another line of binding upwards. And you separate the bone that is between the two lines of bindings by a span's width wide until the bone is uncovered;
should they par le: "le t. And it brings to the patient further injury and abscesses, causing pain.
And if there are bleeding complications when you work, then cauterize the wound promptly. or apply certain binding powders; then return to your medicine until it is completed.
so that they are and not de lion:
And I will tell you what happened to one of them on his journey:
It occurred during a dark hour that seemed like fire's glow.
and the gangrene came first on his right foot, so much so that it destroyed the entire foot;
:
And long periods afterward the dislocation returned to its place, and it came to me.
And I applied countermeasures after bodily purification of the body, and it could not stop the dislocations.
and that I wrapped the hand, and although I had hope to resonate with the matter; And he doubted as if I were to cut off his hand, so he would not die. For the virtue of the man was weakened; and he became despairing, and returned to his homeland. and healed by cutting his hand, and it was sound;
they are not p, and ond the in the same de lion bené mot.
Never comes an abscess at its place of origin, and it remains so long that it forms a large gathering of pus. And then they heal and break open, with the discharge of pus, and it remains at its original place, just like a small vessel. And the skin above is as subtle as fine torn fabric, treatment;
but if it is stretched to the bone on one side, it is called "fistula";
l’e s, ne m, and untie les: so thatli. And it does not hurt due to its decay.
And if you suspect that the skin is hardened, and there is no infection at its core, and the skin is dry as ash; then apply a treatment of anointing like so.
Look to see if the breasts are large, and the bow that is there has a foul-smelling odor. Then use the Egyptian medicinal clyster prepared in this way: Take alum, and oil, and litharge, equal amounts, and put to cook in one vessel over fire, the b o, and pait:
Then take as needed from each according to your necessity, and they make it with water and honey. and strain the urine, and tighten the passage; and let the remedy sit in it for two hours, then extract by squeezing;
the g ne bon'profit est.*
Sometimes they are enemaed with water of ashes, When this medication is not available, and you must take ashes from a stick of grapevine, pour water on top.
Then let it cool down, then enema with it until you know that the bowels are well cleansed;
after they s and ine or. If the enema of water and honey contains some opium poppy extract. And you perform the enema with honey and sweet wine, as the honey has properties to cleanse and wash. and the wine promotes health.
And when you have done this, and you are certain that the joint is properly set. If there are issues caused by constipation in them, then... (Note: The provided text is incomplete, and without further context, the translation cannot continue accurpressingly.)
And that you extract the feces with a spatula dipped in oil mixed with wine. (Note: The provided text is incomplete, and without further context, the translation cannot continue pressingingly.) When you enema with various medicines and unguents, whose properties I have discussed in treating the unguents.
If his nipple is small, and the tube of the enema cannot enter it, if he expands a little with an iron rod, and applies a tent of Egyptian ointment, che that li est quem etemle.
When the wound is too wide, if you sew it shut to a point where the clyster can enter
And if there is an open sore that bleeds excessively, place the bandage either above or below it. For when the wound is fresh, do not close it with pitch; First If dislocated so that the bow is bent towards the lowest point where it lies.
and if you cannot support the chin away as you see fit, let And take consolidating medicines to put on the wound,
And stretch a linen bandage that covers the entire wound, Then apply pressure at the location of the protruding part of the wound, making it slightly wider than before. if; so they le t c not to, and:z un bon et emitted de l’m so s; S’um the les malp at; itle troat; He will that o bont line. And place it on the hollow of the chest to ease the bow, and do not remove the large bandage for many days afterward.
The one who is under the hollow of the chest often removes it in order to remove the bow. And know that arises from the bow, whether it is poison or pus or sufficient, or digested, or undigested.
And take care if the patient feels pain or numbness, and whether there is an abscess or not.
And when your medicine extends in a certain manner and you see the swelling under the chest, if you know that the breast is becoming hard, and approach it with salves.
And then you dislocate it in the morning or at noon, and when you open the wound. If changed by another cloth, and renew the ointment.
And if the breasts become badly bruised after many days, it is said that the breasts do not heal. they dont; The main line the same. When Chimer: to themn:e c so that’s and n't follow by writing :pR (and English we can's, you the Soth .
As health approaches. For there are men who delay treatments for their wounds, and those that do the opposite.
And if there is an indigestible swelling of the breast after several days, know that it does not go away.
If it is delayed in rising, and becomes long-standing, apply dry and moist medicines made of substances that are dry in virtue. If as anointment dries up, for it contains a large portion of vitriol, and this is the last medicine.
Take dried ointment, and make it with rose oil, and mix with equal amount of old wine in substance;
; s: the t . When poultices cease to be effective,
Or take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them, then powder them with honey while over a fire. And then apply the cloth to it, stretching it across the breast, and never perform an arrhygroma long at a time, with le quare:
with le quare: And it is used with simple remedies or compositions: grind them down and make a powder, then add the honey I have mentioned, and apply. If the wound is not healing and cannot be treated with this remedy.
If the wound is not healing and cannot be treated with this remedy. Therefore, say that decay has reached its origin, and it affects the bone, or hard limbs, or sinews. I, without; by li'nt; but: oncspare:
Of the abscess of the nail
Pus is an abscess that arises from under the nail at the tip of the hand. or on the foot, or sometimes occurs in other fingers;
iste de s na: And they will draw blood by cupping until it reaches the root of the nail, and occasionally may draw all.
And there are erosions up to the bone, causing intense pain upon arrival, with a wide shoulder and a dusky hue.
When you treat it as we have described in the section, if the cure does not help at all, *; <aejckt; Then cauterize the wound afterward. The cauldration is of great help if the bone is healthy and the nail is sound;
and if the nail afterward hurts the horse, and begins to grow, and splits. If it is necessary to place the splint below the nail where the horn grows. and secure it at the top, and carefully detach that growth gently and lightly. and apply medicinal substances that are heating and corrosive upon it to remove all of it;
And if there is corruption in the bone, and it becomes brittle and weakens, as long as the bone is compromised, it cannot heal.
and if you see the knee becoming corrupted, and it becomes brittle in one of its joints as previously mentioned, sofait byttest et can cause that are heum: 2B (not d.
And if it is forced out, and bruised, and feels great pain, then you must first reset it. Then remove the ingrown nail by cutting across near the top.
And guard that you cut not so deep as to reach the bone beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too great pain.
and:
The dislocation that occurs in some men's hands by chance is completely fleshy. and occasionally it has bones or sometimes it does not have any claws.
the main incontam: Those who are born with any defect of their two eyes do not move. and those who are born with a deformity in the joints of their limbs may move;
the stature of one who is plump is somewhat lighter in manner: that are they must na:
Those who are born at the root of the joint are more difficult to treat: take hold with your spatula.
In those who are born or must thereafter, if it is necessary to first remove the round swelling up to the bone. are they nee:
The tendency that comes with age may arise from birth, or by sudden wound healing, or by scalding with fire, or similar causes.
If it is necessary to cover that dislocation, so that the joints are repaired according to their natural shapes. then place between two tents or cloths greased with oil rose, so they do not stick together; as:
If attentively considering any of his legs with the palm, cover them as needed according to necessity.
Of wounds
There are large swellings wrapped in excessive melancholy fluidity that come to affect various body parts.

Then it is necessary for you to administer a purging of colic once, and then wash the area with holy water from the chalice.
The treatment of iron is in two ways: one is to encase and draw out the black blood. and the other way is to lift up the vein and drain it completely.
if they asd; ensi's ; Then straighten the leg for the patient from above the hip to the area below the kneecap. Then cut the vein at a spot that is one, two or three finger-widths wide.
Then draw and strain the black blood to your hand from one end to the other until as much as the ill patient can tolerate.
t, so I't even of s and he said e tel cesl'm pleu:
And begin evacuation and washing when veins are clear, avoiding discomfort to the patient.
The movements of his limbs follow this manner: raise the affected leg, if there is much hair on it, then put to bath, and do so: raise the leg with warm water until it turns red and inflames the veins;
que he ben tre lesse.
Then work the skin at the neck, and scrape the vein from each side until it feels when touched.
And when it appears red and black, and as it enters the skin looks similar to a white string.
Then remove the thread from beneath, until fully raised in the skin, and then attach lightly to the neck.
Then place a bandage at another location three fingers above it; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears. Then lift up the arrowhead, as you have done before, and attach to another hook, as you did initially.
Then place a bandage of suitable size or more, if necessary, then lift it and secure to the second toe,
.
Et si vous ne le pouvez pas tirer et soulever, alors il utilise une aiguille à tout faible fil de deux fois plus solide. et il lève la entorse et le relâche, puis insère un os dans une crevasse, tournez votre main à gauche et à droite, jusqu'à ce que cela fonctionne. Et assurez-vous qu'il reste droit, car s'il se courbe, il ne peut être tiré ni soulevé, ce qui cause du tort à l'individu.
When you have treated it completely, place soft cloth soaked in wine and oil on the wound site; and let it heal until it is sound.
And if the vein is twisted and bent together, not straight as we have said, And if it needs to be cut obliquely, but not covered with a cap; and treat as we have previously said.
And if it needs to be cut obliquely, but not covered with a cap; and treat as we have previously said. The form of iron used to open veins is curved, and does not cut, but opens the vein.
It is of large girth because if it were subtle, it would cut the vein; but it is broad as we have said, and this is its form.
From civil blood (referring to a gentle or non-violent method)
pastd the bo nast market.
And sometimes it occurs elsewhere than in legs, as from decay that comes from beneath the skin.
If, as it arises within the body's core with worms and writhing creatures, nestled between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of this abscess's beginning are that it causes a great inflammation in the leg, ou lesi nece:
When the head is opened, it must be wrapped with a piece of cloth three and a half to four fingers wide, and so on.
And leave the cloth on the leg, wrapping around it every time if there is no issue with loosening, and re-wrapping the cloth and the bandage. And if it is too long, cut off a part of it and re-wrap the remainder, without covering it all the way up to its root until it is completely used. by *fist O chiette te t e (Cquer les so and s :
For this particular matter, it is necessary to treat it little by little until finished, leaving no part or body.
And it is never in such a case when this vein is treated with 5 or 6 long handbreadths or widths, and a noble man came to me, from which it emerged 6 handbreadths in length, and when you cut it, so that the vein burst or ruptured, and was pierced completely through.
If it becomes a fistula, let the matter within be emptied and restore to its place using putrefying medicine without delay for any day, then treat as with abscesses.
And never let blood flow from this vein, especially when it is opened at the joint of the foot or leg. and where there is much bleeding, and which spurts out blood; treat accordingly as we have said before.
by:
This illness is called in our land "ox disease," because it often occurs on the buttocks.
And it is a small vein that forms between skin and cartilage, and runs throughout the body upward and downward. and feels all too well from limb to limb, until it reaches the skin where it goes, and breaks forth strongly;
And it is caused by putrefaction of various bodily fluids, such as those that come like snakes and worms and ascarids or belly.
And there is doubt about its evil nature because when it travels through the body, it goes to the head and reaches the brain. sometimes enters, and destroys the brain; and this often happens.
; it none; don'
Then it is proper to lift above and below a strong joint tightly.
Then wrap on both sides of the fracture, and if one side is partially in the cartilage, do not attempt to align it. If there is fire cauterization above, let them heal completely.
(cble de the le t that are to f ; comb et o; and a les m TTPm so they be c.
If you see it coming or near the eye, firmly hold down the eyebrow, then clip above, and let it fall.
And it is fitting to use the patient's bathing in medicinal solutions for removing harmful bodily fluids.
And if it is affected by rotten meats.
Of the pain that comes from windwounding This illness is called in our land "wakir", and it causes pain in some limbs. s’s la:
I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, where I saw a small swelling on the vein near the elbow.
and shortly after, it rose like wax to the shoulder. more quickly than anything else, as if living silver when cut from one place to another;
the me:mouche pour so ou les la.
And then, after it is slightly moved throughout the body, until it reaches the other arm.
Then he told me that she was repeatedly turning within the body, as I saw her.
And it not moved by all le peignee les maint lits a l'eau; Et heal the sains: si li ou vous doit seintelle de ce il la, comme merite pendre et ne quitte avec le bail, and herboutre temps du que parle en couché est sois it pour mouche les maintes d’aposte la l'oeil a sains qui elle sur la fuit tout, si ce de ce telle the ou il te merite. And heu: li, thene au se eau de oinz et saie; and of le couvre dans the c. Nevertheless, I want to maintain that if pain moves from one place to another. but I have not wanted so, as I see it in the woman;
and I thought that it was because the woman had dry skin, and her veins exposed, . If the-1.
And do not appear for certain to those who are weakened, and have moist bodies and veins restored.
And when you see to treat this illness, and the sickly feel that pain, if it opens up as we have said. If gently pushed above and below steadily, then wrapped tightly until it returns to its place. And cauterize the area; and if you do not see with your eyes,
If this remedy causes swellings like foul pills and serpentine pills, and similar things.
C�; igne er:
The arrows are various, according to their appearances and where they enter the body.
The variety among them is that there are some with large points, small ones, barbed, and fixed. and those that have two edges, and those that have tongues, and those that are split. et ceux qui s'écoulent dans n'importe quelle partie du corps se déversent de deux manières : soit un membre important se vide, ou
and as follows: those that flow into any part of the body do so in two ways: either a major member like the brain, heart, liver, stomach, kidneys, intestines, bladeroes are emptied, or similar members. When it flows then into any part of these members, and the sign of death which I will tell you hereafter appears: the  (and; that c. And when this ill omen does not appear to you, and the arrow is not completely out of place, then treat the wound.
And if the sign of a brain injury occurs when the arrow pierces and splits the bone, causing severe bruising above the brain. is when there are blindness and numbness and tremors and reddening of the eyes, and inflammaturgy and reddening of the tongue, and muscle spasms and disturbances in understanding, and bilious vomiting. And sometimes it is without strength of smell or ears; and occasionally affects speech and voice. and falls from the wound with white foam resembling hair, and heals as quickly as charred flesh.
and if these signs appear to you, attend to the treatment, and extract the arrowhead if it is present;
When the sign of the arrowhead as it falls or moves, it is near the left breast and feels as if it were pierced in something hard, not hollow. And sometimes the arrowhead moves as hair does, and causes black blood to flow, along with cold sweat, and fainting. Thus it brings about fear of death.
The arrowhead's sign is that the hole never closes and exudes pus from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and breathes deeply and seeks cold air.
And if the arrowhead pierces into the muscle layer, it is near the ribs; and exudes a lot of blood and great pain and breathing; and moves all limbs around the shoulder blades.
And if the arrowhead pierces into the abdabdominal cavity, sometimes it does not cause any damage to the unripened meat.
If the arrow falls into the belly and does not exit through the bowels with a gush of wind, there is no hope for the remedy or extraction of the arrow.
If the arrow falls into the bladder and the urine does not pass while flowing out freely, and the patient feels strong pain: believe that the wound is deadly.
The other limb, as it is made and the neck and throat and shoulder and elbow and spine of the back and ribs and thighs and legs, and limbs appearing similar, are safe according to various conditions. When the arrow is in a vein or an artery and it's not poisonous as I will tell you what happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
It happened to a man whose arrow went in the root of his neck. I tried it, and injured him on the other side from behind the ear fat, but he was not much hurt.
. If you t90r; e-C: When the arrow is reset, it could not reach further than the tip towards its base. And it was an arrow large from a Turkish bow, with one light iron tip and no ears; the joints were sound, and there were no accidental injuries to them.
And pierced an arrow from the throat of a Christian, which was an Arabic arrow with ears:
de main they must le t
And treat an arrow shot at him, which had pierced his belly, and I thought he would die.
And then after thirty days, there was no change in his condition. I cut around the arrowhead and maneuvered it outwards, and there was no unfortunate incident.
And if you want to treat a man whose arrow has fallen on his back or belly, with the wound sewn up;
and let the arrow remain within, without disturbing its natural position. nor should it hinder any of his natural works.
and: s.
And thus staying in this position causes great suffering; and many similar issues arise.
And lodged an arrow at the king's groin area, where it was stuck inwards. and it leaned slightly to the right side; and the arrowhead was fully embedded.
so that they can, which: e t ;le de stom :pire of the same;t one.
At first a subtle numbness, but not felt by him. And he experienced ringing and pain outside his right ear. I thought it was from the tip of the arrow.
: s that t not to g ti so et nume se c. And I appeared to have lost the arrow shafts.
And I appeared to have lost the arrow shafts. I put on a waxed cloth bandage daily, and dressed the deep wound, which caused the patient to suffer greatly for long periods.
until he felt the arrow within his nostrils; and thus I knew it. the
And I tried it, feeling the shoulder blade's head shift to its place. Then placed it at the opening of the wound using that medicinal ache until the shoulder blade's head appeared visible.
and transpired quite thoroughly within approximately 2 months and 14 days.
the:cj s that l’t p ou
Once I ceased not to carefully devise and engineer various methods of traction until one day with well-made tongs. according to how its shape will appear at the end of this chapter, as long as I pull it and keep the wound closed.
And they judge that the cartilage in the nose cannot be restored: ; do not them. Buttons as it'chin care of the same: they n’s :t0.
Now I have told you about the quality of extracting certain arrows. unless you apply your care to what I do not say, for the book cannot fully cover it all;
but wise masters compare little about that which is present and failing. from the t dissection; and, as the by gue
I say that arrows fall from limbs where they are lodged, by two methods: or through the immediate area or elsewhere;
and that which jumps out where it enters, is an arrow entering flesh, and never leaves again at any time.
the in the same par les c, or ou they so that les f unt.
And similarly if it is fixed into the bone, and cannot be removed, leave it as such for some days, allowing movement each day.
And then it will pop out, and if it does not, gently make a very fine hole around it, as long as the area around is sufficiently enlarged, and then extract it.
And if the arrowhead is back in place on the body and cannot be seen, then you must cover it completely; line.
And if you cannot for extending the wound, nor for deepening of the arrow. and there are no bones, nerves, or veins, so that the wound may bleed as long as it is large. and track the arrow if you can, and if it has in the arrow ears to which it clings,
and track the arrow if you can, and if it has in the arrow ears to which it clings, If a bone is driven deep within two parts, when you see it move, and then break or bend the arrows' shafts as much as possible.
and then break or bend the arrows' shafts as much as possible. and be careful not to break the arrow, but remove it more firmly.
the c. (Ct; asper quo and le t, so far, but there. And if the course of blood is contrary, follow the treatment as we have said in its chapter.
and be wary of incision near nerves and veins, and devise a method as you would carefully draw an arrowhead without danger.
soon or late, strongly or gently; and place the patient according to their condition when the arrow fell into them. ki
When an arrow comes from another source, or if it opens any wound in the area where one can see or feel abnormally swollen skin.
Thus, make an incision there, as long as you can with the pincers, and then extract it; if the shaft is still strong now.
And if it is held in the bone, rotate your round hand as much as it enters into the bone and widens the bone, then extract it.
by:
If it is an arrowhead embedded therein, if possible remove it completely.
And if it is coming out, and you see the need for stabilization, then administer with a suitable instrument. if the point of the arrowhead enters into the hair of the instrument; and then remove it forcefully,
at in; the patient to they w: c and d or;
And if an arrow is grazed, it's necessary to cut away all the flesh around where the poison is, provided you can. then treat the wound as required.
And if the arrow falls or pierces through the stomach or bladder or ribs, and it is imminent, and you can cut above, do so if possible.
And be careful not to touch the vein or nerve, and then extract it, and then close the wound, if necessary. and treat until it is healed.
The form of the pincers used to extract arrows resembles a bird's beak, and here is the shape:
f; t.
yt. When veins from which one gains strength are .xxxii, their heads number sixteen.
This refers to: ii millstones that are after the ears and called "hair." And the ii arteries which appear in ii temples. the d and:e are not; also and dont l’s w, and nd it, and so they were le t de f, soit that the in the la s. And the veins that are within the forehead; and those veins that are behind the nose; and the two jugulars that are in the neck. and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins called "auricularies"; And there are two veins which lie below the tongue.
The veins of which we commonly draw five in each arm:
One is the cephalic, and it is on the left side, and they call it "the vein of the head": as heal: And they call them "veins of the heart"; and it is located near the left side. And they refer to them as "the common people's veins," and are situated above the groin. And it is that one which can be felt, clearly visible above the scrotum.
and so:
Et in the leg where there are three veins: one is below the root of the left rib cage. and the second femoral vein that is in the ankle of the right leg, and the vein called "Nesse," which is in the ankle on the other side.
and in the other leg there are three veins below those mentioned.
How to: 5 (e t. The text on the inuisert sof; it'so n's vat that you can clothes. Et the quality of the saigner, as I have told you, is to raise the head of the patient.
Et the quality of the saigner, as I have told you, is to raise the head of the patient. And rub their body or veins with a rough cloth; then tighten the collar on the patient with a strap. until two veins appear behind the ears, each depending on the head: When you find the joints on your finger, and where you feel hairs above your knuckles, remove them with tweezers.
Then take the lancet and insert it just above the vein until reaching the bone, then lift your hand along the entire length of the vein. and cut and remove the skin and veins properly with two passes, and let the blood flow until it stops.
they cile se main, and neither any; there;
And I have already said about the incision and fire cautery in the first book.
The pain of the two arteries that are in both temples, if it has been present for some time. and often accompanied by headaches, and long-standing blindness, and the body producing tears from the eyes;
by are n’st that mainly. The v... And it is so that the patient strains their neck until the two veins appear openly; and feel your fingers of both hands, then tie it up tightly;
Then lift your thumb over the vein up to your index finger's knuckle, and place the lancet from above. And lift the vein upwards, and tie it off, as you did in two other veins, and allow blood to flow accordingly according to your necessity.
Then lay the patient down, and place your fingers on the vein for an hour, then cover with cotton.
the tous tret's s: Dont sonn's (Marjo: Ite que you nge so that they should he mot;k Force and:mbo mois d’ en tduire by.
The bloodletting of the vein on the forehead is just as much for diseases of old age on the face, and for migraines, and for redness.
And its quality lies in that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called "spade", which is of this shape:
. nue su J. Then loosen the necklace for the patient and tie the wound so that it is clean and without any fumes from a wide blade.
However, it should not be that the clamp is too tight or twisted; and the suture line, because the bone is close by, and occasionally breaking the clamp when it is fine.
The sutures of the two veins in the temples should be assisted by linen, and for inflammation, bruising, redness, and eye diseases on the face;
The quality of their health is such that the patient twists his neck by pulling on various ligaments as before.
Then healing occurs, and let there be the right treatment: a bit of lengthy fleshy tissue that is slightly wide, for there is no tendernissure.
And if the flesh is delicate and may break easily; then do careful cauterization of blood, as much as you need it, and afterwards apply a poultice, and bind it well.
d themd's iz. If as a migraine with redness comes upon the face, especially when it is old.
and if the quality of health is such that the patient grasps his neck, then he strains his nose with your left hand. and take a slender cloth long, and insert it between the lips in the space that is between the two nostrils, b areg ils t; they dont too that:s (don; The most likely so we. And it's. If you;
And do not go too far into it, and make a precise cut according to your need, then let it heal overnight, for it is quickly restored.
The juice of these two glands assists in the stretching of the sinews, and at the onset of surgery, and with many diseases, and impetigo, and ulcers, and herpes, and itches.
the fact ;n: The word: they that is not-t, t ecota f. And let the master stand over the head of the patient, with them seated on a stool,
Then cleanse the vein slightly wide on both sides, then cut the blood quickly, or as much as necessary is needed.
Then make another incision in the other vein, then tie off the ligature, and tighten both veins moderately. The patient's arm does not stretch; let it rest until morning so that the wound may be healed.
From treating wounds. Healing of ulcers on the lips above helps with coalescing in the mouth and gum decay, as well as lip cracks, swelling, and inflammation.
And the nature of the ailment is for the patient to sit before you, and hold their neck as I have said. Then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left. And recognize them by how they are black, and also by the small black veins around them: that on:
that on: If you grasp the largest of each piece, and do likewise with two veins that are above and below, for it is in the same manner.
From the inflammation below the tongue The inflammation of the veins under the tongue if it follows the swelling of the head, and it is by stretching the throat, and diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth.
The quality of the saigner is such that the patient sits with their hands in front of the sun, lifts the tongue, and looks under each cheek for a black vein.
Then cleanse both thoroughly, and do not cut too deeply as they are the arteries beneath.
The veins of the groin that one commonly cleanses are done so in two ways:
de And they are wide and delicate according to the width and extension of the veins. The form of the deadly mistletoe is very famous, and it's wide as you can see:
And blood and it is from poisoned with veins, to l’ovrinest la vins of the wound does not purge. And this is the form of the olive bile:
and it is finer pointed, and used for balancing subtle veins, where there is a subtle yellow blood.
The vein of the epiglottis, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are below the throat, and neck, and armpit, and abdomen.
it is nott: If you cut the artery, and bleeding occurs, then it must be stopped as I have said. And it should not be gripped too tightly with the flame, but trimmed as necessary.
And if the basin does not open clearly, it must be removed and another used instead. . And to hold the bandage on the affected limb as we have said.
And if you know the location of the sinew, then as we have instructed, extract the arm and feel for hairs until you are certain. then sign the bend of the elbow, and securely tie the limb, and apply a bandage to the affected area with moist hairs.
lesstam:
And if you see it rising up as the urine of a child does, and the vein is red and subtle, know that it is from an artery. Then make haste accordingly, and rest your arm for a long time, then remove the bandage where it is swollen, as often happens.
If the arm is tied up, leave it so, and do not move it while in pain; be patient with fear, and do not move until it is healed.
thembo.
And take a sliver of pine, and grind it, then take one half and place it on until the next day.
If there is no bruising, that's good; if not, then apply the remedy as we have said, with powders that coagulate blood.
and these bruises are not in various positions for the slight area of the wound, nor does it affect the function of the arm's ligaments.
with ce; Because it is composed of both the upper and lower parts, as we have said.
And it is necessary for the physician to warm his hands before addressing the nerve that lies below; if he does not do so sufficiently, and damages the nerve. And it swells, causing pain to the sick person, and sometimes cannot be healed.
they way:
And if there is a vein between the two nerves, they are deeply cut.
The medicinal powder of the head helps to draw blood from the skull and assists the eyes.
and it is appropriate to press on the olive or myrtle temple because it is among all veins, as it has no nerves or arteries therein.
Always seek to make it as easy as possible, do not burden anything if the first time is not successful, and restart. And sometimes causes swelling in some people when it must be done the first time, but do not worry about anything. The quality of healing depends on your thoughts.
a; c s the sewer, and so that youseus: no dont laissible.
To avoid future illnesses; And so the sanitation should be done on one of the three veins that are there: namely, cephalic, saphenous, and basilica. And it must be drained at the beginning of breakfast and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear.
And if you must heal it within one day or two after two or three hours.
The healing of ailments does not have a set time but is done when needed during the day or night and at all hours.
And healing children should not be done until they are fourteen years old or women carrying for the fourth month up to seven months. Do not attempt to heal old men who have passed sixteen years.
And when one wishes to treat anyone in any way possible, it is necessary that they cleanse the intestines with a mild enema. if there is much feces retained, so that the veins do not attract the excesses from the intestines to the principal limbs which are harmful.
(tente:
If you become weak from severe illness after constipation, vomiting, abdominal distension, frequent urination and defecation in women, sexual intercourse, labor, staying awake and joining together, or by anything to the body or through a wound.
Then delicately drain the humors if it is large due to meats and drinks or medications, provided you have permission.
Then give a bath unless any of these prevent them from subtly draining the blood,
And cleanse of blood from the vein around the third part as we have said.
And guard against work, pain, lust, and similar things on that day.
Be diligent, and let them be dried, and they are three times as the plague of wounds; The armor twice.
Then carefully stretch out the ligament moderately, because when it is too tight or loose, you cannot correct it without causing harm.
And then rub the area gently with your hands until the veins become swollen and pulsate.
Then moisten the bandages with a small amount of old oil, then place his finger from your left hand over that vein above the area for a short while as needed. soet;s to you theym, and he bon: c quarters. If you see : There are veins that flee like cords to the butcher, and some of which are flat with swelling. for if when one touches it near the wound, it retracts into a flap and cannot open the vein, thus there are some like this.
and if it operates on the vein, then the wound is too narrow, so the butchers must be knowledgeable in these matters.
s and d. So, so that he at the first one'I: to be on-brolem
When the leg is swollen, and the patient hopes for relief, let it rest for one or two days without binding the arm. Perhaps he may have an abscess appear; do not give him a bath, then resume washing if it pleases him.
and if the hole is small or the vein is subtly cut without you doubting that it does not bleed as much as you see, then cleanse that same wound thoroughly.
2ulentfro (1 en la t the TM:llt:
If you see the area swollen, do not start bleeding again, and apply a little oil of wool fat there, for it eases the pain in that spot and softens the skin at this place by the oil.
And thus treat each vein with wool fat oil that you cleanse, to stop the flow of blood.
And do likewise make triacle and bowels from it when you put it on the wound; if too fine the threads are and split apart as they become too thick.
And if it comes to a large abscess occurring often, especially when the opening of the vein is small at that time. If hasty, and place upon its location a soft sponge soaked in water and salt slightly warm, and hold for an hour.
And it is necessary that you do this after the blood has been evacuated from the vein, and if there remains any discoloration or greenish hue at the location for several days, do not worry. s;t;
And many times there occurs an abscess and appearance on the sinew of the basilica; therefore place your hand upon it, and if you find the spot tender to pressure from your hand, that is the evil appearance. Then be sure not to place anything as we have said upon it, for perhaps by chance on the artery; but provide a dry poultice to harden the spot, then treat with another remedy until it is healed.
And deal with each blood according to its amount and the color of the blood.
If the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see it swollen, leave it to become thinner; and if it's too hot, let it cool down.
And one who is thin and weak and in need of bloodletting should be given a wider incision, with larger bandages.
And for one who is weak, do the opposite and frequently strengthen him with small amounts, and instead of squeezing, make incisions across.
This way of healing is safe from blood deterioration and nerve compression, and it allows for movements as long or wide as necessary.
And for those whose body requires attention to the limb, it is necessary to give them pounded wheat in juice of red apples; if they are exhausted, bleed three or four times.
And if they are of a cold constitution, let them take pounded wheat in syrup or honey-flavored syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and well-scented syrup.
And if it is swollen from much blood loss, then one should take a strong purgative drink and an aromatic subtle syrup.
And employ other remedies as mentioned in the section on fainting, for the evacuation of blood from a vein.
And if one wishes to drain the arms, and to bleed elsewhere at another time, it is necessary that when greatly swollen from much blood loss, they are bled little by little continuously according to the quantity of their virtue.
(1; and so and there the t't
And if one wishes to heal another area, it must be tended to on the second day or sooner.
For there is much blood within the body that has become overheated, and it causes fever; thus, one must draw a large quantity, and dilate the passage until it drains freely. then once you have treated all ailments of illness, and place your hand over the soiled hairs as it is being shaven, ensure that death does not come to the area. firstdt, or nofus tth. Don've the following sentence and c.
When you see a dislocated arm, do not immediately attempt to relocate it if blood is seen on the second attempt, and the wound appears closed; instead, firmly press around. If it's swoleback, extend the arm quickly, as this would be harmful.
But leave it until the wound has healed the second time; or if you see no sign of inflammamoiu at the flap, continue as long as the blood vessel on the vein has hardened. the
If the vein is inflamed, leave it alone and do not bind it, until the abscess is calmed.
And if it is necessary to bleed again, let the blood be taken from the same place or another vein, or the other arm.
li miau et unce it is d and so that li chiers comme nos espointe de ou heu, si que we have les oint the cure to done, s said braies avie l'Oul; et li nail the place doue de pne ce est.
And the manner of healing is such that the patient puts their hand in hot water until the fever subsides.
Then bandage it moderately, so that the vein appears well, then cleanse while moving through the length, neither too wide nor too long.
And it should be wide openings, and well bandaged close to the joint of the hand, so that nothing may escape from it; if not, put the hand in hot water again and allow blood to flow into the water until you have enough.
And if it is so, do not push back with hot water, for it is placed more in winter than in summer.
and the healing of this wound is better than all others, as there are no veins or nerves present.
The healing for the sore on the right hand is effective against all liver diseases, and this is how it's done:
c. And if you cut across it, and if you cover it completely on all sides, then there is no harm.
And do not sever too much, for the nerves are close together without separation.
Then place the hand in hot water if the vein is frozen at the wound and cannot be extracted.
as it;
The bone of the finger on the left hand is used for the illness of leprosy, and do as I have told you with the right.
The bone from the elbow serves all diseases that originate within the body. as illnesses of the spine, and retention of urine, and kidney disease, and ancient diseases of hips and legs, and similar ailments.
to:07 the d; the fact as t s c. 0, but on tha l's and so de he vey byt - annbads that n tre et de mort And it lies above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, with much blood flowing from above the bone.
Cleanse or make larger where there are many vessels or at the ankle, so that it moves correctly.
And if you cleanse at the foot, watch out for veins that are underneath, and cleansing as in cutting through; let the swelling be reduced.
:
And if the resetting fails on the first attempt, try again within a short time as the joint is sore. And do not hesitate with the nerve, as we have said, and make use of the sophene for the other limb equally.
The head of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle, and its treatment relates to the pain in the hip when it's inflamed with blood.
themestry:translate ondun they c;
When otherwise one does not open the vein; and if it opens, then the blood flows in all ways that you can see, and across. and one may move to grasp it, because the bone is loose, and it is greatly pushed back towards home (referring to its position).
and one may move to grasp it, because the bone is loose, and it is greatly pushed back towards home (referring to its position). And if you cannot grasp it, so that no blood flows from any part of it or through the double foot, and towards the little finger, and protect against numbness.

Of wines of cataplasm
Poultices are made of horns, or wax, or glass; and suction is done in two ways: either by drawing blood with a lick, or without causing pain.
And this suction that does not cause pain is done in two ways: either at all heat levels, or with heat;
and two others in two ribs of the neck; and the chin's vermilion. and the vermilion of the two shoulders; and above the knees. : And the blisters on both ankles; although bloodletting does not affect any veins, only small ones scattered within the skin.
And so that they do not become weak from lack of blood, as with healthy veins treatment. by them ou that liont and not day let heal:ce f in the lueter; it.
And if by necessity of illness it is required to massage, or due to customs, we administer each hour at the beginning and end of the month, as well as in between.
For there are those who, when they need massage, have heavy heads;
and if some suffer from swelling and redness on their face, head, neck, and in the eyes.
BSA (t with a: And if there are those who think, and see with bloodied and pained and dead bodies and similar things.
And when we see these signs, especially in the month, we command to treat after 3 hours past noon.
The treatment of the muscle helps to strengthen the head ... that comes with the eyes, and it is not necessary for everything to be evacuated from the body.
This windwasping is at the site of the head's sinus.
And it is not necessary for those who have a cold disposition to use it or are choleric, as it causes much harm.
be done; dose les maintes made de la plie for the vent:
And those who experience it often become disoriented, so placing the bladder slightly lower due to suspicion of misalignment is necessary.
Ventilation within the neck affects the health of both the upper and lower jaw, and thus requires stretching of the chin. as they n'lls
And it must be gently pushed, for if held too firmly, internal displacement or stomach distress may occur.
Wind attacks and two ribs cause pain in the chest; hysteria, migraine, strangulation, and pain from the nerve roots.
And it is located near the sanity of the basilica; and one must command the anointor to express his hand upon touching, that he does not cut the artery, nor let blood flow outwardly.
the final treatment bo:
The windings of the shoulders cause an illness which arises from heat and swelling.
The windings of the elbows are as much like those of three veins in the arm. because it attracts blood from these large veins;
And instruct the surgeon not to pierce too deeply, for the body is close to bones and contains veins and arteries.
The suction cup placed on the buttocks is also effective for hemorrhoids and conditions below it, and it must be large and made of wax, which needs to be well melted; and sometimes if it were too thin, it would break; causing large wounds.
Leg suction cups are openly healing, as they draw blood from the entire body, and are effective for ancient aches of the legs, bladder, and kidneys; and relieve headaches in the temples, ankles, and generally weaken the body after long use, bringing about palsy in various conditions.
The method of applying the cupping is that you place it first empty and apply heat promptly, positioning it hastily and moving it evenly, without stopping until you see the area turn red and swell, with signs of slow bleeding; then remove, reapply the cups, and take care in the arrangement of limbs, as some have sensitive skin and clear veins: a single firm strike is sufficient, and wide shallow cuts should be made, and suction applied lightly.
And if the vein is large, it must be struck twice: the first time to thin the blood vessel.
And if the vein is very thick, it must be struck a third time; and when we want to draw out little blood at a time, then we only strike once.
And if we want a lot of blood, begin often; and if the vein is spacious, pierce deeply with it, so that the vessel's end is neatly severed.
And it is appropriate for those with thick and hard skin, who have swollen veins, to insert the points of oil-based aperture and solvent cupping glasses. if it is such, of purple oil or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil.
If it is by means of oil, of watercress, or of lily, or chamomile, or similar substance.
And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of almonds, or balm, or aniseed oil, and similar substances.
And if the one whose skin is tender and wide, there should not be put any oil,
But it is necessary to wash after ventosation with pink water, or cold water, or black henbane water, or squash gourd water, or porcelain pitcher water, or other similar substances.
And those with excessive moisture should rise easily, or with myrtle water, and sumac, and similar substances.
And those with large excesses rise with old wine, or water of cumin, or a decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar substances.
And it is not necessary to apply the cupping before or after bathing, but an hour or two after; and do not sleep immediately after cupping.
And it is customary that he rests when he must be cupped and when he has been cupped. And beware of those who are prone to cholera, whose blood is excessive and inflamed; the text. t as them:
And spiced meats, and roasted pieces, and moistened meats.
And those with cold disposition should prepare a syrup of honey and fragrant wine that is neither old nor new, along with small portions of meat, spiced meats, roasted pieces, and various game birds and partridges.
And the day they fast or purge themselves, they should drink more than eat.
c for the patient. Thei's; if yout: [A story de them, neither: And let them be subtly syringed, but it is not necessary for those who are hot to drink it.
The cupping glasses that are placed without causing harm are those set over the liver, and kidneys, and gout-affected areas, and abdomen, and swelling and aching limbs, for these body parts do not endure being struck.
And it is done only to draw blood from one part of the body to another. byrrt ill Est il s: C's. Is not f.
And from it pain arises when there is an obstruction or stone, and you may draw the obstruction by chance through its attracting power, or remove the stone from its place.
And thus it is done when placed upon the liver and near the spleen if there is retained windiness.
And these cups are made with hollows to be emptied as much as possible; and at no time are they filled with fire, nor ever plain water.
If by bad illness there is bleeding from the lungs, and in such a manner that you fill the bladder with hot water or with water where you have boiled medicinal herbs like valerian.
The administration of the bladder is by fire as follows:
And it has two levers of half a palm thick at the end, and around the middle there is a small hole as for inserting a needle.
:bard, e t le
Et il faut avoir un milleau qui soit de taffetas ou de fer pour faire une chaîne liée.
And they should vary greatly or slightly depending on the diseases and the condition of those who suffer from them.
the do bount a v . I believe to not so:n;
And one must thus apply this poultice to the limb:
Take the tallow of wax or a salve and place it within the poultice underneath the vein that is over the poultune. Eschange ou elle duit of les chaunde lou mettie oeve la place, qui estes orde lairant les tels le veue the sounement the saloon ou que vous de place, et letz quitte.
And then place it over the limb, and position your hands as we have said above, so that when desired, you may apply pressure, and insert the bladder.
And follow this procedure as before, and repeat often if needed.
In the bladder used for treating pneumonia, there are no penis or urethra, and it is only made when filled with water, and placed over the limb completely.
When it occurs:
Without exception, they should not be used in limbs where it is impossible to apply cups due to their small size, such as lips and gums, among others. and on those newly shorn of hair, like goats or lambs, and other similar cases;
with them:
And they place it on an acute soft surface until it becomes familiar, and has nothing in its stomach. Then cleanse of veins and bandages, then rub the limb until it becomes red, and apply dressings on top.
And when they are flat and have healed, if it is at the place where you can apply bandages, then do so because this works very well afterward.
with that he les are; c;l't erben; the ou ; çe laubgust il.
And if the wound heals too much after it has been without dressing, then apply a linen cloth soaked in cold water and place over, until the sore is filled.
And if there are multiple sores, then apply powdered stibnite (vitriol), crushed gallstones, and similar substances, until they are filled.
Or place them on the shells that are peeled, and leave them to grow back in length and width as they have been now.
Et s'il en est besoin davantage, alors prenez d'autres remèdes.
And if the remedies are not to be taken, then rub the area with fresh blood or insert a needle until it stops bleeding. and apply them there, and as soon as they feel the blood, let them heal.
And when you see that they bleed, then powder with a bit of aloe and silex grind, or ashes, so they will clot now.
This is the beginning of the book on fractures.
These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and they deal with the healing of fractures and dislocations.
s. 1dud (t.
For this reason, knowledge of it is rare in our land, for I have never found any good one.
and I know nothing about it, unless through the knowledge of ancient books that I have studied so much that I have learned its ways, and by experience, and from my life's habits.
and I have described in this chapter what is contained within it, and I have shortened the end of it, showing clearly the forms of the treatments that are applied as I did in these two previous chapters.
; s;
When breaking or dislocation or twisting or contortion occurs in any body part, it is necessary to support the patient on both sides with a stretcher, if there is nothing to hold them up entirely, as with weak limbs, children, or old people.
If the tension is not too much or too cold; and with frozen joints, that is to say, cold baths, and horse and bird dung, do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty foods, and do not overeat meats that fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of an abscess or discharge of material from a limb; then bring the patient back to their original state as they were accustomed.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to feed the patient with meats that promote growth, or are viscous like boiled wheat, eggs, testicles, pancakes of veal, and offal, fish, freshly caught fish, large amounts of wine, and similar foods. To partial dislocation, movements are immediately present and soon there is a fracture.
And know that the bones fractured from old age and weakness cannot be well mended or joined according to their natural healing of limbs, nor those likewise who are too tender, such as in small children's bones.
But do not cure, reset the fractured bone with a large tenon that binds and joins the limb together until it is strengthened as if it were before; and perform all of this work, so you must nourish with fatty meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures are various in many ways.
Because a fracture of the head is different from that of the hip or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. by to la maint les doue time cide the lits, that s, it so.
by to la maint les doue time cide the lits, that s, it so. And if there is a break with a wound, and a small crack throughout.
And each has its own method and instrument proper for restoration, according to what memory suggests in that place.
And it is known as bone fracture because the joints are twisted and widely opened due to excessive force, and they lie in the palm of your hand.
And when there is no twisting or touching them together, and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no fracture.
But it can indeed have twisting, splitting, or a small fracture. t (chestre the text s i; it and so as de te bon: M: est ueple: C'sui the ou f clac are all nul ben par le li croit la mermzard that a durduest by the tjr. O, they shteman et ie un
And know that the fractures which go into alignment, with the two separated parts, they must now be brought together evenly, so also in abscesses if it arises.
and if an abscess occurs, leave no day, until the abscess is calmed; the puncture les poinz it is to the hairsir le sangle dents the saiches tu the wolflips too large et poisthem alies the cotte the tingues to li les points de healing, and ploxelts à la maintes too icé est tout lisht. And they are them the mold.
And if the bone is in pieces, and they extend from two parts, whether it's hands or feet, or to your hand if it's small members, or between two strings, or one string with your hand.
And place the member according to its natural shape, so that when the broken parts of the limb are separated, you reset them by all means in their original positions as much as possible, and ensure through your work that the patient does not experience further injury or pain.
And properly align the two ends of the bone according to the best fitting shapes.
And he feels a strong sensation in the hand if it seems to you that it is not well: treat gently and do not stretch or press too much, as those who cause abscesses and swelling through their methods often have seen us many times.
And when the limb is about to give way, gently restrain the patient so they do not move it, neither while awake nor asleep, neither turning or in any other manner. and ensure that the limb is securely positioned so it feels no pain. When it feels no pain at all or not at all, one must place it in such a position that it feels no pain.
When it feels no pain at all or not at all, one must place it in such a position that it feels no pain. and ensure that it is kept properly aligned so that deformities do not occur once restored.
and the quality of the broken limb depends on what I have told you.
;
For there are small members like arms and legs and others: one should wrap bandages of fine soft linen.
and those that are thick like thighs and legs: one should wrap with a wide sturdy bandage, for the wider bandages encompass the entire large limb evenly, without any folds.
then it is wrapped with light wraps three or four turns around the member and tighten the bandage on one hand throughout its length, then go above the break and loosen slightly there, less than at the break point. Then pull away from the break a little bit.
And soften the ligaments little by little, until you grasp a large part of the joint's original position, then take another ligament and turn it back to its proper place above the broken one.
Then return to the part below the fracture, and strain it moderately, not too hard or too softly, as we have said in the first letter above.
Then place strips of lin or cloth between the ligaments so that they are all equal, then bind it above with bandages, and then apply well-made splints underne groin. If there is no abscess or swelling.
If there is swelling or an abscess, apply soothing ointment for the abscess and remove the swelling, leaving it as such for some days.
Then hold the affected area and be of a mixture made from equal parts of linen cloth or wood used for making wedges, or coconut palm fronds, shaped as follows:
But it is necessary that the splint placed over the break be slightly larger and wider than the others.
sa c s,t ;
Then it is strained on the edges as you did in the first dislocation, then laid to rest quickly with a thread, as in the initial dislocation over the break.
Also tighter it should be, the less there is; and it is fitting that the thread be of medium size, not too thick nor too thin, and made of flax.
Because if the thread is thick, as in the works of peasants who twist their ropes from flax lines, and it's a great error, for the dislocation cannot be equal if too fine, nor should it have less than two finger spaces between each point.
And if the patient is in pain from the head of the shoulder after being strained back into place, put poultices of flax or charred cloth under them so they do not shift.
When the wound is accompanied by broken bones, and the skull is fractured, I will explain its treatment hereafter.
And know that it does not require extracting all broken bones on the first day. them line s and totide. The t.
And here is the manner of ancient empalers to restore fractures, dislocations, and torsions: take flour that adheres to the walls of a mill, mix it with abundant egg, and create this concoction, not too clear nor too thick, and use it. This is the common method for the empaler restoring fractures in various positions, especially in women and small children, as it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Another method of plaster for restoring fractures and dislocations and torsions: take arar root and lavender, anise and asafetida and Arabian gum, 10 grains each; musk and aloeswood, 5 grains; ambergris .viiij. (7) grains; and make a powder of it, with honey mixed with egg white. If the patient's constitution is warm, use this plaster, as its composition is beneficial, and quickly heals broken bones for many individuals.
Another plaster that is effective for torsion: take Arabian gum and wormwood, 10 grains each; musk and aloeswood, 7 grains; balsam of Mecca .vi. З.; benzoin .x. З., and grind it well, then mix with water or abundant egg white, and apply.
Another method for joints and bones displaced from their places, alleviates pain when occurring, and cutting involves the bone; fracture: take new linen, and soften with milk and cooked in oil, and apply on the site. These dressings do not heal but are good to soothe swelling due to an abscess, and properly relieve pains.
Another method for dressings that heal broken bones: take dried leaves of mulberry and ground ivy leaves, and grind together to make a poultice.
Another method for dressings to restore broken bones and heal the remaining abscess: take roots of valerian, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour in equal parts; grind and mix with wine, and if the limb is swoln, apply with moist coriander water or just water.
Another method of plastering more effective than the first, when a hardened abscess comes to the healing of the limb. Take roots of valerian, and seed of flax, wormwood, mallow, and without rue, and flowers of violets and chamomile, all in equal parts; and grind, and knead with salt water, or fresh water, or wine, according to the warmth of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras writes in his book that nothing but a mixture of wax and oil should be applied to a broken limb for restoration; he advises it not to be too hard or too soft between two.
And it appears to Galen that one should apply dry and slightly warm substances such as myrrh, frankincense, and incense, among others, for the restoration of a broken limb, as we have said.
Another method of treatment for injury and pain: take dogwood bark and hellebore leaves, or feathers of birds, and wormwood, and mix them equally, then grind them and make a paste.
And then spread it a little afterwards, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor have his bone moved out of place; do not stretch him too much.
And if pain comes to the place, or itching, sense of relief or swelling occurs, so hurry and stretch out, and remove the paste immediately; and take a light cloth, and a damp sponge, and dip in water, and lift up the affected area until the itching ceases, and be calmed the pain. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then wrap it in dry or moist linen with rose oil or oil, and bind to a stool until you are sure of heat abscess.
And let the inflammation of the limb rest, and beware if it is bone pain, then resume binding carefully, with a bit of lead ointment, and do not strain too hard as before; gently until it becomes healthy again.
And if you see that abscesses and redness and pain and swelling are spread throughout the bone, and you need lead ointment and binding, then resume as before.
If it does not come to the limb as we have said, do not dislocate for more than 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 days; and never leave it unattended for 20 days, according to what is seen, until the breaker heals and approaches the shoulder joint above.
Then reset it promptly again, and the flesh grows thick as I mentioned before; and if you see the place drying more than necessary, know that no swelling can occur. Arise the warm water baths at all times when you dislocate it, and do this every day, and wash a little with soap.
Therefore, in this work, cut the ligaments on the limb and hasten what a wise man does, who restores the twisted member correctly: it is bad, and such works are fearsome, and I see nothing else but weakness and working directly.
In various ways of fractures Many kinds of fractures are there, and different shapes, and the causes are distinguished.
When there are cracks made from the blow of a sword, and the neck bone breaks all the way up to the socket which is below the bone, as if by an arrowhead or club; and for this reason, this manner of fracture is called "arrow-shaped".
When the sword pierces the bone from above without splitting it, this manner of fracture is called "absolute"; and there are wounds from these two large or small cracks.
And if there is impact with embedding, splitting, or stone-like fragments in the bone, or falling on the bone, or other similar injuries.
When there is a persistent break, reaching just below the skin that lies under or above the bone, causing this wound which may be large or small.
And if there is a wound that lies as subtly under the bone like fine hairs, and it is a small tear, thus this breakage is called "fine" or capillary.
And if the wound is made by being hit with a stone, or falling, or similar things, and brings in a piece of bone upwards, causing swelling as hot pots do when they are placed on heating stoves; it enters into the flesh within.
And this happens more to those who have their bones softened by moisture, as is with children.
And it occurs in all these ways of fractures where small fragments are left if such, and I will speak about them specifically.
And let us know all ways of fractures by separation underneath them and inquisition on rods, and by the corrupted cartilage which is beneath.
; That do theye la peck: ne: car; that yout les se mar: If you sont c. Incorujn: the unnerment y lo-JJ. (and by 1.
In the treatment of broken bones, be aware of accidents involving the patient, and if you see any bad accidental occurrences such as vomiting of blood, loss of understanding, extension, paleness, fever with chills, eyes protruding forcefully and reddening, and other similar conditions in many forms, he cannot cure without doubt.
And if you do not see any serious accidents, and expect a cure, begin the treatment.
And when pain first comes to you, and it is winter time, the bone should be removed on the fourteenth day of healing that you can do.
If it is so, if you remove the bone within seven days, thus ensuring that the tissues below the bone are not corrupted, then the accidents we have mentioned will occur.
And if the bone fracture extends to the tissue covering the brain, it is necessary that you split the broken part as such: and be sure to grasp the head where the patient has struck it, and expose it above the bone in all possible ways, and beneath the wound's appearance more gently than you can.
And if the spreading of blood reaches the exposure of bone or abscesses, use what is necessary for aid, and ensure that you fill the space with soft cloths soaked in oil rosé. And make the wound rest until the abscess is pacified and you are assured of blood flow; then begin to work around the bone to remove it; there are two ways of working: one way is to cut at the narrow incision in front, which is the method.
And then make another larger incision than the first.
And the work is diverse and large it as thou shalt fasten them with points are iron and let be them quickly do not let up fasten on.
And if the bone is out and hardened, it must be that you pierce around it, thus making incisions with tweezers, not too deep so they do not penetrate beyond the bone of the skull, and there should be a margin or circle at its tip, which does not allow the point to pass through the bone; and you must have several, so that each comes to the specific part of the bone's edge, with tweezebacks for all tests. And this is the form of the three methods of tweezers:
The quality of the piercing inside the fractured bone is that you place a tweezeback on the bone and turn it until you know that the bone has been pierced; then move the twezeback slightly, doing this around, then cut with scissors the space between the pieces, do so subtly as possible and gently, as we have said, until you take out the bone to your hand or any of the tools like pliers, forceps; and ensure that you do not touch the brain or spinal cord.
And when you have extracted the bone, and separated it, it is necessary that you cut any appendages remaining from the bone to all other instruments resembling scissors, but it must be more sharp and subtle than the other scissors.
And if it remains nothing but small bones or scales, gently apply one of the remedies; then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
And another method of treatment is that which the Greeks call "more effective," and it requires much force, as they say. It is necessary first that you expose the bone where the break is open so that when you have exposed that part, place it under the head of this lenticular saw, which has the following shape:
And do not cut too deeply on one side, and the affected part is in two sections, so that the cutting is toward the bone; then grip with a small mallet underneath it, so that you lightly strike along the entire bone without harming the covering beneath.
If it is near the bone, gently strike with an osteophore, for you must not harm it and cause fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not pierce through to the skin, and it is cut so severely from above, leaving small pieces, you must address that roughness and remove the scales with a fine file for which you should have various quantities, in order to treat each place as most effectively possible according to the work and shape of the fracture.
If it has been cut too deeply before by large shears, and afterwards by finer ones, continue in this manner until well done.
In each of the other delicate haircuts and fractures, it is necessary to treat according to its severity; this is something not easily remedied by those who have studied in this art.
And if the sore is exposed, it is necessary to take a cloth of flax according to the amount of the wound, and soak in oil rosins, and place upon the wound. by for the first they c bon conts an de a. If you say so faire en
Leave it thus for a day or two until the abscess is soothed, then remove it, and administer herbs as root of lis, and wheat flour, and incense powder, and unguentarium, and similar things; make a paste from these substances, and apply to the wound, and introduce more remedies without causing pain.
And ensure the wound is cleanly dressed, do not leave any ointment or allow scab to form, for when a scab forms over the brain's membrane, it hardens and cracks, causing great harm; because if something mordant is placed upon the sore, it will be irritated from above.
Therefore, if by any accident something comes to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
And if blackness does not come from the medication applied there, where its virtue lies, it is necessary to take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil with woolen cloth, and place it on the sore. Then you must treat in ways that are appropriate until it is healed.
It is said that the two upper parts of the neck are not broken, nor separated from one another, for they are bones; and the lower part is cartilaginous, and does not break, but only bruise or twist, and then heals.
And if one of the two parts is broken, you must insert your small finger or thumb into the neck without injury, and match the break inside at the index finger joint, and in the throat further down, until the bone regains its natural shape. and do this gently, ensuring that the patient does not feel pain from your action.
And if the break is in the part above the neck and the bone cannot be brought to its place, you must align it slightly with the handle of a knife that is somewhat thickened.
And if the fracture is of two parts, then remake it similarly, and hurry to restore on the first day, if you can.
And if not, after the seventh or eighth day, when the abscess is soothed, then wrap with fresh linen bandages, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you wrap another bandage on the other side, if the fracture is there; and let the bandages be large enough to fill up the bone's protrusion.
is the ouso; by; you them, and so ça mbl's at en trene lesst Trafus contte clevist to on ce l’s.
On any occasion when goose feathers are placed near the tent opening and if there is a slight draft, it causes the dislocation to break, making the patient cough; do as you see fit.
And if an abscess comes to the patient while you work on it, then apply a poultice or cotton wool soaked in rose oil, or a small amount of diacron.
And if an abscess does not appear, then apply a poultice with fine flour, incense powder, and toasted whey cheese, and place it on light bandages, without tying the wound.
If the nose breakage is small and it is broken into tiny pieces, extract as much pus appropriately, then cut along the fracture line, and treat various chaotic wounds and burns, just as with plasters and ointments suitable for this.
If there is no dense nose without wounds, treat with bandages and apply compresses until it heals.
For the treatment of a jaw fracture
When the jawbone is dislocated without any wound being present, and the fractures are not severe, but merely broken in two parts due to internal bulges, if one recognizes it easily.
It is necessary, if the fractures are on the right side, to insert your index finger of your hand into the mouth of the patient; and if the fractures are on the left mandible, place your index finger from the right hand inside gently, and guide it with the other hand carefully, making sure they align properly.
And if the fractures of the jaw are dislocated in two parts, it is necessary to adjust the alignment by extending both parts evenly until they align correctly.
If movements of the teeth occur, or grinding, then strain with a thread of gold or silver or silk; then place on the broken jaw cerot, and on top put double cloth; and on the cloth place a large well-made stone, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the mandible, and tie it according to how you want it moved, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
And if you see that the shape changes, straighten the joint once a day, and then reset what has been moved; place plaster on it with finely ground powder or flour of masticum after removing the cerot; put light linens over the plaster, and as long as the cast is drying, ensure the patient's position remains unchanged; often it will be correctly set in three weeks.
And if abscesses come, treat them as we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, ensure no piece of bone remains exposed; carefully remove the fragments near the tendons without delay.
And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with thread as necessary.
And once you have removed all these pieces of bone, and there is no remaining piece, then cut the wound, if it's wide, and place suitable splints near the tendons to support, until it heals properly.
aulben; don’t What does so The great break occurs many times at the shoulder, in three ways: it is broken and torn into two parts with pieces, and it is easier to repair; or there is a fracture with an open wound.
And the treatment is as follows when there is a fracture with an open wound: have two assistants, one who applies heat to the broken shoulder; and the other supports the neck towards the injured part; then align the break evenly across your shoulders so that the shape is correct, without any unevenness or gaps.
And if you need to extend further, put a round sphere made of cloth or linen under the shoulder of the patient; and expand and release the breakage, holding onto the sphere with your hand, so that it is aligned correctly as required.
And if you cannot pull the top of the shoulder out because it comes from far back, then it is necessary for the patient to lie over their stomach and place a medium-sized earring under the shoulder blade, with ministers pushing upward on the shoulder until the bone of the shoulder joint has moved.
And then address the break in your bones and if you find fragments, it is necessary to cut into them; gently extracting the pieces. If the bone cannot be joined by any means, place the instrument on one of the incisions made earlier, but ensure this avoids touching the shoulder joint:
And it should resemble a spoon, and not be sharp or too narrow, but rather the width appropriate to the size of the bone and strength of the hand. It should have two handles, if you see that is necessary, one being wide and the other narrow, corresponding to the shape of the wound made when extracting the bones:
When you are sure of an abscess being hot, if the wound is large, and if the cavity is small or you doubt its heat, apply a cloth and bandage to the wound according to its size.
And if abscesses are present there, apply an oil-soaked cloth and linen and wine, and place it on top.
Bone-setting when there is no pain or swelling, place the bone plaster with fine powder and egg yolk on it, put in gauze, and if necessary, place a stick underneath it. Then take a very large band of palm width, then put a doubled cloth over splints, and the plaster; then take a slender rod three fingers wide in length, wrap it entirely around that band, so that the head of the band hangs evenly. And place the rod over the fracture, turn the band around the neck and below both shoulders, wrapping each part separately. And when you see that the ligature holds the fracture adequately, and it is clearly evident that the rod does not move above the broken bone, reward each day, and when the sutures loosen, re-tighten them;
And lay the patient on their back, and place a small pillow under the shoulder to elevate it; this will ease the dislocation of the joint by aligning the shoulder correctly when you tie the arm to the neck, as long as no harmful accident occurs until xx days.
Then begin the plastering again, if it is needed, and strain and leave it so, until it is restored; and it is usually restored in 28 days, or sooner for some people.
Of shoulder fractures.
Sometimes the shoulder fracture does not dislocate and cannot be moved with force; if you set it according to the figure of the break, and shape it as nature intended in all ways that you know; then put fine powdered flour on the site, along with plenty of egg whites; and place a double layer over this. Then place a wide yet subtle board slightly wider than the shoulder, ensuring the edges are evenly covered by strips of linen stitches; then tightly bind it all with a large bandage so that the board does not move from its position, and check the connection every day; and each time you adjust it, if necessary, ensure the board is in place, and let the patient rest on their side. The shoulder should be restored in 20 or 25 days, but do not loosen it too soon because bone does not heal quickly.
And if a piece of bone juts out and not from the edge, make an incision there, and remove the bone, and do as we have said in the treatment of abscesses with hot pus.
In the case of a broken foot
The foot is rarely broken within the body, but it often breaks on the outside. And when it is broken inside, it descends below, causing the patient great pain and weakness, loss of strength, and sometimes vomiting blood, exposing the joints in the fractured bone, which feels very badly.
The process of restoration involves the patient lying on their back, placing a cushion between the shoulders, pressing the shoulder blades together, and gently binding both sides with hands to align all body parts as much as possible until the bone's shape is correct; then apply liniments or other light substances wrapped in cloth over the fracture so it does not move; return the ligament roundness to its place on the back, strain cautiously, and gradually release each hour according to healing progress, continuing to bind if swelling occurs. If separation is necessary due to corrosion or pruritus at the site, pain, or abscess, proceed quickly; separate it, clean the area, and apply suitable remedies; then gently strain until it is well-healed.
The breaking of ribs
It is the fractures that arise behind and at the base, and they lie on the back, and it needs to be inquired about them well.
And the reductions are that you make the fracture even as it should be. Then place the splint, and strain with a stake if needed.
And if the fracture of the ribs is moving towards the inside, the patient feels great pain and pressure, similar to pleurisy, for the bone does not have flesh; it has nerves, and they spill a large amount of blood, which is serious illness, and the ancients placed great remedies upon them.
And those who say that it should be treated with meats that cause the stomach to swell, in order to push the fracture forward.
We do not attempt to make abscesses appear if they are not present. And if it is there, and the wound heals.
And some say that applying cups on the area to draw out humors is reasonable; however, there is doubt that the cupping may attract excesses to the weakened area.
the so that’s le m s and se la; Thebiffront. Hep domme:
If the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear due to an unmoving bone causing doubt, then at its original location of the broken rib, it is necessary to make a cut and place under some instrument for protection against infection; then one must sever the bone, gently extract blood, and then sew the two edges of the wound if they are large, and treat with unguents until healed. And if abscesses arise, place it on moistened cloths anointed with oil over its location; care for that area as needed to ensure the swelling lies flat against the ribcage where it must be, until healed.
For a broken collarbone.
Never comes breakage of the shoulder bone, and it does not collapse; also at the spine of the back. And when this happens to anyone, and you wish to know if they will be healthy or not, take heed if you see their hands softened and swollen and dead, and cannot move or extend them, and when you prick with a needle, they do not feel it. Know that in some cases they are mortally wounded, but if they can move and feel well when stretched and not, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and the patient will be cured if put on treatment.
And when such things come to the spinal column of the back, and you wish to know if they will be healthy or not, take heed if their feet are softened, and there is an injury that is on their hands, and a gustation and egestion without volition; and after being soothed on its belly, it also experiences egestion without volition. And when it has been soothed on the back, they cannot stand up. Know that they are mortally wounded: do not labor in their treatment.
And if these accidents do not occur, then this is a lighter matter.
And the treatment is to apply warm oil or goose fat if there's an abscess, on the spine until it's soothed; then place it under a comforting and dry compress, bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; do not sleep on that part where they feel pain, until healed. And if any bones are dislocated, it is necessary to cover the area with clean cloth; then move the bone back into place, and sew together the two edges of the wound, using a stitch if they're large; and if the head of the bone is broken, known as "the joint of the knee", apply your poultice from your left hand and hold it up to your right hand at eye level, then place an ice pack on top, if needed; then secure it, and if there are dislocated bones, separate them and treat the wound until healed.
for a broken thighbone
Sometimes the bone of the hip is broken, and if it happens, there is not much reduction at its head; they cause a long deformity, descend to the pelvis, come to the patient's pain in place, and protrude as though broken.
And the restoration is such that you extend your hand over it, as long as it's on the fracture; and discern what the fracture and its shape are; and if the fracture is only in the head, then align the fracture so that it becomes naturally.
And if the fracture is long or it descends to the pelvis, then make the patient lie on their belly until the restoration of that fracture is properly aligned. When you have set it evenly, place on a splint, then put a wooden or metal pin underneath, and hold the breakage so that it does not move; and mend the gap from above the ribs until it is aligned.
And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or back.
And if an abscess comes there, do not touch it until the abscess is calmed; and then proceed as we have mentioned before; and then return to restoration, and hold it firmly as needed unless there has been no harmful outcome; this is how it should be done.
From the breakage of the shoulder joint
The shoulders are what is between the shoulder blade and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, as it should be repaired according to one of the two ways; which is that you take a piece of fresh meat of moderate size in this manner:
And you bind two heads with two straps and tie them upwards, then shave the patient under one strap; then pour some boiled meat over the broken part until it reaches half a cubit, and have half a foot of stick inserted therein, then suspend it from any weighty object or extenders used by servants; then place the mire's hand on either side of the breakage equally, until the breakage returns as it should.

And if you see that the extraction is more severe, then tighten a ligature below the fracture and above it, extending each member to its place. And if the fracture is near the shoulder blade's head, one must put a ligature midway under the collarbone, and another toward the ribcage, below the fracture; similarly, if the fracture faces towards the ribcage, it requires placing a lightly tightened ligature without strain until the fracture is level on both sides, then align the break properly, as needed, and secure with the ligature unless abscesses develop.
And if abscesses occur, do not tighten the ligature for more than seven days, and apply a linen cloth soaked in oil of roses until the abscess is eased; then secure it again, with the method being that you place an envelope on the fracture, assemble the arm over the shoulder, and put your hand under the shoulder or breast; wrap the bandage, tightening above the shoulder and along the arm so that the arm returns to its natural shape unless anything prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
And if you suspect that the fracture does not move, so use of splints, and place a splint more robust and broader than the others; have two pieces, and it has as large as three parts; then straps on each piece is sized such that it passes over the break. Then apply them as they are thusly, and less frequently
If you see the position of the fractures and tensioning as we have said, when you return to set the broken member at the hour, and if you doubt whether the wound is hot, let it lie bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then look every three days to ensure no swelling or inflammation occurs there, or that movements cannot take place in the limb because it is too strained. If so, as we have said.
If no such incidents occur, do not release the binding until after three or more days, and let the patient lie on their back with hands placed on their stomach; place a plain linen cushion evenly under the shoulder, and check each hour of the day or night that the position of the fractured limb does not move or soften the bindings. If so, due to the power of medicine, give them the meat as we have previously instructed in such a manner that the meat is finely ground; and when they start to regain strength, it should be substantial. It is customary for the shoulder and leg to be reset within forty days altogether; then you must release and administer baths and ointments at the site as directed. If the strain is painful and swollen, delay releasing until after one day or two months.
To treat a broken arm:
The arm consists of two bones, called the "ulna" and the "radius," one small and holding the elbow, the other large and extending below toward the little finger; sometimes just the large ulna is broken, or the small radius, or both together.
If the small radius is broken, its repair and healing are easy; if the large ulna is broken, then its treatment is difficult and more painful than when both are broken together. But if only the small radius is broken, it requires a slight extension and alignment.
And if it's the large ulna that is broken, then it requires stronger pulling; and extend it on a splint, elevate the elbow of the hand higher than the others, and let the small fingers be lower than the others, and cross them right over it immediately, with another splint placed higher in front so the patient feels no strain. Then, extend the minor radius at the part below his hand or near a joint, and another minister above on the other side; then place it evenly according to its best shape.
And if in the break to pieces, place each piece where it belongs, and if any are not aligned with their joints, push them into position; if they cannot be restored to their place, then cut above and remove the bone, as we have said before.
And if there is a break with an open wound, I will discuss it with the individual practitioner; they should take care of it.
And if during the beginning of the healing process there are multiple abscesses, make a bandage with a cloth made from oil-based rosin and white wax; it should not be too hard or soft. Wrap each area gently until the abscesses calm down. Then remove the cerate (waxy ointment), and apply powdered egg whites abundantly to the bone ends, where you make incisions; ensure that the sutures are tight at the break site, slightly wider than the others; understand there must be five or six more stitches arranged in various ways: whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or two. Pull more on the area near the fracture and less as you move away from it, as we have said at the start of the chapter; and the bandages should be soft and moist, not hard or rough; make the strings that hold them tight with flax thread, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said. And after a few days, tend to the limb and joint again. If any accident befalls the limb, as a prickling that comes to the limb, it is necessary to wash the member with warm water until the prickling is soothed; and let the limb not rest too tightly. Then begin straining again, and if the bandages are softened and the bone relieved, proceed similarly.
And if the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, one must soften it a little and let it rest for some days until the swelling subsides, then begin straining again.
And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, they should not be bled until XX days or so; then tie their hands with equal lengths of cloth and keep them from movement and lying down, allowing them to sleep on their backs; and understand that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 35, or sometimes even in 20 days, depending on the compositions and the complexions of the substances.
Of a hand fracture
Such that at the back of the hand there occur few fractures, and not often complete breaks.
Of the nemenmet il iste a la sire, ne doit met elle tires si lent la mues que tu est les emples de flosme seigne li paiset eus, qui prise, et si i est ceste, en li puet ardre oste, se bienemontraie l’est a la carolem ie.
If the fracture is around the tooth beneath the sole of the foot, make a splint out of linen and instruct the patient to fasten it at their broken bone; then stretch with a long bandage, and let the knot be as large as the hand's palm, and secure, as necessary.
If the fracture is in the heel, it is proper to place a splint above and another below on the sole, so that the foot remains open and straight; then tie around the entire hand, securing the connection between the two.
If the fracture is in one of the toes, if it's a sprain, make it level as necessary; and secure with the sole, and if you see fit, place a small straight splint to elevate the breakage without movement; and if the fracture is in other toes like the index or others, make them even, and bind with the healthy toe that follows; or bind all together with one bandage so it may move as needed, or place a splint above as necessary; and take care in restoring and arranging for abscess drainage.
Of a broken hip
The bone of the hip is often broken, and you can see when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration consists in a ligament above the break, and another below. And the patient lies on their face, then extends each member of the body equally to its side; and this is when the breakage is within the bone.
When the fracture is near the root of the hip, let one ligament be towards the forearm and the other below the fracture. Similarly if it's close to the groin, then let a ligament be near the groin, and an extension valve; next place the mirror in equal distance from both hands until it is aligned with its natural shape, and then apply the cast, and securely bind it so that swelling does not occur.
If there is an abscess, allow it to be soothed first and then return to your work and treatment; the lithotomy is done in a certain manner. It is necessary that you wrap around the fracture with a doubled bandage of .ij., and allow for excess material; then twist the leg so that the heel reaches to the base of the thigh, and put a long thread between the hip and the leg near the groin area, above it, let the top part of the thread hang downwardly; then twist both the leg and the hip with the bandage, and place an upright on the fracture site; then lay a dowel under the leg bone, then insert the rope between the leg and hip using fine cloth strips to maintain equal tension. After that, begin fastening by .ij. twists or iiij around the fracture; as you move towards the fracture, the less it is bound. Then go back to the two ends of thread which you have placed between the leg and hip, then ij dowels three are on top, then return atop below the thread, until reaches the pusillar leef, so that thou shalt not move from its place, also no more abscesses or other signs.
If it occurs and is dislocated, adjust as it approaches; as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of bone that protrude, they must be set right, or removed by sawing through the flesh, pulling out fragments; and treated as we have said, until healed.
At no time is the thigh broken as in setting arrows and arms; however, in such a restoration, it does not cause harm to the patient.
And know that the thigh is restored in one day or a little more or less, depending on the various temperaments.
Of the groin's hollow gland
Said that in the hollow of the groin's gland there are few breaks but many bends. And if it breaks, it is not just a cut or puncture, and leads to all kinds of wounds, feeling sore, and this feels very badly.
And the restoration is such that one puts together what was separated on its two sides until they can move; then put the splint, and if necessary, round pegs as well, and strain it as needed, then address all the dispositions we have said in other breaks, like abscesses hot and similar; apply to each accident that which is suitable for them, until they are healed.
by: (ou cide sa qus or n' s
It is known that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called "mustelz" and the other is called "foscile"; and all fractures occur as they do in the arm, and therefore the treatment is similar to that of the arm, and the operations are also the same.
And if both bones are broken together, then the leg turns all around in every part.
And if the subtle bone is broken, it twists forward.
If the large bone is broken, it feels great pain and one can see it well; then turn it back. Then straighten the extension, make it even, and fasten the splints equally; but always, if the breakage is ugly, and there are several pieces, let the extension be smaller and lighter; and adjust according to your skill.
And when you have completed your work, take two strips of hazelwood that encircle the leg from one end to another, and are as long as the leg from knee to ankle; then wrap each in turns with a band above and below, tying them tightly together so the leg cannot lean left or right, which is good; and no one administers any other movement of the leg if it's made of wood, and they place the leg for protection from movement, properly done at the break where there is a wound; and move each day the leg to see if there are pus or any other accident; treat as long as it remains healthy.
From the fracture of the bone of the foot
At the ankle there is no fracture, but at the foot's bone a break occurs and in the toes, with no injury that causes discomfort or certain conditions.
And if there is a break in the foot bone and you see these bones protruding on each other, place your maladies so that the foot touches the ground just like it would walk, then place your own foot under theirs where the bones are elevated, then press until they return to their places; then apply the plaster and bandage around it, and put a small pincers with two flat points under the belly of the affected foot, then stretch it back to its normal position, after which you have wrapped cloths around, and other things as needed.
And when three or four days have passed, release the ligament because you will find the bones even, broken or dislocated.
If there are any broken bones, repair them as we have said for the hand of a man; then place on the broken bone a splint according to its length and width, and place beneath the foot the table I mentioned earlier, and secure it quickly; and if there are two or three, or more, breakages, place on each bone a splint according to its amount, wrapped in one linen cloth, and attach the table beneath the leg so that they rest above the belly of the leg well.
And it is necessary that you do not forget the other things I have said about other fractures, as we have mentioned; and treat each injury as it should be done.
Regarding the breakage of the bone in the finger
When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, she should sit with her legs widely apart, then tilt towards the soft part of her back, and be held behind; then fill her bladder with cotton, placing as much as one stitch; then stand up the woman, lifting her back slowly, until the cotton slips in through the entrance to the nature, bringing the bone with it. When she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and once she has finished, let it reset, doing this for seven days or so: the fracture will be repaired, if you wish, take a sheep bladder and tie on an iron ring, then fill the entire bladder with nature; blow into the tube until the bladder is deflated inside. The nature will restore its break, then fill it with cotton again, leaving as such for several days until healed.
And when the bone of the finger is broken in man or woman, restore it as we have described for the hip bone; these nearby fractures should not be hidden from those who apply their study and use to this book. For fractures indicate various conditions on the correct path of restoration: therefore proceed accordingly.
When it should be done thus and in the brisure de l’oeu, que li les mete, tetre mout estent orle la haus, qui nes. Et quant elle vient ou ne pelez en entour, et le plix: soi sene au plusors; se pren, et les cholez la brisure de l'est que il rite.
Of fracture with wound
It is necessary for those with a fracture and wound, especially if it is as large as the hip or shoulder bone or similar, to be well bandaged now, so that the bandages we have mentioned prove effective.
And if the wound is healthy but has been touched by vitriol, if you have nothing else, then begin to reset the fracture again at that same hour or day, unless an abscess develops.
they; s the t 0 :l* (do not quite, it: m one of the same.
And if the broken bone is visible above the joint, it should be carefully straightened slightly with your hands in small extensions.
And if the extensions do not allow you to adjust evenly with your hands, use this instrument made of iron, which has seven or six hooks and its width according to the amount of injury; thus it is necessary for the master that he grips three or four (hooks), depending on how much he needs in each fracture treatment; be round and slightly thick so that it does not bend under pressure on the limb during your work, with a large part forward:
And it is called "palanquin," for the head of the shoulder should be bent over the visible bone; and it shall bow once until it straightens, being equal to each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the strains cannot properly grasp the bangs, you must cut off the top part of the bone so that the strains have access.
If you cannot bring back the bone as we have said, with an instrument suitable for this purpose, either cutting or smoothening to your ability; then remove that which is lodged in the sharp and hard splinters of bone.
And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, be sure that it's not in its natural place. Make all efforts to put it there, then moisten a piece of cloth with vinegar turned black, properly laid over the wound; do not apply any ointment or other substances to prevent rotting and corruption; after restoring the bone, leave the wound uncovered, and smooth the entire covering according to the size of the wander, ensuring that it does not strain with a fracture; many times this has been done by wise men, resulting in betterment or death or rotting at some point; thus, ensure gentler and softer tensions than other fractures.
And if the wound is severe or large, and you suspect that there may be an unexpected occurrence at this place, as we have said, and you find pain in the area, it does not need to apply dressing; but wrap firmly around it with durable cloths instead. And when you see after one day or two days a swelling near the wound, remove any vinegar you have applied previously, and then put healing ointment for wounds on it, like an ointamant tetrafarmaçon and similar substances.
And it is necessary to loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is healed and healthy.
And it is proper that the limb be braced so that the bow can move gently.
If more than one day passes and it cannot heal but returns to its bent state, for there are small pieces of bone causing the pain; therefore, you must diligently cover the wound with a bandage and remove all extraneous bones that cause such pain.
est blacier bon  (also by faire ; the same.
From bruises which come upon the ulceration
They often come after the healing of the ulceration, especially when it is near the joint, and an unpleasant thing to see is how the limb appears; and sometimes cannot perform its natural actions.
Thus beware if the patient is fresh: if you administer stipulative medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, frankincense, and other similar substances, whether taking one of these alone or all together, and mix with astringent wine or an abundance of honey or a syrup; and put on the body in bandages well tightened, and do not loosen them for days. Then release it, and start over with another piece until the swelling is gone; or you may constrain under a well-made plaster as its property that it draws out all inflammation from above the limbs; and if the swelling has already become hard like stone, and needs to be removed, scrape away the excess skin; or take them to a barber who shaves off until they are gone, and heal while still healing.
When the broken bone is restored and remains weak and delicate afterward due to many causes: one being that it was bound too tightly, and not loosened as it should have been; or because there were too many ligatures, preventing circulation in the limb; or due to frequent irritations; or from excessive movements at improper times; or because it has little blood within its body, thus making it weak.
And the treatment is that you should feed the patient well and keep his body relaxed until there are many blood vessels in him again; and give him baths, bringing him joy and cheerfulness; then apply heat to the limb so it draws great nourishment to it, and often remove the cover with cold water, until the nutrition reaches the member; and he returns to his natural shape.
Dislocation of a limb after health returns
When a limb is twisted after restoration and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the affected limb is unsightly, yet it still maintainures its natural workmanship: do not believe the madmen who say that you must break a new member; many foolish people have done so in our land; these practices are blameworthy, and great harm comes from them, sometimes even death. However, if the nerves and twisted bones are fresh, then it is necessary to raise them with hot water, or mollifying herbs cooked as foxglove leaves, roots, meadow-sweet, and similar things; and make a poultice of mallows, like good diaquilon, and take the musk root of vismalwart confit with geese grease or oil of sesame, and apply the poultice. Alternatively, you can use fatty figs ground with flaxseed flour, and other medicines that alleviate swelling.
And never should the joint be rubbed continuously and for a long time with wet hands. Let there be gentle movements applied to the limb each hour.
When the tortuousness is aged and hardened, like a stone, it needs to be removed with iron, if necessary cutting up to the bone, using a delicate saw-like instrument; and place poultices and give careful attention in treatment.
Here begins the book on dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs on any part, now it must be brought back gently.
For if it is delayed, and the body swells, and perhaps when resetting it to its place takes some effort; therefore, one should not move it until it has swelled: many times this causes bile and other pains.
Also, when this occurs, instruct the patient to apply a bandage, then leave it until the abscess is soothed; then wrap the limb in warm water and oil, then gently move each joint as treatment comes naturally at its place.
the s: igne:
Of the lower jawbones
Sometimes the mandible is dislocated outward, and there are two ways of dislocation: either it's slightly off from its place and swolps a bit; or it is entirely dislocated, hanging toward the cheek, causing saliva to not be held in the mouth nor able to close the mouth, enveloping the tongue during speech.
When the dislocation is slight, it may return through various positions.
And if it is complete and well-formed, you must reset it promptly without hesitation.
And in such a way that the minister paints your head with dye for the patient, and pours three drops of myrrh from one of his hands at the root of the lower jaw dislocation inside the mouth; if the dislocation is into two parts; while the other hand should be ready to balance. Command the patient that they soften their jaws (mandibules) and move them in all directions.
, et que rist of his a lassue les peux sores: ici au de pain, ou jucle dis locations they mandres so the cemai; deter the plaster and pain ee, that the patient, but for it beand li brize. Andre, par ces ointenz saignent tis, duces of l’esquiter les, çui la de la m si vaille jue le disin their toile s;
If it is difficult to reset, especially if they are the two lower jaws together, use hot water and oil until gently relocated; do not wrench while doing so, as we have said.
And when they are equally relocated, and the patient's mouth feels quite softened, place a cloth soaked in a mixture of oil-based cream and wax on it, then loosely bind with soft threads.
and the patient sleeps on his back with his head between two pillows, ensuring he does not move to either side or strain himself in any way, but rather eat light foods until pain subsides, and then gently mobilize the jawbones.
Et puis mêlez ce qu'il veut légèrement, et ne travaillent pas à ouvrir la bouche pour manger ou boire, tant que les mâchoires soient bien nettoyées et sanées.
Et si les deux mâchoires ne peuvent être remises à leur place en une heure, ni repositionnées correctement, alors on peut avoir des fièvres habituelles, diarrhée ou nausée avec vomissements purulents occasionnellement.
Et quand vous observez cela, alors vous savez qu'il s'agit d'une perte ; de nombreuses fois ceux qui souffrent meurent au cours des sept jours suivants.
Of the joint's forcefulness
The strength cannot be dislocated within the ribcage and lower region, and is never dislocated easily, causing much pain to those who experience it.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back and stretches out their arms; then firmly presses the area with your whole hand, after which it returns; then place a plaster and bandage over it, and secure.
the fis. Ingh ęt that c que lessele Jude de laichey:E. ET line les.
And similarly bring back the head of the shoulder when it is dislocated from its place.
Of shoulder dislocation
He said that the shoulder is dislocated in three ways: one where it dislocates towards the thigh bone; and the second is towards the lower part of the arm (ulna); and occasionally upwards, but this occurs rarely.
And it does not dislocate backwards from the shoulder, nor into the nerves; and sometimes downwards towards the thigh beam, especially in those who are thin, as it moves quickly for them; but in those with enough flesh, it descends easily and returns without difficulty.
And sometimes it happens to certain men with a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells from a hot abscess, and they think that it is dislocated due to this.
It therefore requires you to test it until certainty is achieved; then begin the treatment.
And it's known that when dislocation is pushed towards the shoulder blade, and there is a difference between the affected and healthy shoulders; you will find their distinctive differences apparent. and 1.
And similarly, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you can clearly feel it when touching.
And this way of dislocation is not just to return it when new, or if the child is unwell.
And the manner is that the minister lifts the patient's hand upward, then removes the shoulder blade and lifts the joint forcefully back to its place; the minister lifts the hand again and extends it upwards, placing it beneath; this will be done swiftly.
And if it does not come as we have said on the following day, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and prepare a softening and soothing mixture, like an infusion of altheae and fenugreek and honey in water, and apply.
then gently support the patient's back with a strap of linen, neither too soft nor too hard, and place their heel on top of the strap, then carefully lift the head of the shoulder.
And other ministers wash the patient's head so it does not move backward; that shoulder is now reset, and if you see whether the dislocation has been reset in this manner:
And make sure a home attendant is present who is taller than the patient; and stands to their left side, lifts up their shoulder from under the bed of the sick person, and raises the shoulder high so that the patient hangs in the air. And other ministers pull the patient's hand back toward their stomach. And if the patient is too light, use something that weighs to hold them down, and now the dislocation has been reset.
And the joint may also be reset in another manner: and it is such that one drives a long pin into the earth, so that the head of the shoulder is similarly aligned as with an arrow shaft, and neither too large nor too thick. Then it is to be removed from the patient, but wrapped in cloth on top of them, and the limb should be long and straight; then their hand should be extended downward on the other side properly, so that the joint quickly returns to its place.
and if it does not return for all the reasons we have said, then this treatment should be done: take one pin from each of two arms, of great length and four fingers wide, which has a head bent to enter at its full into the socket according to this method:
Then wrap the head with soft cloths so they do not prick the patient, then place it under the neck of the sick person; extend your arms over the length of a staff, and secure the shoulder to the staff, with the arm at the top of the hand, then put the arm above an arch of a wide stretcher, let the hands hang downward, and leave the body hanging on the other side: the joints will be now secured.
And when it is done in any way at all, if you must place under the neck of a spindle threaded with wool equally, then apply the poultice fitted with powder from grinding, with incense and egg yolk around the entire shoulder and near it, then strain off liquid from the poult groove.
It is necessary that it heal as soon as the members are strengthened so it will be more days or less than five and then move; and if it is firm and let them loose, if not stiffen.
And if the dislocation is severe due to moisture that has occurred or another cause, you must apply three punctures with fire as instructed in the text of the cautery treatise.
And if you do all this, and it dislocates again after six or seven days, and the joint does not hold and cannot lift either arm forward, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is compressed or stretched out or weakened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation towards the back and buttocks is caused by a blow, and extension of the arms, and you must administer other remedies; treat until it heals.
And if after healing comes stiffness to the limb and sluggish movements, many times it is used on the patient until the stiffness eases and returns to its original state.
Of dislocation of the joints in the shoulder blade.
He says that the joint of the shoulder blade is displaced to points, and returns to points; and it has been displawed from all parts, especially in front and back, and dislocation is not properly reduced because one can see it well and feel it well; and displaced according to each figure. And when you join the wrong bone with the healthy one, if it can be seen clearly. For the joint is raised, and cannot bend the arm, nor reach its shoulder at all.
And it must be reset as soon as abscesses arise therein, for if they come to pass, the repositioning would be difficult; and sometimes not all of it can be reset at once, especially when it is in the back; such dislocations are worse than others, causing greater pain, and possibly leading to death.
And the restoration is when it can be reset, extend its hand to your two hands; and arms are spread apart, and hands according to the bone around, above and below, place the joint back together or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is at the front, when it doubles its hand to its own hand, and the root of the palm's hinge that is dislocated.
And if it does not return to its place, then make strong extension; and two ministers extend the arm, and cover with their hands, so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm in each direction, after which you have wrapped a long and wide piece of cloth around.
And when the minister joins the joint with its hand, if anointed by any oil to soften the joint, then bind it firmly until it heals.
When it is back in place, then apply dry paste with egg white, firmly strain it, and bend the arm against the patient's pain, and leave it for several days, then release it.
If the joint is firmly in place, then release it and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not hold well, reapply the paste and bandage again, and leave it for several days until it is securely set; then release it.
And if there is instability after the repositioning of the joint, and it moves again, then wash and rub well, and press until relieved; or put a greasy sheep's fat on the joint, leave it for one day and night, then bandage, and let him take a bath. When it subsides, if you rub the joint promptly, then reset and place a poultice on it, and then give an immersion bath; thus do this twice or three times until healed; and if needed, apply warm cow dung mixed with butter as a strain, which will return to its proper position.
Hand dislocation
The dislocation of the hand is slight, and its return is easy compared to other joints Therefore, it must be promptly returned to its place at once when dislocated, so that it may swell or develop an abscess as soon as possible.
And the resets are such that you place the affected hand under a table, extend its fingers, and align them evenly so that it places its palm over the joint's appearance, and hold until it returns.
Nevertheless, you must ensure that it is properly in place; then the patient should place the back of their hand under a table with extension and resetting. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, then the patient should place the back of their hand under the table and align their hand over that appearance of the joint. If it returns now, it's good.
If not, strain with soothing balms on abscesses, and leave it as such to start healing again.
And if it cannot be endured, and you cannot put it back in place after any days, the twisted joint will linger.
and advise the patient to rest until their hand is no longer weakened, and cannot grip anything: then you know that the nerves or arteries are cut; there is no other remedy than to attempt resetting by cauterizing near the wound, and sometimes nothing else can be done.
but;
If it cannot be moved properly, and there is no sharpness, then warm water of milk, and rub until it becomes smooth.
Of the dislocation of hand bones
Dislocations are never reset to each side, neither to the back of the palm nor to the belly.
so que they n'his and:
After leaving it for two days and then resetting it on the same day; and do not move it as we have said, leave it at rest for a day, make it move, and fix the movement until it becomes tight again; and do this often, until it is properly aligned.
And do the same for any other dislocations, if it is out of its socket in another part, and proceed as you have done before, until it is properly aligned; and do the same when it is displaced elsewhere.
Of the displacement of the spine of the back
When the spine of the back or neck is dislocated, and there are several dislocations, there is no remedy, for it hastens death to the patient.
And its signs are that the evacuations occur without voluntary effort, and cannot be held in, causing many times a limb to become weakened or one of the knees, or both arms or legs.
And many times it affects four parts of the spine; when the back part moves, it is called "gilbousness".
The treatment is to ensure that you reset when gallbladder inflammation has arisen from childhood; if there is no healing or health restoration in total.
And those that arise from a fall or blows or similar things say the ancient methods of healing with grand words, where there is no great benefit in all.
but I have shortened them according to my intention, and formed extracts in various ways.
the:
And also those that come directly to two sides, and cannot be healed except for the one properly which comes along the back, as I say;
and it is so that the patient should be extended on their face in an equal spot, and have support under them, not allowing them to bend.
and then it, and let them taches other le, que laissez en .i the l’autre toile estain, et chas de ses li peche, quidit les piez. Et se cest les autres à mons, si a la terrez, sache as euch pies qui diz un bon die, and which on lepour eux, que tu les.
And two ministers know the ligaments, one at the head and the other at the foot, among the two fires.
And they are well fastened together as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms over the spine evenly until it is healed.
If it does not return with this method, take a stick three finger-widths long and place it under the head, positioning the patient on their side, then tilt the top of the stick upwards, followed by placing the middle of the stick along the spine. And place the stick's other end under their opposite head, and press firmly until it returns to its place; if you see so, make the turn that turns towards the hand.
And you shall insert two pins at the head of one arm on each side, with space between them as wide as the palm;
And it has in each ember a small stick, which when twisted correctly, the ember is firmly held in place on earth so that it does not move; and between each two embers there should be one twisting stick, around which the ties turn, and two short twigs of palm length to turn the spindle.
Then tie the ties that are among the scales on the spindle towards the top, and the other ties toward the sides at the other spindle, and each minister turns their spindle with all of its ties, and the master places the axis evenly as we have said.
And when they are evenly placed, put a drying substance with plenty of egg on top, then the straws, and then the splint from a tablet three fingers long to cover the hole of the gangrenous area and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a band as we have said, and use the malaise for subtle nourishment until they are well.
and if anything occurs at the end of healing, it is proper to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the stave that we have said before; and never once should one apply a piece of lead.
and never should the appearance occur in the lower back spine, and one thinks it is dislocation; but it is the bones that open up, so there must be no assumption of healing: perhaps this would bring about death.
for hip joint dislocations
Joints of the thigh and shoulder joints do not experience sprains but only dislocations, unlike other joints; the thigh joint is dislocated in four parts: internally and externally, front and back, more internally than externally, and slightly less so at the front and back.
And the knowledge of its dislocation internally is that when you join the injured leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer and extends more on the side of the sick than the healthy, and the patient cannot double their fist in fire. And there is swelling of a hot abscess nearby because the head of the hip joint comes loose.
And the sign of those it comes upon by chance, is such that this accident is contrary to these before.
And the signs of those it happens upon, are such that they walk well with their legs in accordance; however, do not double over in pain at the groin, and if one wishes them to walk, they cannot beforehand, retains urine, and swells the ankle, and when walking, passes above the heel.
And s and thent; That dose ce que the test.
The resetting of this type of dislocation is such that you may reposition it before the dislocation occurs, and it remains according to its nature, there is no need for treatment; and it does not require any assumption.
And in those cases where the dislocation is fresh and there are four ways of dislocating it, quickly return to the joint, push it back and forward, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will return by itself, and requires no other treatment.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must seek strong assistance and apply great force to the leg with two hands or with straps tied above the knee; And other ministers stretch out their hand over it in such a manner that they place their hands below its joints, then gently grasp the limb above the hip; and others twist the head of the ligament.
And they extend both upwards and downwards all at once so that the patient is lifted from the ground completely, and hangs suspended.
This method of extension is common in four similar cases; if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is good.
If not, proper care must be given to its appearance. When dislocation occurs in the jaw, it is necessary to support the patient's head on their healthy side, then place a tie at the base of the thigh and where the leg extends from the knee, extend the tie upwards towards the knee and towards the forequarter;
Then attach other ties to their arms and embrace the large part of the patient's affected thigh, extending it forward fully: this will return to its place now; and this method of dislocation is easier than others.
And if you cannot hold it as we have described, you should tie the two feet of the affected side together with a strong supple cord around both heels and knees, and let the affected leg be extended twice as much as the other.
Then hang from a stick over the head; and let two arms lie on the ground. Then command one minister to hug the neck of the thighs, and have another minister also hanging with the patient who embraces firmly the thighs, as the joint returns quickly now.
And when the dislocation is inwardly displaced, if it falls to the patient, as we have said in those with fractures, and properly strain a bandage on the affected leg and over the foot likewise;
Then place two heating pads, one on the head and another at the foot, then insert a heating pad between the thighs in front of the patient's body; And to apply wet cloths around it so the patient does not move, then extend each part toward him, and the physician aligns the hand with the dislocation.
If it returns, that is good. If not, place on a board and press as we have said in the splinting, and lay the patient on his healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front, it must extend the injured leg quickly, and according to what I have said; then place the physician's hand on the painful side, then press with the other hand, and stretch downwards towards the groin.
And if the dislocation is to the left, it is not proper for the patient to extend their arm or lift from the ground, but rather they should be as if the elbow was dislocated on the other side, as we have discussed with lying on the two elbows. And be supported by his chest, and the ligament is extended as we have said before, and it must be pressed above the joint against the board.
And then when the patient extends their legs and they are equal; then place a pillow, and put the straps of a bandage so that the elbow does not move.
Et repose 3 ou 4 jours, puis redissolvez-le, et placez la plâtrerie sur celui-ci ; et si vous voyez qu'elles sont égales, exercez le traitement, comme avant, et laissez 3 jours; puis redissolvez-le, et faites aller doucement l'articulation jusqu'à ce que le membre soit réconforté.
De la dislocation du genou
I nternal and external displacement occurs in three ways: that is to say, within and outward, and behind; it does not displace forward.
And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at the hip, and if it does not return to its place, know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all things is that you make the patient sit upright, extend their leg if they can, place your back to their face, and put your foot under theirs.
then take their ankle in your hands, and retract between your two fingers, then bend the two knees gently with the heel; and other ministers extend his foot until the knuckles return to their place, and the sign is that it fits lightly back onto its hip.
And apply the bandage over it, and lift the leg to the hip, and tie them together firmly for three or four days, then release; do not allow the patient to move at all until the limb is comfortably set.
And if the limb cannot be properly extended, treat it with great care as we have mentioned in the treatment of the hip until it is soundly healed.
Regarding ankle dislocation
The heel is at no time fully bent, nor fully straightened completely, but sometimes forward and backward.
And its signs are such that the ankle is swollen, and attempt before at the part where it was dislocated.
The repositioning should be gentle, and one must extend lightly with their hands once it is grasped only.
And when it is dislocated entirely, one must have the patient sit upright, and hold a strap outside by the leg, above the ankle;
*
Et perform these two ways as we have said, by pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is good; if not, resume the procedure, for it will return.
And if it cannot return this way, lay the patient on their back on the ground and fasten a sturdy bar between their thighs in the earth, and wrap cloth around them so they do not move.
Then the assistants dampen the thighs, and other attendants extend the foot towards their hands or a strap, so that they tie it above the ankle of the foot; Then extend all ministers equally, and the pastern should be in place between the calves of the patient to hold while extending.
Then apply equal pressure at the dislocation site on his hands, and use other methods to straighten the healthy leg from underneath, and the dislocated joint will return quickly.
And when it reaches this point, if you apply the dressing and stopper up there, firmly straighten, and tie the bandage around the leg, and watch the nerves that are behind the ankle to ensure the ties are not too tight.
the e totulard: 1 s dras; they haved in the o nd; and Ibonte by ca bane est ; By; If youdo so far cest en tous se, or CNAneze;l're que l’s If it goes beyond this termination, it is not secure that it will not dislocate again.
And if an abscess comes upon it, one must soothe it as we have said elsewhere, until it is healthy again.
Of dislocations
When the joints are dislocated, they must be extended with ease of effort, and it is a simple thing to do.
And if the dislocation is in any part of back or foot, you must have the patient sit on a plain level or table straight upwards, and then place your foot against these joints, pressing firmly until it returns.
by the li de the t and there: an ite est them that dose isde bon.
Of wound and of dislocation together
When a wound comes with dislocation, and it is seen to be restored, many times the patient dies:
If you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compasserate and merciful and slow to anger;
 When you see hope, reset the limb to its place now, so that abscesses may heal there.
And when the limb is in place, apply soothing remedies to abscesses there, and treat the wound as needed with dry ointments.
And if with a dislocation there is a break, and remove small bones as necessary, and do what we have said in simple illnesses.
by.
