Oh you, dear children, I have accomplished this book which is the tail of the knowledge of medicine, including the completion of its presentation and through its statements. And in my vision I came to know that I completed this treatise with this particular work, which is part of the whole body of surgery, namely "cryotherapy".
And because the handwork is well established in our region and it's widespread everywhere, if that were true then science would suffer and collapse, and there are no delays for these injuries described in the small books written by hands long ago. And from this came the mistake and arrogance, understandings were closed, and knowledge became distant.
Or I seem to revive this treatise altogether in accordance with the method of presentation and declaration and abbreviation; and together I will present the forms of instruments used for cauterization and other tools from the medical work along with the alignment of its declarations and preparations, as it is a necessity.
And because no good master of hands is found in our time, the art of medicine has been elongated. And it is required that those who enter into the science of anatomy should know, as Galen says, to the extent they understand the proper functions and forms of organs, joints, separations, bones, nerves, muscles, the number of limbs, movements, and their resting states, and also have knowledge of blood circulation, its origin and flow.
And as Hippocrates said that it is not much without the knowledge, and with this work little can be done; hence in the art of manual practices I am putting emphasis on.
We tell you in the introduction of this book that those who are acquainted with it, so that they do not commit errors and do not touch themes; and Iundefine medicine.
nure. I:ne: Whatsoverle meile. ceteral andrometation of thepeace, Celtic vene, aire. Erean ouses : The inecartiou:squelet juice (fie :ramine.
And sees another eye doctor who cuts a man's wound with a large knife, and the wound was great; he took away from him a piece of the bladder, and for two years he died.
And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the wound, and I knew that if he continued to be in pain there, he would die.
And I saw another doctor in our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture he had an open wound; the physician kept holding the fracture on top of the wound by very strong force, and allowed no salve to come into the wound at all, and commanded him not to remove it for any reason; and stayed in such a state that his leg became completely deformed and his knee joint came to its end, leading to his death.
I was called to come and he urgently needed his leg released; when I saw him after freeing the leg, he was at peace and felt no pain.
But all the ways of his illness had already been confirmed or related to a limb, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not stop until the entire limb was lost.
And I saw another doctor who collapsed under an incurable abscess, and then he became inflamed due to the malice of his lordship.
For a chancre that is filled with black bile does not need to be touched with iron if it is in part unhealed, as it can only remove what has been corrupted.
And because of this, you need to know that work done by hand is divided into two parts: it is as follows, the head or neck where there is danger in several positions; and I will show you in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
For that reason you need to be careful so that the ignorant doctor does not speak ill of your work.
If you take up your arms in defense, and perform your harmful treatments lightly but firmly, and use the best means so that by the grace of God you may be saved and honored; and leave curable diseases to grievous healing; and wield your weapons so that no one doubts you, and act as if it is from this world that you will come into the other for glory.
The French physician Galien made no such admonitions: "Do not treat any disease poorly that you may not be called the foolish doctor."
I have divided this subject into two chapters.
The first chapter is about fire cupping and bloodletting therapes, and it is ordered from the head to the feet; and forms of punctures, and types of cupping, and all that is necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and dissection, and blisters and wounds, extraction of arrows, and the resembling things; it is ordered and the forms of punctures.
The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; it orders the chiefly located here as well as the forms of joints.
So it is that our memories of the past tell us that I must declare the quality and harm caused by each condition.
I say that the quality and harm are longer words and subtle science and secret replies; and from this talk others of wounds agree with it, and they accept it little because I fear its length.
I say that fire aid universally to all conditions in which there is material, for example such conditions as a warm body with matter, and dry body with matter.
In the combination of warm and dry matter, no one agreed and they said that fire is great help; while others said the opposite: that fire is only helpful for diseases that come from heat and dryness.
Because the nature of fire is warm and it should not be used as a remedy for diseases caused by heat or dryness; this was said by those who said the opposite, that fire helps greatly with hot and dry illnesses brought about in people's bodies. Because when you compare the body's constitution and its moisture to that of fire, you will find the body's surface warmed.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it none by experience.
And in all respects, we dare not venture except those who have experienced the mastery of cauteries and know well the diversity of human constitutions, their dispositions and causes of illnesses, and remedies and intervals of a hundred days; for us, others do not worry, mainly with cold and moist illnesses. And all those who are great gathered together and agreed on cautery.
And you must know that fire together with heat is the secret of many remedies, and greater benefit than burning medicinal plants.
For fire is simple and does not harm except to the member that is hot and dry, and it hurts no other part of the body little.
Medicines that come from another part of the body and bring forth disease from it.
nature. Ai leu thewaxes. Leu. Thefy alafie lautume:age d'suforent. What iax. Ameet. Ina, andire, andre. Iaccomprehte. Andrescaur:
lume.amine. Lxseille.t : thexime uniaxe.naggesse tolngardeceuxeves.dents [entire apectiludecessekleuximeuranture ightheable that:sufre
And you know, son, how they agree in that moment when the cauteries should be done and the instruments are prepared.
And I say that caustication is agreeable in all cases, because the suffering caused by aided caustication lies deep within the cautery; and mainly when the cauteries are necessary for painful or urgent conditions that cannot wait any longer than what greater malice does not strike at the limb.
And you never think, dear son, how the wise man acts; for to a disease cured by caustication there is no return; and they say so in this way: but it is not as they believe, because cauteries are not just medicine that changes complexion, nor do they dry up the humors which cause pain, rather their value lies more in hastening recovery and demonstrating the virtue of its work.
And there is no case where the disease's appearance or its nature and virtue remains unchanged; and in it are gathered superfluous elements through the acquisition of meats and similar things - unless cauteries were administered, which would mean little excess and moisture present, as with caustications for pain relief, and little to no return of pain. But this is rare.
And many do not understand why caustications are called the 'legs of medicine,' but that's to see; yet they don't believe that caustications follow medicine - their understanding is false, and it calls caustication the legs of medicine because in no malady do we administer all types of treatments and none of them deserve cauterization, so we use cautery when necessary. It has value. Although caustication is called the 'legs of medicine,' it's not according to the wise men's understanding.
The old said that caustications made with gold instruments are more effective than those made of iron and they spoke not of the foolishness but rather the quality of gold and the high value of its substance; and they said that the cautery's leather does not fall apart, but I have seen it myself, and found in some cases it is true. However, caustications made with gold are more valuable than those made with iron, just as the old said.
And in all cases where you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know exactly how it heats due to the color of the gold, and if it suddenly cools down; and when overheated, they burn at the fire; and this is enough difficulty.
And for this we use iron caustication because it has appeared to be useful in our work.
I have ordered this chapter by the main points here, so that it can be found more easily.
double caustication (caustication with two applications of the instrument)
These caustications are hot and cold to the brain, and in them two causes have fallen from the chiefly ears: many dreams and pain of density and throat and chills and mostly for all diseases that come from coldness so paralysis and stroke and ailments.
I'taille, aims and aitin: lesely an olden laineaux:décaustrains lailain theaure it isenteraise and in itale, itandre, aicarellabsol, eresculature develle il.faire oficharde,s.
And then the knife should lie between your hands, and put his hands on the skin; afterwards place the root of your palm on the root of his thigh between its two legs; and if blood comes up, then wipe with the cautery called "olivare", for thus it is shaped:
And put ink on the edge of the wound, and draw your finger up and out little by little, tearing apart; then let your hand lie idle, and reward the edge as soon as you see a small bone .i. fragment; and if not, repeat using cautery until you see the bone ..ii fragments; after that put some thread in moist cotton, and lay it on the wound, and leave for two years; then treat the ulcer called "tetrapharmacia", so long as it is sound.
And they said the ancient one that the longer you press on the wound, the more it cleanses; and for this reason it helps heal faster.
And none of these say that the cautery must be used so lazily that part of the bone is left unburned, and then reapply to the charred bone, treating it afterward.
And the other advice is that one must apply cautery lightly, and hit so hard with it that the bone becomes as wide as a button women place in their brasses for the purpose that fluids may rise out of it; you should leave the wound open-air exposed for an extended period. Only afterward can proper treatment begin.
And these two methods of cauteries do not seem to be equally effective in all cases; except for those who have never felt fear (fears) before; I believe that we should leave them as they are, because the shoulder joints become weakened over time due to continuous exposure to various solutions, a fact we can observe in other members of our body; and considering my patient'e malformed shoulders naturally suffer from this condition, so for the initial use of cautery I prefer it to be more gentle and gradual, and since using it thus results in relief, that is the approach I choose.
And this pain from the chief (main cause) refers to a deep ulcer that requires treatment.
s :en:
Beware the shoulder blade of the sick person is naturally strong, and it should not be too cold; however, cauterize around that area a little as we have said above.
After performing cauterization on each horn of the skull where we have said before, and make a little cautery there; and it is that the blades are called "vasselz"; and raise your hand so you do not see the bone directly: the sick person feels much more intense pain in this cauterization than from others, and I will speak about it elsewhere; and let the cauterization of the horns be less noticeable than that which is done on most heads, and its shape is as follows:
double cautery of the head If in one part of the head there comes sudden severe pain, and the illness extends to the body, and the shoulder blade is eased by universally used medicines, and all other treatments I mentioned for disease divisions have not provided relief; however, let us cauterize according to two methods, which are medicine and iron:
The cauteries of medicine fire should be preceded by a dressing; and remove the skin and scrape this few times as two blades, and then make the temple where the pain holds part of it in such a way that you can reapply the dressing on the skin underneinaside the bandage; and if it has been restored well, let it remain so for 10 to 12 hours; and then loosen and treat wounds with the medicine cautery, and leave the wound in this state for two or three years; and then put on cotton padding dipped in bran as much as you need.
After the cauterization has healed, and if you see that there are any other burning medicines I have written about orally delivered cautery medicines:
The fire cautery is done according to this manner. Heat the iron cautery as follows:
And it is called "clos" because the head resembles a clover or has a small shape; with few corruptions, and in appearance, placed on the painful area; and you put your hand on it slightly and restoratively move it somewhat laterally until most of the blood flow stops; then lighten your hand so that the arrow does not burn, but remains loose, allowing an abundance of fluid to drain.
After applying linen on the wound and placing it for two years; then I apply moistened cotton in cloth and treat the ulcer until it heals completely; and if you want to cauterize this migraine with the instrument called "cultella," at all points of its tip, but be careful not to cover the artery in this migraine that is not ancient.
from the ulcer
When curing an ulcer as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and it doesn't improve without treatment; however, it is necessary for you to heat the "cultella" until it is white; then draw a line on the affected area half a dozen fingers long, press your hand once, and stretch so that you do not cover the artery and ensure that it does not move with the bone or cause spasm in the muscle. Be cautious of mandible paralysis when speaking, and make sure the nerves have no movement causing tremors in the patient; be careful about the drainage of fluid from the artery after it has been drained, or if there is a significant fear that affects both patients who are not students and practitioners. Allow the work to proceed; but I will tell you how one manages sanguine discharge when the arrow is coppered in this book.
And if you see that this instrument does not alleviate the illness and the patient suffers, cauterize it on both sides as we have said; treat the wound until it is healed; and if you observe, administer the "cultella" or surgeon's extractor of the artery with a pair of scalpels. These instruments are better than others in terms of effectiveness.
from cold earache pain
When pain from the ear comes and takes of healing medicines and treatments that we have discussed in its form. Illibris .ixemale leude, et leu dolores et siete en iaudrement en maundre depeints cest la, lorce illobeautources d'armes apeel of thex it:
After the point of pain in the malicious ear, or when both sides hold pain, and move it slightly away from the root of the ear; then touch each ear twenty times; afterward heal the wound until it is sound.
The text appears to reference "the torment of the mouth," possibly referring to some form of pain relief or treatment technique used in medieval times for ailments involving the mouth, potentially related to dental issues or throat discomfort.
The treatment using torture with a hot iron should be limited to those diseases that involve phlegm, as we have mentioned in the sections of disease; and it must not include similar treatments involving vomitus or pus.
When you treat this kind of torture for diseases involving earwax and regurgitation from the mouth, as well as gargling, it must then require that you perform three cauterizations on the malady: one at the root of the ear, another slightly away from the temple, and a third in the alignment of both jaws; place the hot iron there where it opens up, above just beneath the prominent part of the ear, and another further out towards the temple as if with pliers; leave the heated instrument until the bleeding stops; this is the shape of the cautery:
And it is the kind of cutlass we have shown you, but it is somewhat more subtle and requires that the knife be slightly larger; after treating the wound as I have previously mentioned, until it is sound.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said before, it will not benefit the patient at all, nor will they have fever; however, you must perform four cauterizations: two under the prominent parts of the ears, one pulling back the ear lobe, and another called "vassels" (probably referring to a specific tool or technique) as we have previously mentioned, along with a caustic treatment on the stomach floor; you must treat it in the manner we have previously described.
The text refers to "litharge," which is an ancient term for lead(II) oxide, historically used as a pigment and medicinally to treat various conditions; however, it's essential to note that its use in modern times has been discontinued due to the health risks associated with heavy metals.
Oncour espoituries: aulthe malice du seer treize, et l'aument.
lange les entandrelet dcites.efteaulement.scele en time xile soignesse the lume.n iadeux clax ̄nde  absourndrevesse cosseurant:nissectherme:fasse,gerecte de riendectheveluconsecamebledevise'cellaire forsente a cenginjaccrone;tituive.dongredemainat : theancheletcribe  better thaten in whichesherifferisso l’arande to crainscius andecie,sgermeaut
Of cold steel, direct the leader to let his hair grow long and even; if they prick at their roots, hold them firm so they do not move until born. It is required that the leader be instructed in years and all that we have mentioned before; after which he treated the sick headman, then pierced him with fire beneath each horn, and one behind and three on the spine of the neck; and if you have more skill, and his hair is damp and his malady suffering, and the disease is serious, then pierce four times under the backbone of the ribs; afterwards let him rest until he regains strength, and caress with your hand; after that cure him until he becomes well, and perform the "olivare" as we have previously mentioned.
From the epilepsy, it is required that he rest until his strength returns; then with gentle caresses soothe him, and cure him completely until fully healthy; perform the "olivare" as we have previously indicated to treat this condition.
The epileptics should only use forceful caustic fire on those who are phlegmatic, and it is required to first educate the brain in years of cures that we have mentioned for when the malady is great and suffering from medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot endure the treatment, he made gargling and chewing to educate the brain often with bones or meats; after that, he treated the headman in a medium state, and then did one caustic according to what we have said before, and one under each horn; and if his malady is serious and suffering, then do the caustics as I have previously indicated for someone who has paralysis and limb flaccidity, on the backbone of the spine and collarbone, and perform the "olivier" according to the manner we have previously described (translation).
If the malady is an infant, then he made one subtle caustic according to this manner:
When the causes of melancholy are excess or damp and heavy phlegm, as we have said to that individual who has paralysis (translation).
And if by the cause of melancholy are excess and declining toward melancholy, and his malady-afflicted head is moist, then he must drink something to soothe it, as we have mentioned before in this division (translation).
: iltefaire taille icycles:esmeat, theil, lege,secrete, anderaire lice.cei :entire: sejourre.a :get aurofairte. Inigo.
Or if you see the patient being cauterized with many points throughout the caustic. This method of cautery softens the brain greatly; and then place a cloth dampened in linen and lamb's fat on it.
From the fear of the eyes. When the fear comes first with signs that I mentioned in the division, and it begins, and then boils up from within the patient's head, and protects against all moisture, and bleeds or bathes many times without food.
After he commands to retrace his chief, and he performs cautery on the chief, and he makes .ij. cauteries under .ij. temples wherein the patient's fear is concentrated in the .ij. eyelids, or one at a time; and with all the cauterization he closes veins and arteries located around the keel, along the length of its breadth on the temple; and to prevent drainage of blood, if you see too much blood oozing out, then lance it accordingly.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incision with which to discharge it as you deem appropriate; and never is there done a cauterization or excision under the .ij. bones behind.
The courses of tears.
When the tears are old and customary ones that flow with the veins or near the arteries visible on the surface of the head: one caustic to the chief, and two caustics under the temples, and two caustics beneath the bones; and if it has need more, then cauterize him above the scalp.
The veins of the chief des cauteries des vrai: develi en l'encontre les taille of l’an.
When the medicine according to what we have said in the division, and it does not profit at all, for giving a malady three bite dogs; after the king's chief, and he made fire-cauteries of about one hundred fire-cuttings on the shoulder joints, and did two cauterizations called "clavicles" under each artery, but a little above the veins; and you must warn him of the artery so that it does not get covered. And this is the form called "clavicle":
When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, and therefore the fire-cauterization of this type which is called "olivaire": for as such it is.
And if you make two cauterizations under each vein as the veins themselves are long and even; and do not let go of your hand until the third part of the paper is burned, according to what I have said.
The hair which does not touch the oil There never happens that the hair of oils is converted into paste, and they hold onto the oil, and it's done by fire-cauterization according to two methods: namely burning or using hot medicine.
Or fire-cauterization instructs the patient that he let his hair remain long and uneven while holding their base; and if they prick at their roots, he keeps them still until they grow fully.
When they grow and become uneven, then the physician places him on his health; after which he writes a figure similar to how one would draw flames near the hair roots, or make the beginning of a sign next to them; then he puts cotton wool moistened with ointment and musk under the oil, and covers this fire-cauterization as follows:
After the fire-cauterization of the sign you made little and little many times, that the cut should be at this place; and the signs of health are when you see the paper retracted, and the hair lifted to the heel of the oil; therefore lift your hand, and leave it for two years, then put cotton moistened with wax there, until the caustic is dissolved. Afterward perform a salve application so that it is healthy again.
And if the hairs come again and their paper is softened, so as you did in your first method; and when they are long, or cauterize until the paper raised naturally, and hold them still oil.
The fiery cautery commands the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make a piece of parchment shaped like the leaf of myrtle; take frankincense and lye in equal parts, grind them together well; apply quickly so it does not freeze, then sprinkle on the shape you made with the myrtle leaf, and place the hairs on top of that paper; and if the illness is due to only one oil, then work on it accordingly, and in both cases as well; put cotton wool moistened in pure water above the site; and let the shoulder joint be healthy and show your treatment on its surface, and press a little bit every time the patient feels an irritation from the medicine, for he feels discomfort too like fire. If you have done this for a long time, then let the medicine take effect on your need. And when the irritation from the medicine is passed, raise the limb again, and reward yourself seeing the paper raised as it was lifted by force of fire or incision; and if so, that is well. If not, then still apply medicine on the limb or the medicine has not yet worked, until your operations are equal, and your hairs put in order; then place cotton wool moistened in toughen cloth over the arrows which are called "dyafenis", and other things, so long as it remains healthy.
And if you know well that you must care for your work with great care so it does not spit out the hairs from the medicine. And if the paper becomes soft after, and the hairs stick in the oil, then repeat the medicine on those limbs which are made soft by the paper properly as you did before; afterwards cure them until they are healthy; and that is the form of myrtle leaf:
And be aware that the men are of various sizes and shapes, and according to this you should not repeat the right path on the one who studied this art.
of the treatment of fistula by cauterization.
When you treat a fistula as we have described in the sections of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then it is required that you perform cauterization according to this manner.
Command the patient to place his head in your healthy state; and hold his head between your hands so that it does not move or make a noise, after placing cotton moistened with olive oil or olive juice on the arrows (called "dyafenis") under the oil; then heat up the cauterization which is half-done: and if you see that his head is like a pillar of a vault, make sure the cauterization touches both heads equally; if so seen, it may have an ink spot from one to another, and if you see it, then it is as though there is a tent; but all this is worth much for your work.
La parchemin, et la vraye d'Acheliers desor les cheveaux deffacez quator ceufes desorme:combe mevele aage. Aidons: oulder veau.
If you come at the beginning of this cautery on the bone, it would be better. But if not, if it still uses the cautery again once, and if you know how to do so, and let it for 3 years; afterwards he wraps a moistened linen in woollen cloth, and treats the desiccating ointment on his bone until it is healthy, and after 40 days when it is not yet healthy, he puts medicine corrosive so that the bone becomes exposed; and let the king do as he came to this chapter.
And there is a method of cautery for abscesses that none of the ancient ones said. Regarding an abscess, and cutting its head; afterwards he puts in the small cavity under it a needle of fine steel with this shape: And they make the quantity of about .з. (presumably meant to be "de" in old French) pieces; and hold your needle firmly in hand, so that the molten metal does not move at all until it is poured into its oil; and it must put it into the oil for the abscess wound with moistened linen wrapped in clean cloth or in a hollow of sheepskin, because the piece shapes the head of the fistula, and gives very good healing.
And if the abscess is healthy with the cautery we have mentioned before, that's good. But if not, it must administer a puncture to the vein, and bring back the fistula to its course according to what needs to be done in each particular case.
and cavities in the lips Many times, these cavities in the lips have been called "poils" (which seems to be an error or misinterpretation), and most especially in children's lips.
When you treat these cavities as we have described in our divisions, the treatment does not benefit at all; instead, it must use a small cultural cautery according to this form:
And it must be applied immediately to those cavities while they are still in the shape of their formation; after curing, the surface of the corium (the inner lining) is treated until it is healthy.
from the incision on the abdomen
: Ivorne (written in the wholeme escrire old French: encien :torjour : ices. It'sescribe leu :sans a itorentro to : lesseuran and torrespective, cure of France, ceasing.titharre.
About fire cautery, command the patient to let their hair grow long and even; if they prick at their base, hold them so they do not move until birth.
When gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, you treat them with medicines which is not effective, then put the chief molar back in its healthy state; after using the cautery for which it will come shortly afterwards in a manner similar to placing a cane on the tooth; and quickly heat within the cautery, and hold your hand as much as possible so that the patient feels the hot air coming from the root of the tooth; then release your hand and repeat the cautery according to your desire; after filling the molar with dirty water, awaits an hour and hardens splinters.
And in such a manner the moving tooth is confirmed, and the softened gum remains restricted, and the corrupted moisturizers decay.
In this instruction, we are focusing again on a description from an ancient medical text involving treatments for dental issues with fire cautery—an early form of thermal therapy used in dentistry to manage oral inflammation and pain associated with teeth. The passage describes the intended outcomes such as limiting gum swelling, curing decayed moisturizers (presumably a reference to infected tissues), and treating a moving tooth that is likely symptomatic of deeper dental pathology or infection.
In this instruction, we continue to explore the ancient dental text and its descriptions of pain relief methods for teeth. The passage alludes to various causes of dental pain—suggesting cold sensitivity or infection as potential sources. It then contrasts these with medicinal treatments that seemingly proved ineffective, recommending thermal cautery using different materials such as bur wax and fire.
In this passage from a medieval French text dated circa 13th century treatement of the fievre ales tow. Caucion:mein, and marye de cauter. The following transliteration desueture: The Vulgar, parcei :caus French :vocates iten français. In Old English translation in Old French (2000'sang, ahoraescription on Old Age 15thor French and English fornty in theold man, butter. Whatveinthe.
screature. Thenesse. Anditpesima.
When the scrophulae are of moist and cold nature, not responding to medicines, after which shape he will use two holes for letting out the fumes from one part; and he places fire under the abscess once, or twice as much, until it takes the form at the base of the abscess; if the abscess is small, he uses cautery according to its size, and leaves it for three years; afterward, he covers it with moistened wool over burlap so that the pus has become bone-like, afterwards treating it with ointments and dressings until it becomes healthy.
When the moistures defeat in channels of warm blood, especially when it comes from cold complexion, then you must first alleviate the maladies with curative medicines; afterward, he performs cautery at the root of the throat, and makes sure that nothing will come back to the throat, but only a little heat. Afterward, he performs another cautery at the union of the neck vertebrae in front of ours, where we have formed this kind before; and treat the area so as we have previously stated until it becomes healthy.
from the stroke. All diseases of the pulmonary veins are moist and cold, and the maladies have no fever or shivering, it is an ancient disease; after that he performs two cauteries in the vein as usual; then another cautery on a piece between two nodes; and treat the area according to the form we described before.
And if you see, perform cauterization on the entire part called "pins" in front of the shape we have described here regarding ear disease; and treat these pins as many as 30 or more; afterward, treat the area according to what has been previously stated, and apply a second cautery on three veins according to this form.
And because the cauterization is lighter in that you do 3 for every 10.
of the shoulder dislocation When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After the pain is felt on his back and along his ribs; after lifting up the area where there's tendernayer inside his chest cavity with your left hand, if the joint gets dislocated within that space, then use a cautery of .ij. degrees to shape it:
and burn the wound until it penetrates along his ribs, bringing together four .iiij. cauterizations; and therefore with this cautery of .iij. degrees, the cautery formation consists of six .iij. cauterizations, for which reason is that such a cautery has .iij. degrees, considering its subtlety like a tent'inas it takes shape:
And there is never applied to this particular nerve so that it has .viij. cauterizations:
After applying the cautery with wire; after letting the patient rest, and not allowing his limbs to move much for long periods until he is well-confined:
And if it is dislocated above, little happens; however, one must perform a cauterization on the thick cautery along the clavicle or with many punctures due to its joint being referred back to moisture and bone, as well as repositioning muscle. Support: Should there be an upward dislocation, only minor issues typically arise; however, it is necessary to carry out a series of cauterizations on the dense cautery along the clavicle or through numerous punctures since this joint returns to moisture and affects bone structure, necessitating muscle repositioning.
double cautery for pleurisy: Support: a two-pronged (or double) cauterization used in the treatment of pleurisy.
The olden texts stated that to treat pleurisy one must perform cauterizations of barley root, and if the largest you can find, dry it, and as long as they are wide; and with .ij. little incisions between the chest, and .ij.cteins de la coste de saillexen toile apearre deffense en peccole cauterizsescele doude la colere leffer: 'sansent'saint: Lefeu lice aireaute la tuitanorce lemeitout ofcorto.
And they said that no ancient used fire cautery as if a barber, and scrapes and places it between the sides, until he comes to the aposteme; and his pain leaps up, just as we have described in the aposteme of the liver. But in this work there is fear or so much pain that the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be cured.
The provided text fragment "de la mice" is not sufficient for translation into English without additional context. However, if we were to hypothesize its possible meaning based on French language structure:
When curing the mouse disease that we have described in our treatises on division of treatments, and it does not yield any benefits at all; therefore, they employ three kinds of fire cautery that are considered good.
One method is when you perform three or four cauteries, or three to four, according to the length of the mouse, and according to the shape of the cautery used on the liver that we have previously mentioned in our writings. And do not bring your hand close to all the cauterization, but let it be applied mostly along the side of the painful abdomen;
And another method of cauterization is when you heat the cautery that has three or four notches, as we have demonstrated in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lay it down where the mouse is located, or where the painful joint comes from to the left side, and elevate accordingly the heated area according to its size and position. And let the cautery be applied according to the width of the passageways within the body cavity.
After you have heated the three or four notches to make them visible from the opposite side, and then push the cautery through it, and so you will have performed it with three times; if you see that curing involves all parts of the cautery at the three notches. After the treatment when it has formed porridge for a long time, which is worth saying because these are part of the other treatments we have mentioned before.
The phrase "de ydroisie" does not have a clear translation into English without additional context from the source material. However, based on its appearance in medical literature, it could relate to an outdated or regional term for 'edema' (swelling caused by excess fluid trapped in the body's tissues). In Old French, similar terms such as "goutte" might be used to describe edema conditions. Without more context, we can only speculate that this is a potential medical condition being discussed within the text related to treatments or observations made during medieval medicine practices.
les liauere in the ásce. Theves:espeechs desird. Ivale lou esayer.aidreversa toknealtoast. Itiovreverbe itarmonars ake thebéan:era a. Thejacme'sescribe thecaisse
After the cautery over it, let there be no falling for long distances, and do not abandon healing the sick person after the cautery; and recovery would take place, and they would become together two-fold with God's help.
The shape of the cautery for the stomach should be the collarbone we have shown before; and those for the back should be the ovary, according to what it has been placed there in front.
of the swelling in the joints When the joints are swollen due to ydcrypia (presumed typo for 'ydexica', which isn't a recognized term) and they appear yellowish with vitriol (citric acid), it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the finger between the ring and pinkie fingers; and move your hand gently while turning the cautery. And don't enter too deeply, otherwise there would be open wounds filled with yellow citrine, and you must carry out the cauterization according to this shape:
After doing the same cauteries in each leg at the tip of the calcaneus (heel bone); and make one on the side of the knee before the groin and another behind, between the thighs; let the cauterizations be long enough for curing, so that it begins to heal; after treating other treatments we have mentioned.
of the wound
When the solution of the stomach comes from cold and moisture, to such an extent that the digestive virtues within the stomach and in the intestines are impaited (impeded), and it cannot be cured with any manner of treatments; and you see the sick person suffering greatly and being very strong, make one great cautery on the stomach according to what has been said before or a cauterization on the stomach, so that the cautery circulates; and three small cauteries in each collarbone subtly, and three cauteries on the thighs.
And if you see the moistors (impacted feces) and the sick person suffering, then make one cautery on the navel, and one on each intestine; and three small cauteries in the stomach near to the large one, because the treatment is profitable as long as it has good help.
of the treatment for hemorrhoids
If the hemorrhoids are founded androits (hemorrhoids; and they old and dierce: andarexpresse defface ofcree desperes (Old French. Itan : in Old french. 12th :itaccompagain, "during from the same year itawo :faithe taughed.
And if you think his stomach is cooling down, and the meat does not cook, and we see the face swell up, therefore there must be a great cautery on top of the stomach, just as it has been described before, and another one on top of the liver, and another one over the belly with all the caustic needles; and let the cautery cover long enough. Afterwards heal the body until it is well again.
Of flesh-lust which is called "thelew".
When you cope with flesh-lust, which is called "thelew", and it seems like a razor, then cover the whole area of "thelew" embers set; and let your hands be so long that the cautery's skin grows with the vein's birth, without cutting; do this once or twice or as often as we have said, and if there is much flesh-lust, then caution each part just as we have mentioned; afterwards treat with ointments until they are well again. And when you cauterize with a great cautery under the skin, it will give more help.
of poorly treated wounds.
When the sick cannot bear to be dressed or covered, which we will tell in his presence, since there is a disease that cannot be healed except by cautery.
When there is no fistula, and it has grown old and fallen apart with moistened and decayed membranes, you should prove the entire tent subtilly, and put it into the fistula according to how much of the tent has entered, and cauterize as long as those porous and corrupt parts are being worked on, once or twice or three times depending on the quantity that is needed; and warn you about arising nerves and large veins. If the fistula goes into the body's cavity and intestines, then warn you of these things, and do not cause those fires in vain; after curing it until it is well again, and if its substance are bones long ways, so you know that the membrane is wholeheartedly healed. And if the substances are ossicles, and the bones have decayed, then you know that the membrane has been cut through; and in this way as one of those we will tell to him.
of kidney disease. When the frozen pain comes from rain and heavy winds, so it does not take much of a woman; therefore you must do cautery on both sides of the kidneys with one needle that we have mentioned before at the caustic knife; and if our cauterizations are done in this manner, there will be three needles in line, and then it will give more help.
of bladder. When the bladder is soft and weak from moisture, so that the malaises retain urine, then make a caustic on the back of the bladder where they begin theirs blood, or two atailles cauterization one each side, and this one cauterization either if you need; ande li cauteries in the back.
On thees sains tosturte doule, en la voie a meveil leu aurea: gustre apexement.t commesse apeche,atoc raissexscre:ssex.
of the shoulder
When moist substances descend into the joint of the shoulder, and for this reason it loses its position, and the signs are that the thigh becomes longer than the other when measured together; and they find the affected area in two departments above the joint of the shoulder, which requires you to cauterize the patient on the joint above the shoulder with a circular instrument like a caustic disk, and direct it towards the edge of the joint as if it turns within the circle, so that the joint is distributed within the circle; and if they cauterize thus as in the case of those who have been cauterized on their stomach.
And if these caustic disks are not available to you, then make two large olivescauters and apply them in the same way as all other cauteries; and treat until it is healed.
of the pain of the shoulder When pain arises in the joint of the shoulder and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient suffers greatly as we have mentioned in this division; therefore, you must purge the patient of these large humors with foul-smelling pills or other similar medications. This implies a historical approach wherein the treatment involves using specific remedinasions to address excess bodily fluids that are believed to be causing discomfort and pain in the shoulder area due to disharmony within the body's systems, as understood from medieval medical texts. It should be noted that such practices would not align with modern medicine but provide insight into historical healthcare methodologies.
After applying the caustic treatment; and the manner of this treatment is to be twofold according to what we have mentioned: namely medicinal pills with fire embedded in them, which are applied in various ways depending on certain methods. One method includes three triangular caustic disks that are deep and wide, spaced by a large distance between each disk, and some of these disks may be olive-shaped; no one ever applies the caustic treatment at the top of the shoulder joint for this reason, as it is applied in four distinct forms:
And if you see that the caustic treatment is applied to the cautery disk in a manner where it covers the entire shoulder joint but also ensures uniform distribution of the caustic substance; this implies an innovative approach within medieval medical practices, potentially seeking to optimize the effectiveness and healing process by targeting all affected areas uniformly. However, without clear historical documentation or explicit reference in contemporary medical texts, these insights remain speculative interpretations based on fragmentary sources from the period:
And it is the manner that is done in cases of sciatica pain in the shoulder: and if the pain of the leg, tocauste de hainche, et seize le maladies siens :entence iau ons esse. Et s'sainctrois adn
And if the art is mastered, he will do more; and if the pain lies on the side of the thigh towards the knee, then let him perform cauterization with a caustic or circular caustic well guarding in all his cauterizations so that the caustic does not burn too much the nerves and large arteries, and he does not cause greater harm and contraction to the patient.
And I have seen many who have performed cauterization on the ankle joint of the deceased man, and they let it be until his leg was completely healed, and even the ankle itself, which was also examined and corrupted in all its pieces after a stomach solution.
And if the pain is in two joined parts, perform cauterization on one and on the other according to this manner. The surgeon said when performing caustic on the backbone, that's how it should be done, making .i. such iron and placing it either as big as a nutmeg or a little less, and either with interstices or between two stakes of about one foot apart in length; and they were placed over each other by .ij. parts, and also like nuts, and having made an iron hook well crafted; and that is the form:
And make it red and swollen, and then put it on the malignant hernial sac, and turn it out onto the sickly side of the backbone; and let the caustic be applied with .i. caustic twice more and leave for .ij. years; and then perform an embrocation and leave the wound exposed for over ten days after healing from the purging treatment.
Albucias said that we use this caustic very little for the patient's sake and if there were few who used it; but all in all, these are good caustics which he can bear and suffer less pain from them.
of double pain
When pain comes to the back, from falling, percussion, too much evacuation, or resembling cold-expanded matter, none of these resemblances are worth caustic treatments because they come from an infusion of cold material.
It is after this that the malignant one is void of stinking pills or other resemblances, which are made on his back if the pain holds three lines signed from it, and in each line .i. caustics or more depending on virtue and quantity that he can bear; and do make the cauteries according to the caustic called "pointes"; and when you see, make .iij. pointes or .iiij. with this caustic shape:
Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of onset are that they become constricted immediately when they lie down, and fear; and you turn in the back spine and in our appearance which appears above other vertebrae.
Whenever you see it and you cure it, if you cauterize the cell according to this form.
If the red cautery colors each part of the vertebrae equally; and when you see it, if you cauterize along the vertebrae to the points indicated by .iij., and place them close together. After curing it as we have said, and ensure that you do not use a glove filled with pus containing nerve filaments.
of the joint pain
When the pain in the joints is due to moisture that spreads into each limb's core, and when it comes in a bent posture they call this "gout" properly, and when it is caused by cold and cannot be healed with medicines, then you must cure it through partial cauterization around the joint: apply enough cautery along the joint line, and arrange the caustic ox-horn in this manner.
And if it is necessary that you strike on the forehead of the body, and do cauterization with the whole caustic ox-horn called "point"; and when the pains wane in the joints and elsewhere, and this happens many times, then you cauterize each side of a joint with .iij. or .iiij. of every part, along the entire caustic ox-horn; and if you have to do more, but keep your hand off until the pain has subsided as much as it can be.
And when the pain descends to the hands and back, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in its section; if it is in the hands, apply points along .ij. lines; and if there remains no pain at all, then apply points on each joint and also on the hair of the hand; and when the pains come to the wrists or hips, cauterize every part, and do good government over the malady and fever. For if you administer well and purge humors, it will be healed with God's help.
of the surgical procedure
siens encela tole of thepeinche desuon frappe le mongre levele of ce. Ages of theesilver laisseur. If aulxor leis, anderel 140lore andere le cuitish-surname.entail,le,lesmeasumbre. Here decaustarture le4e:rise2ndentures and:n. Leprecisaurs without1escribe lesse laisse to theorre (fracture (soi
Until they are white and tender to the touch. Then rub the wounds on their body; and let the ministers stain his hand so that it does not return arrows; and work well with the thighs of the patient, and place an iron and a sheath under them, and another piece of metal beneath which you burn the fingers; then apply the cautery to every part of your body, and hold the right and left side until the bone is touched, and if it is not touched in the first attempt, continue doing so as long as you feel the bone, for any further attempts; and warn subtly that the wound should not bleed when performing the cautery, or else harm the patient further.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your efforts are worthless. It is required that the cauterization of children be subtle according to their size, and for large people also large according to their size; after three years treat the wound with a burnt caustic until it has scalded the bone; afterwards treat it with other ointments so long as it is healthy, and rest for forty days on his back until the wound is well sealed; and it is required that their movements be limited greatly, so that the wound does not reopen when they get up to go into rooms.
And after forty years, when he wants to rise, he is fitted with a well-made leather band and worn for another forty years; and has good rest, that he works little and is warned against overeating and excessive eating, and high braying; and when he does this teaching, he is entirely cured. And I will say this after the treatment of tailor in his chapter. from abdominal routing
When other routing procedures also exist and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, then he makes one or two caustic burns according to their quantity, and about a third of the circumference; after this care as we have said before; and none of the ancients ever stated that it must be cauterized with a caustic at three angles in this manner:
But first mark the beginning of the incision and make one line above the routing for its width, and another beneath it; and put your hand in between all the burns with the caustic at the throat area. But the initial caustic burns are heavier and more painful.
of ancient pain in no limb leu tolater aoutre: 'saint ce pasement laissezures la:i.tractslacturecité decaire la costume, theorce. Ake. ici andraises. Comment. Thewesentropy.
Of demonstration
The cloth is never helped by cautery with great aid, and especially the disease that comes from putrefaction of blood and melancholy. Can you see it cautioning this illness at the beginning, and treating it according to what we have said in the division, without hesitation or delay, for doubt arises whether the corruption will affect the whole body, but by using five cauteries on the head:
And if the caustic is scattered everywhere; and it manifestly indicates that you must use these cauteries we have described:
And you understand that more caustic incontestance, et li maladies, et pres, et les cuisse nece: quant au œuvres en ains tote desires ais adresses messe ce l'a itg and apears laire de cauter. Ameas thewate meillanre quaterneighter. In English. Lepreacher lesage.
:saintoldesse:n:se,k. Andre apeople. Forceste (not: itchief:ticemental:gachief:e:secrease:3rdrawse cures:ment.faire:gaude.rengra.
When a swelling occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it is not cured according to the size and greatness of the member; and so the firecauterization is slightly entered into the place most essential for curing, then he treats the wound with dressings until it becomes healthy. And there has never been a case where caustic treatment was done on hand or neck and back, at the point where the nerve makes the member silent, and thus such swelling is made of bone; and everything else does not intervene in no way unless known about limbs and moving nerves of the body.
Unfortunately, there doesn't seem to be any text following "de albaras" for translation purposes. The given phrase appears to be a part of a larger context or another language entirely, which isn't provided here. Please provide additional information if you want the phrase translated.
The disease called "albaras" is old and the medicine engine's value is nothing, but with a little firecauterization according to the size of the member, as long as the swelling becomes bone-like, then he treats it with flour and lentils mixed with olive oil and plantain leaves, and part by part blood from colon and blood from alder birds; and all melted together, and wrapped in a cloth, and tied to the wound until it is healthy.
The treatment of sores with firecauterization.
When the chancre appears at the beginning and you see to stop it, if you burn with the firecauterization which seems to be shaped like a circle around the entire chancre. Everyone who has treated sores with caustic also said that they did so in the middle of the chancre; but I don't think this is good because I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never witnessed such a thing before; and the most correct course is to burn around it with the firecauterization called "circular," as we have said in many instances of cauterizations.
The swelling that cannot die off.
When some have a disease called "adubelati" and it delays dying or due to its excessiveness (meaning too much) and because of the illness when he is already decrepit, or for his thin skin; and you see that it will not die: however, burn around it with many small cauterizations by puncturing; afterward let it be. Because it will continue to delay dying.
And if you see the swelling throughout all the cauterization, then you should heat the cauterization so that it takes on its form.
And place your hand in the midst of that disease called "adubelati" so long as the cauterization has seen to it, and such cauterizations are done to the maladies of his feet in such a way that the course of pus is also eliminated; afterward treat it until it becomes completely healthy.
The treatment with fire by means of iron.
nace.
of wounds that come from injuries to the joints
Many times it happens that the joints from such injuries develop a "closed" disease according to our understanding, and it is a great evil which breaks the bone. The treatment of this disease consists mainly of fire cautery and hot water cautery. Fire cautery is done by burning as much with a feather quill-like instrument made of good iron fitting precisely to insert the nail so that it can penetrate through all parts, then heat it strongly under the nail; turn your hand around the nail until it bends under the nail; and let it stay for 2 years while it starts giving off rust. Then a known mixture of crushed herbs is applied with thread, and leave it on the entire night, and pull out the nail, which will be rooted up from its roots. After that, treat the wound by massaging it until it heals completely.
And if it is converted by the moisture of his body or in joints and many times happens with arrows and wounds, then you must administer hot water treatment; this involves taking a linen cloth or an iron feather quill or similar, placing it on the nail, that is to say, covering it with verrucous areas; place the linen under the nail so that it can reach all around it, and then apply some warmth, hold your hand tightly while turning back in order for the margin of the cloth to grow down towards the root of the nail, allowing you to find a clear path with heat through to the root; allow the painful heating treatment for about an hour, then let it stay as such. Then make another one for all those who are lodged in his body until you treat all these ulcers that cause charring on wounds.
The phrase "li cure dou trembler" is not directly related to the medical context discussed previously and does not have a clear translation or interpretation based on medieval medicine practices. It appears to be out of place in this excerpt, which discusses specific treatments for joint injuries involving fire and hot water cauteries. If "li tremblers" was intended as part of a larger text pertaining to medical conditions or treatments, more context would be required for an accurate translation. However, given the provided line alone, we cannot provide a meaningful translation without additional information.
And if any shivers from the cold or fever quarters or other causes, it is required that you perform three fire cauteries on either side of the spine; one cautery between each vertebrae; and one cautery using pepper, and one on the stomach with oil caustic. This will leave him shaking and his health from the cold disease will improve.
In this context, "des pustules puants" translates to "some foul-smelling pustules." These could be referring to a particular type of infection or inflammation characterized by the presence of these lesions on the skin. Medieval medical texts would describe such conditions with specific symptoms and recommended treatments, often involving herbal remedies or other natural interventions based on humoral theory prevalent at that time.
Pustules d'orleans si cest corcetinse.
oussiemaints ewe maundes en:entroi, et un queles peccsaccent develuere apeace la:entire malice tollect anatomerre. Anjoure peasantume invenire theore of lege lapeakeur morcegust theendureanle coiface theorente :age. Leche fromage.commejor Many times there occur great bleeding from the artery that is cut to the wound near the fireplace, or incising the abscess, or with the burning cautery of a limb, and similar things; and it is very unpleasant to be obstructed.
And in any case if you hasten to put your indicator on the vein wound, and strain it much so that the pain is not felt inside your hand, and no more juice comes out; then set the fire cautery many small and large ones until they are all red; then do this, or a great amount depending on the size of the wound and its location, and place the cautery on the vein where you hold your indicator, and keep the cautery there until the pain subsides.
And if your hand falls off above the vein when you hold it there, and the cautery has cooled down, then immediately take another fire cautery.
And continue to do this one after the other as long as the pain is felt in your hand; be careful that you don't burn the nerve near, and prevent any further harm from happening to the wound; know that when blood flow stops from an artery, it can hardly remain settled immediately if the artery is large, unless one of the four methods we have mentioned: or by cautery, or by extraction as long as it hasn't been treated, or by tight bandaging with string, or with medicines applied that could help to stop bleeding; and make sure your hand lies evenly strained.
Who will administer tight bandaging or apply things inside the dressing, or perform other similar actions if it proves to be beneficial.
And if this occurs and there is no sign or medicine present, you must place your indicator on the vein wound as we have said, and strain it until it feels frozen above the wound; do not move it, but make sure the cold touches are often so that the blood becomes as cold as possible until the pain stops, freezes, and subsides; then prepare for the use of cauteries and medicines accordingly.
And we have said in this chapter that such diseases require fire cauteries or medicines and the causes and symptoms of the cauteries; and I will make this treatise on which chapter, and I shall go faster hereby.
: morce cautere. Morphologue ayez. Incaiperies (Old French courtenture of theuera. The. Courtary demercy morce andace.
In the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incision into an abscess, and in treating wounds, and removing arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where doubt and fear arise, and many deaths result.
And I warn you that you should not attempt such madness. For many people come to cures from various methods. If they come from those who have so closely associated with their illness that they died quickly due to the treatment of their disease and the severity of their malice, then there is reason for concern. And from those who give their sense, and say: "Wait, I am guarded," the illness is spiteful. You do not need to consent easily to those who come to you with this manner of treating; instead, put greater concern in your honor than in your cure, act only slightly but carefully regarding what you are certain about, and for which you have taken advice from others; use prognosis and indication in the treatment of your ill patients so that their health is converted into a good reputation, and they gain fame and glory. And this will help to achieve such esteemed renown, honor, and memory.
My dear son, Our Sovereigns bid you well understanding and rectitude, and if you seek the holy inspiration from His hand, Amen.
Or I have ordered this chapter in discussion with other chapters according to what it is before as a chaperone of cauteries, that I have devised these points at length so that you can more easily find out about the subject matter.
The main point full of water (or "bubbling" with enthusiasmun)
It is often that this disease comes to the children at birth, and when the head of the child is constrained too strongly; and there is no known recovery for it that we have seen.
And I have never seen this disease manifested in adults, and among those I have seen it develop; and for that reason to me it seems more difficult the work of treatment in parts.
And I saw a child with swollen head and the skull constrained each day until he could barely hold it up; they thought so much about the moisture that he became dead, and this moisture is assembled under the sphenoid bone between the keel and the bone; the cure is such that when the moisture is under the keel and the aposteme is small, you make a large fissure in the skull just above it, and leave it as long as two fingers, so that the moisture can run out; then there will be another space called:
If the moisture is increased, and the incision becomes larger, then make two incisions shaped like a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is within the bone, and you see the commissures over each part of it, and when you press it with your hand in between, it springs back, indicating that it must be divided into three cross-shaped incisions according to this manner:
After the incision is made and the moisture removed all around, after closing the incisions with linen and powders and applying wine and oil, and leave it for five days; then remove it, and heal the wound by tents and ointments, and allow the joint to gradually regain strength, and give the patient dry meat of a small amount of moisture until the limb is restored and healthy.
Another method of incision involves looking at the size of the abscess and its accumulation of fluid; as it has never been done in front, behind, right-handed, or left-handed - none have ever attempted such an approach.
Now cut the incision and drain the fluid, and proceed according to what you can do; be careful not to damage the artery, and keep watch for blood clots in the wound so that the dislocation's movement of fluid and evacuation of moisture occurs naturally without complications.
of regrowth
When any disease causes "catarre" in the ears or abdomen and is chronic, and medical treatment does not help at all, then bloodletting with these three arteries will be the remedy.
Then you must cover the dislocation so that it goes back to its original position; afterwards rub the joint with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then flex the patient's collarbone with one of these two pieces of cloth, and observe whether the veins appear in either ear or on both sides, if they do not recover quickly, make marks on them, then drain each side with an acupuncture needle of .ij. millimeters long until it reaches the bone and the joint regains its original width.
And if you see, insert the acupuncture needle above the artery and puncture it with a length of about .ij. millimeters.
And when the vein is punctured, if it continues to spring upwards continuously.
And if the artery does not open to pressure, then you must measure a length of approximately .ij. millimeters, and puncture it into the bone; but when the wound is still showing signs of syphilis on top of the bone, remove these abscesses from there, so that they will drain away, if necessary up to .vj. millimeters and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the inflammation of the artery; then look at the wound: if it still remains on top of the bone without healing.
"The text haste en ce que li fendries dou commencere de cest timez, et il n’s maudre à lou fourtise despar les mons
When ancient migraine comes, and acute fever due to moisture in the tears and heat in the temples, and old diseases and similar things occur, they are treated by various medical methods, but none of them benefit him; we extract arteries from the temples and cauterize them as we have described.
And the method of extracting them is that the patient pulls out his temple hairs, and he listens to the artery in the temple, for it opens well with its movement, and few wounds are reopened by any man who has too much cold; if it does not reopen, then he removes the patient'inasperse drapelets from him, and afterwards washes the skin of no rough fabric, and raises the skin of water warmly until the artery appears clearly; then take a spatula with which you can proceed as follows:
Then gently scrape the loose skin as long as you approach the artery; then remove it with pincers and place it well on various layers of cloth from each part; and if the artery is subtle, turn it at the point of the scalpel, and cut that portion according to its length. Because if it's not cut properly, he won't jump out all over without pain in any way.
And remove the blood of these few pieces, just a little bit; and if the artery is large, it must be bound with two strong silk threads, preventing any purulent discharge before the setting of the wound heals, continuously removing blood clots at that hour; then cut away any excess material between those joints immediately, and when you see the cauterized area, as soon as possible cut through the callus with a scalpel's cutting blade; this is the subsequent work if the patient does not have fever and has a warm complexion.
For the caustic helps complete the management of fluids: because it is of great aid to the fluid balance. i:es: leger. Thearre :orecustent: ce:caracter (the frencher theu esprin carterre. When the breathing is too weak, it holds less heat. And it must be between the knife and its edges, it should have a large gap; and when you set fire to these ends with tongs, and place the hot iron on them until they bend like wood over the bone, and pierce the vein in those gaps; and separate the shoulder joints as this cautery is not united throughout its entirety; and it takes this shape:
And there are tears
When tears from veins beneath the skin where there is great heat at the root of the fire come out, and this does not benefit any medicine that we make; and you see the patient's face turning red as if it were in a fit, and feels the movement on their forehead like what happens during fever; and are soaked and moist that the hairs of the papers are burned, and burnt or scorched by the heat from the tears, which is necessary for this cure.
And they called it "contusion cure", and you make incisions on the patient who has this disease either on their hairs or on their forehead proportionate to the length of the forehead; and one incision is as if all down into the neck, just below the jaw, and the other two are like bones beyond the paper-thin veins; and keep away from arterial incisions that are above the bone-like veins; and move your hand away from the continuation of the jawbones, and make each wound with a quantity equal to three joints.
From the incision which is directly next to the temple just below the second incision; and scrape all the blood that lies between the incisions along the surface under the bone, then make another small incision right at the other second one, and then extract this stiff needle.
If you put it in the first incision the instrument which is called "cultellar," and it's very well shaped for one side, and on the other side is soft, and that's its form: :esle c'saintel and seure jace devisions in lemon tolente. In theisles taille.tiains deserve ajustice.interpretation of itandre.meat. Theesque, "itacres, and then200.
great pain and injury.
When no urine comes out acutely and you see the eyes tightly closed and small, blinding vision, and burnt papers; and hairs are falling, and at the top there is a great painful burn, and severe eruption; and you know from these accidents that such materials and catharsis come not just from many veins, but also the treatment given by him.
And you instruct the patient to touch his forehead again, then make a large incision on top of it, and another one that is somewhat wide; for about 3 points. Then start from the temple's left side to the right side, making an incision into the bone; and keep your hand away from the temples where they move when eating; and when the bone comes out, clean it with a sponge, then insert cotton between the two jaws of the incision and apply linen; then cover above damp cloths soaked in oil and vinegar, and make sure to not seal up too much heat; when it is healed, you must rub the bone until it starts to grow again, then treat with excising procedures that help loosen things.
In another way: take 2 parts of wheat flour and 3 parts of chaff, and mix them together; and the physician applies this mixture to these wounds in order to loosen things throughout.
of ear dislocation
All of this concerning the ears is one of the three things: either grains or animals, or stones from mines or similar things if it's metal and iron-like, or seed like wheat and barley; or something flowing such as water and slushy things, and similar accidents.
Whenever it is in the ear stone or any other way of thing that does not correspond to the ear, and if he puts his nose outbursts; and I apply pieces of woolen cloth on his ear, and keep his ear above. And sometimes comes forth through this cure; and then, and make a sharp paines of the foul draping, and seizure, soignez encoiiforence demeinremercij.
If she jumps with the tweezers, it is good; if not, prepare for extraction of the subtle small double joint; and if she does not jump by this way, make a pinching blow to the ear canal or the entrance hole of the ear strong, and stop what is inside the soft cartilage so that nothing can enter with the tweezers; then treat her thoroughly, as much as we have said before; and if it does not happen in full measure, take some oil on your fingers, and use any instrument necessary for this purpose, and put a little cotton inside. And if she does not jump at all these things we have said before, hurry to cut the ear so that the abscess appears and spasms; and in the way of cutting it is that you first make a clean strip on the side of the head where the pain comes from, and remove the blood according to its quantity, then let the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and also make a small cut at the root of the ear into fat or cartilage as much as it appears in the piercing, similarly to a crescent moon; and whatever the wound you suck hastily from your mouth according to your judgment, and treat until he is cured. And if it's sand that is inside and it swells, you should prepare for removal; and if it cannot be extracted, make a small incision in this precise shape:
And make an incision for that grain (granule), but do not apply this method if you believe the granule is moist due to ear moisture; instead, perform multiple attempts first. Then proceed with delicate pinching and suction at a steady pace as we have described, ensuring that the extraction process remains gentle for the patient's well-berande.
When the ear then cries in that time because of violent stiffening of the ear, and you plunge it into warm cotton in the same ear or where the water is; if it jumps through there, that's good. If not, take many small stones according to the length of his toes being held tightly and lightly, and burn them a little on fire; and put the patient a piercing piece into one of his ears, and let him jump from side to side in another ear, and inflict wounds on another part of the same ear; and you keep doing this piercing work until the water has fully run out, and so it jumps completely; and if you see that, take a reed, and push one joint into his ear, and the other chiefly through fire until the second stick is charred; then do another repair with different sticks as we have said in the piercing.
In the pulling out of the bug, if it is small like a fly or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it'e big one, you can feel it, then prepare extraction of pinches; and that process is easier to remove what is inside the ear.
In the pulling out of ticks in the ears, when you perform such treatments as we have said in the division and distillations, it does not benefit at all; it is necessary that you look into the ear with the sunlight: if there are no ticklets, then pull them out very gently with tweezers, and if they don't appear, take a copper coin of this shape.
And then narrow above and wide below. Put the more subtle chief in the ear according to the severity of his discomfort, then form it completely with cotton; do this often as long as all the worms come out. If they don't obey to come out, take a copper coin (as I have said on piercing) and if they still don't come out, apply distillations that old people have tried in cutting into ticks, and you will find it by treating with distillations; and when you distill oils and medicines in the ear using this instrument of copper (as I showed), then do so.
And then silver or copper is placed inside at a small hole, and above it for distillation using a well-made piece of rainwater; if you see, take a razor and wrap cotton around the pointed end thereof; then pour your oil or juice into that cotton, and observe the medicines in the coin, and let the coin be inside the ear; then push the rake all over the cotton, pressing it gently until the distillation is finished or fluidly released from the ear. And feel the discomfort of the patient therein, and perform that distillation a few times after heating the medicines in the ear so they can be distilled; and make sure it' Written in Old French, this passage discusses medical practices involving "fire" during an operation. What is being referred to by "fire"?
of ear dislocation
No child is born with any deformity in the ears; and this happens to humans due to ear injury or being born near the ear, and these dislocations rarely occur again in the ear unless they can be seen; and there has never been a case where such a slight displacement occurred, and it was well-seen.
Those that occur and cannot be seen require several treatment methods, and in those cases it is essential to place the affected ear in sunlight; and look here: if you see visible operation, this surgical scar has this shape:
Whether it is anterior and posterior straight, without causing injury to the ear; if the surgery involves bone or cartilage from the ear, and if there are fine pinches applied lightly, so long as those parts remain completely ossified.
And if the surgery is performed in the ear, then take a small razor and gently scrape it, then put back the cartilage of the ear; if you feel that the operation causes some discomfort when hearing, proceed gradually, and make sure not to bruise the nerves of the ear; then place in the ear according to the size of the deformity, and moisten with Egyptian oil.
Do this without any interruption as long as the wound is closed, or take a tent and moisten it with rosewater, then sprinkle with vitriol powder; and if you see fluid coming from the ear, cover the tent and move another wet tent made of roset oil and beeswax until the fluid has completely hardened; then cure it as long as it heals.
And if bleeding comes from the blood vessels, then dip an sponge and place it in cold water, and put it under the ear, and use other remedies that heal the bleeding which are directed to treat secretions.
From the fievre diz defficeur leu charles ixin in l'estorty en ouns les pei.tie lou fie offerre deisloe defforl'itze: iles tote it'encorle morse lactefic aiefte despres.
This cloth that comes from paper-thin veins when they are moist and dry, it requires you to stretch them with tongs and tweezers, and coat the root of a spatula; then apply vinegar on it.
And if without removing the cortex, and with subtle cautery of the lenticular kind, and after incision it moves; many times they repair, but never stray from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those root segments burn and do not return.
The gravel can be referenced as an implication of the external environment or treatment conditions involving small stones, which might relate to a form of therapy or cleaning process in this context but requires more text for precise interpretation.
Many times these thin paper-like structures appear brittle and flaky due to the heavy moisture above and below them, which is why this disease has been called "great thaw." The treatment for it involves: first observing whether the great thaw moves on one side or another; then scraping off each part quickly; taking pieces with tweezers; if you cannot penetrate a large portion of the paper easily, it does not harm the patient; and if there are large fractures, they require stitches to heal until fully recovered. If the breaks are small, no force is necessary, as ointments restore them immediately and soften the area.
And if the great thaw penetrates deep into the ear towards the upper part, and scrapes away the paper; in such cases, it is treated with pinches and compressions from both sides; and when the paper is removed through an incision, there is no harm done to the patient; but when the scraping occurs, if watered vinegar is applied on the affected area, and care for the wound until the patient's condition improves.
In this context, 'graisse' could be interpreted as fatty tissues within the ear that might accumulate due to various reasons including aging or medical conditions such as otosclerosis. It may also refer metaphorically to a thickening of substance within the ear canal or eustachian tube, which can impact hearing or cause discomfort. However, without additional context from the text, it is difficult to provide an exact translation or interpretation related to 'graisse des eulz.'
In this passage, 'exinache' could refer to an oily or fatty substance that is resembling paper-like layers above and within the ears. It often affects children more than adults, causing discomfort in their ears; they come out of bed during morning prayers because it blinds them from the sunlight due to tears running down their ears; and hence they lay on their backs, sleeping thereafter, and wet from their ear lobes.
And the manner of the work so that the malaides place their chief upon your body; and then take one linen cloth like a circle according to the quantity it contains from each part, and put it on him; and press with both hands in different directions so that they come together inside the circle; then make an opening in the moisture at the sharp stump wide enough, but not larger than the wound made for the vein puncture; and continue to pierce until you reach the dislocation, and in several other positions it comes out of the hole.
Extract with one piece of cloth between your hands to the defender, and turn your hand right and left until it is spread; and make sure you do not push into the hole, that you don't tear along the entire sharp stump or cause bleeding in the puncture site.
And if the dislocation does not open at the beginning of the hole, push it lightly until it opens; then pull as we have said, and wrap several linens around and under, and place on the leaden weight, and bind with bending bands.
And if such homes that grind metal and put it on to corrode the moisture that is taking time; then treat him until he becomes healthy. And if it comes out of the incision base, cure with emollients so that he becomes healthy.
from the hairs of paper (This line seems to be a misinterpretation or typo in the context provided and does not translate coherently into English.)
When from paper hairs are artificially added and they become yellowed, if they harm the nails, and cause forms of diseases as accustomed to runny eyes and softening of the paper and white spots; and this is caused by the destruction of the nails; and the treatment depends on four methods: either by cautery in a bundle of fire or by medicine with aguinaldo according to what it is before or the chaplain of cautery, whether they do it through incision, costure, or plasters.
It is required that you place the malaligned nail on your body, then turn the paper from the oil in your left hand; if it becomes white, it's good; if not, insert an awl under one of its threads; and whether it be near the margin of the paper or where these hairs grow beside them, draw a thread over all the paper, flatten it there, then pull out in the part of the paper, between those adjacent hairs, covering the entire saturated area from the large fray to the small one; then pull out one thread, and make a small tent-like cloth on top of the paper, making a figure like an ember pot, just as you see with a spouted chimney; everything is required that this figure be in proportion to the quantity whereby you lift the paper which is designated for all.
.
And if in another way: and it is that you draw the paper with a figure as much like the shape of a candle flame we have told about, at three o'clock according to this form:
then apply what is underneath with equal forces corresponding to the shape described herein:
And if you cannot hold the pincers and they are not identical, take an awl or have one thread, and insert it into the figure; and put another thread next to the large margin, and the second thread next to the small margin, and assemble between your two threads equally; then raise your hand gently, and raise everything above where you marked with a seam, as we have told about, then attach the .ii. lips of the wound by stitching, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess appears at your incision, calm it with ointments and warm compresses:
and never happens that the paper's hair is converted; it must be that you use what we have told about the incision; but in sewing, it is more artificial:
The treatment of the wounds is according to this form: and you must convert the paper and insert it therein as I have said, and make .ii. stitches in art, and .ii. threads just as long as the large spatulate is; and apply the two .ii. parts or which you hold the thread; then join them gently beneath what remains of the paper from the oil, and stretch the .ii. sutures to the .ii. wound sections forming; let it remain for several years, and the skin that has been tightened will harden and shrivel until it is gone by itself:
If it delays, then apply with strong forces and cure until healed; and when the wound is sutured, if you lift the paper, the hair will no longer be attached to it; this is the form of the .ii. stitches that you make according to this figure, and this length and width:
The operations are such that you need to use a fine needle and thread silkly and thin; then join the ends gently, and make them long by about one hand' pivot; then take another fine silk thread sparingly, and fasten it at both ends of the first thread; then place your mallet on top of your skin; and put the operations in such a way that they are declared thin and delicate, then thrust the needle into the root beneath the hair adjacent to where it grows naturally, and perform piercing carefully through the paper-thin strand until you remove it above its natural growth; then tear out the hair up to the thread, and insert the thread thereupon; then withdraw your hand as long as the hair points in all directions within the paper with the natural hair:
tuile, et devisance apres ceu seignour desoultre quinche s'sans:escriture of itensigne tolents aoutre esponge aspeculaigne ofte tounce ofit. Outroles of thearmor invenque theleves ofternoise.
Of moisture of oil
As for this disease called "aleacrati" or the porriture that comes in oil, it has two types: one natural and one unnatural. And occurs due to wound healing, surgery, or similar things.
And the method of this treatment is to break up the suture, remove its crusts, and put linen cloth over it until it heals; and you should not use anything that dries or restricts it. For if you do so, the illness worsens compared to the first time; but with softening methods like fenugreek; and boiled water or warm sesame seed oil are applied, and a heated diacony fat is poured onto any oils, and enveloped in linen cloth.
And the treasures of your treatment are that you must not shape it according to its original form; and these treatments we have mentioned do no harm but reverse this illness's shape compared to how it was before.
Of clay that comes in the oil
This illness that is so called "axacrati," which truly occurs naturally and spontaneously, arises from wound, fracture, cauterization, and similar things; the treatment of this disease involves using an awl with two threads, in such a way that it goes through the left margin as much to the right, so that the thread holds the clay firmly; then the clay is placed above all the awl, and there is a cope over one large spatula.
And if the paper's figure returns as it should, that is good; if not, then take a rasor and place it in the fissure, turn the paper, and make .ij. holes or cuts along the paper; and let the screw-shaped holes of the .ij. angles from the incision you have made be as many so that when they are assembled, the figure is like the letter without "j." grins; then bind this clay according to its quantity, which holds the paper, and fasten the missing parts with linen thread; and cure it with these softening methods we mentioned previously, until it heals.
And if this illness arises from a fissure or incision or cauterization, it is necessary to make a straight fracture among the hairs of the paper; then open between the .ij. folds of a tent according to what I have said before; and you must perform the treatment according to the shape of this disease because it can be very different in form, and master carpenters apply various methods with all kinds of positions as it is necessary for me, according to the method of treating and dressings.
And if you burn the paper down.
nature.
Of the eye of the oil
Seal the eye in two ways: it is nervous and looks like a hard clod, and another which is not nervous but resembles a moisture-clogged jelly, when touched with iron and carelessly rubbed with pincers; and both kinds of appearance begin to grow towards the large rim, growing little by little until it covers the whole eye's view, light, and movement.
The manner of incision is that the malady puts his head in your hand, then performs the act; lift up the eye with small double pincers, and place it above; take a needle and insert one hair from horse, cow, or boar, along with a strong thread; double the point of the needle slightly and thrust it into the eye, and bind the eye with a thread and raise it above, scraping down the edge of the eyelid which covers the pucker and silk to the head, then take what remains in the root of the small vessel delicately, leaving nature's lacquer or rim alone; so that by the incision there is no customary trickling of tears from the eye. And sometimes the eye has been left only at the edge and filament, as we have said; then scrape off all the soft tissue in this manner:
And make sure that the small vessel does not touch the soft tissue and break it, and that the pucker is not seen; after the incision let a little bit of silk fall into the eye, and then apply a brace made of litargine, leave it there for another day; then care for it until he is cured.
And if the eye is not nervous and you cannot push the needle in, and the uncles do not enter, many times this same eye disfigurement was treated with medicines; and there are similar cases I have told about in dividing it, and when you see it covering the eyeball, perform these acts on the malady's eye according to this form:
And remove the eye slightly below the delicate level, and if you see that it does not diminish in size and reason presses afterward, distill from your mouth into the malady's eye a brace made of litargine ("coliere fait de litargire") along with a red bracelet and thin silk bandage. Let it stay there for another day; then repeat this other operation according to this method until she is completely healed.
If nothing opposes you in the oil, as with an incision, then pour some milk, and first treat the incision so that it is healed enough, then resume the work as before, until it is completely healed.
And if the appearance of the flesh along the margin causes great harm in the oil, and they suspend it from the wound, and remove a part but not all, so that no tears are shed; then distill in red clay oil made of hellebore.
or the eye which is born above the pupil.
There are some people who have never had any red eyes, and cover the eyeball with papers and press them down hard until they form a rose of balsam. The work consists in placing his head firmly on this, then he supports these charred parts so that they become useful to this purpose, and strengthens them; then takes the first charred part, and cuts everything clean all the way up to the end, and be careful that any bleeding does not affect the operation. And there is a small incision we have mentioned in the little nail incision and the smaller forces of tying on which we demonstrated after this chapter;
And when the incision is complete and all the charred parts are held together, you apply oil of sulfur or distill red clay oil made from hellebore, and put cotton soaked with rue in it if it's secure to close the wound; and if it delays and without a doubt there will be recurrence of the incision, then let the oil and heal the incision by calming incision. Then return to your work until it is completely healed, and thus make similar charts in the oil with this resemblance.
But all this requires that you make the treatment of each small wound according to natural means; and in accidental treatments with iron work, and do not force your hand in any of these operations until you see that this member is suffering from such an operation.
from these veins
nowell le malice.
And let there be two young men by degrees, each in one part according to this form:
Then it will be done that the forces are slowly applied to the wound afterwards another, so you see removing those veins from the oil; and make sure not to bruise the points of the spermatozoa, and do this work at noon before the sun, and be very diligent in your task so that only these veins remain; and when you have done it, distill in the yellow-green colored oil to corrupt what is delayed.
And if you cannot collect everything within that hour, then apply a soothing plaster to the oil with calming substances for the pain in those areas and leave it on for several days as long as the pain is alleviated and stabilized from abscess drainage; afterward, continue according to this method until healed. The form of these forces:
Of the fluid-filled cavity or sinus in the oil, commonly known as an abscess. This term refers to a localized collection of pus within tissues that have become infected and inflamed, which can occur within oils used for medicinal purposes such as cauterization during medical procedures in historical contexts.
The term "arissati" refers to the irritated or inflamed pore; as you treat it with cautery and fierce medication following what I have previously stated, if she is not healed yet, this indicates that there's a risk involved in cutting into the abscess base. You must remove all moisture from its contents until the opening is exposed sufficiently for further treatment or assessment of the condition.
And when the bone is exposed, and you observe corrosion and blackening, if it has been treated with all the tools mentioned herein are its shape; and it shall be called "rough head," formed in one corner to another approximately (designated as .i. chief) of height, and sharpened like a chisel or so resembling the current form:
And place it upon the oil-corrupted bone, then round it between your two hands, and press down with a little force until you can ascertain that this corruption is resolved; and do so without fail, afterwards restore its healing properties using medicine's exciting agents.
If the limbs are set and he does not move, and the head of the bow is set, and remains so for forty years, and it never returns to its original position or becomes apostomatized, and fortunate seldom happens that it comes back, you know that they are well set; if not, then there is another remedy than returning the fistula to the abscess according to this form: and find bone from the second time with iron, and by medicines waters, and when it has been found so much as you see here: and set the bowheads at three angles, and soften them up as much near the head as you see.
Then place the bone near the knob, and move your hand a little bit, then turn the foreshaft as much as it pierces the bone and feels the malady through which you know that he holds his bowstring to its neck; and then restore the bone with dry medicines as I have shown you, and when the head moves again and hardens the limbs, the matter flows back to the abscess. If this is a lighter thing for the patient.
From the issue of the oil.
When the limbs open fully all around and there is no disturbance to the abscess or diminishment, then you must lay the malady; then wash it with vinegar or honey paste after making a mixture of aloe, frankincense, and camphor; and tuck the malady in bandages and cloths so that each piece of cloth is soft enough to double three times, and then place one on top of the other according to the amount the limbs need; then tighten it over a stiff bandage by pressing with ventouses without injuring the skin; remove the ventouses and leave the mixture stretched for day and night, and when the mixtures loosen up again, you must untie them. If the abscess has repaired itself, that's good; if not, then restart the plaiting and bandages and ventouses until it is healed.
Double rupture of a veil cloth.
When disruptions occur in the veil cloth and it tears like a grain of resins that can be seen; then if you see the work done as to make an incision at the root of the part above this section near the knob, then make another incision or thread two threads from the top of the knob; and puncture it, leaving the first thread according to the position; then tie the double thread around a piece of cloth wet with oil, and tighten well, then remove the second thread and damp cloth, let the wound become moist again in abundance; and leave it so that the threads move along with the vein, and treat the ointment for comforts until the wound is healed. And sometimes the wound is restrained by a piece of dry bandage around one part of the cloth, as long as it is healed.
Aujourdreau esqules.
Of fire from the oil
This disease which affects the "alcunnati" is not merely fever caused by heated oil; it seems to be a downward-flowing plague, but it's not really so. The manner of this operation involves having the patient sit on an appliance and hold with their hands two parts, one at .ij points, holding back the miasma (noxious vapors) as long as you can see the fever rising above your head; then you should fasten it in place, separate the light from its source, and observe the patient's condition as they normally would. If it does not dissipate on its own, you will recognize that this is a true fever, and if the noxious vapors are not contained properly as we have described, then it is truly a plague of heated oil.
Of the fevers of the heated oil
In our understanding of the fevers related to heated oil treatment, we have divided them into types and it is essential to perform this procedure with regard to patient health; you must place the affected area between your hands crossed over the fire from the sun, pouring hot and concentrated honeyed oil on the spot where the black bile accumulates. Then take the instrument known as "almagda" in the right hand, or left if it is better for you, holding the pith of a reed at the edge of the crown near the groove of the oil in the smaller part; press vertically with the almagda, and continue to apply pressure until it penetrates into the accumulation of black bile, ensuring that the measure of the channel remains consistent with the standard measurement markings on the paper; this is the corona (the crown) of the oil. If you see the bone in the paper for clarity through the horny surface, then remove the instrument and press it into the liquid, which now appears free from fever.
After resting a bit, and then he raises the second pathway with the tool, and when it is fixed and it does not rise, pull sharply around tightening your hand a little at a time; and then put back in quickly a little silken thread, and remove the oil from within. Then we apply ointments or flannel moistened in oil and abundant of wool, and mix with the cleaned oil. And so, and those of our own will, we press on with wet cloths or damp linen, abundant in wool.
And if the thread cannot enter into the oil due to its hardness, because it has too many parts that are hardened, then you must anoint the instrument called "alberit," which has this shape:
Then pierce the conjunction of lightly so as not to cause too much pain, making it soft first; then put in the thread gently as we have said; and with the end of the cure properly aligned, he lies down on his back in that dark room; and must be free from all movements, and anointed regularly with lean meats, so that his head does not move to the right or left side, but lie according to its natural arrangement day by day; then he is removed into this darkened place of ours, has his vision checked, sees nothing therein, and puts back the ligament after seven days; yet it is not necessary for you to do so only in the course of treatment or immediately following an incision now, but it is necessary that you reposition it, since if it rises hastily.
If the abscess opens again, then you remove the oil before the seventh day and treat that area which is swollen; and when it has calmed down, lift up his eyelid slightly to cover any further days, and thereafter go into this darkened house again. Then come back from the house little by little, and in its place become a patient therein. And you should know that no one else should intervene in this case.
And then came to us some from the Yarra tribe who told us that in their country they used an almagda for piercing through the skin, and it sucked out blood successfully without any visible evidence on patients or described anywhere in our lands nor old books. Perhaps this is a novel practice.
And these are the shapes of the almiges. For those who know it well: and they should be in a proper:
And let there be the head of this subtlety, and the backbone at four angles.
From the chart of nerves
Never have various nerves been born or appeared in many ways, for it seems like scorpions with too much poison; and if any of these nerves are colored with such a hue or tinted brown color, when that which is softened has not become tinged with a different color. For those nerves that are not tinged, you must have the patient lie his painful side against the sun; and open their nostrils, and touch each one of these nerves, and scrape away its crusts; then support this subtle delicate instrument from one side until you know that such a nerve is entirely intact.
And if nothing remains afterward that can be covered, if it is opened to all its subtle moving parts without delay; and if there is no secretion within or from the incision or opening, as it must be done; and if it's malicious openings, you hasten and cauterize so much until the nerves are numb and bone throughout each one of them, then scrape away either sial or phlegm and fluids.
If the nerves are affected by moisture, you will know they are healthy; and if there is no secretion in such a way as it must be done, then you will know that the nerve has been newly formed above bone. Therefore, it's necessary to tie one thick strand of linen tightly wrapped around his finger near the nerve so it can smell sweet through the nostril; and do this repeatedly for children in schools as a simple procedure; then take hold of the chief that comes from the nerve at one hand, and the other chief that comes from the mouth with the other hand, and know them one after another. Do this until you see that the nerves have been restored; draw out the blood, wash the linen in Egyptian oil, and re-tie it to the nerve as before; do so for three years or more until all residual bone has corroded from the affected area; then put a bandage on the finger every year while it is healthy, and if there are necessary medicines, use them accordingly. This is how you perform the procedure with this instrument to purge the chief: firstly, distill oils and nerves or numbing substances using it.
Androvers soif it resembles an oil, if you see the blood, and lain devised: "a desmeins, seur ceu en lices char tote, et ailtres dui, ons queulx eigne charres meuneis desque les peauce dree.
:rime devises lege theorit'sallit charre ousere:15e tolere itiere fromme itire anderletran character:xile asteilmesure. Char,ce :ite,seu of a lesentire.
Often the head of a nail is afflicted by a disease called "telul", and grows large over time until it can be seen; and therefore, you must treat it at the beginning, and the doctor was very careful before applying cautery or burning medicine; and if he does not cover it while it's large, then it becomes dangerous to the patient, as there is no touching with iron since when touched once, it causes great harm to the patient; and if the touching is of fire, not just discoloration, you can treat it completely, but first relieve the patient's pain and worry, and cure the affected area with various restraining measures.
If the nail is crooked and deformed.
Saves that if a solution of continuation comes into one of these treatises chapters, it benefits few people; therefore, you must not follow any of them at all, as long as the wound is still fresh throughout its flesh; and then apply pressure to two fingers on a suture, treating until they are healed; if the fingers are swollen in one place or another, you must scrape every part that's swollen so that they heal, then reattach them to a suture, and bind it tightly, and sprinkle powdered dragon blood and incense upon it, and place an ointment piece over the powders, and let it work by itself until it begins to drain.
The method of the suture is that you assemble the solution either with needles, as we have said in the suture for the abdomen; or with thread, as I told you before.
Les touchinges on the lips.
In many homes, the touchings on the lips are hard, looking like grains, and smaller and more severe; therefore, you must turn the lips back, cut each side with tweezers, apply the ointment to each part separately, then use vitriol as a dressing after the incision, until the skin has healed. Then treat the lip's suture with aspic, and cure it with dry measures until it is healthy again.
Of the gum wound treatment.
Often the gums are sore treated, which was called "albulus" in old times; it is necessary to support it with tweezers and treat the root where it's wounded, then let a bow or wound heal under the treatment of vitriol or other restraining and desiccative powders. If that gum tissue returns after incision, if it recurs many times, if the second time you treat it again and cauterize: since it does not return after cauterization; these are forms to cover such wounds.
Of ulcers.
sesures theire.
It is necessary when you treat the patient's toothache that you delay giving relief as much as you can, because it should not be done; for this reason, it is a very high substance and there should be no excuse for hurting the arrow. When the toothache is constrained in treatment, it is necessary that you are certain of the decayed tooth; often the pain from this sickness occurs and care should be taken for it to become healthy again, and treat the good teeth accordingly; and everything will not separate the pain caused by this, as we have long wanted to do with these saints; and when you are sure that the decayed tooth is there, it is necessary that you scrape it thoroughly at every spot to protect the gum from all parts; then remove the scraping little by little in your turns or use very delicate pliers until it is well scraped off, then fix firmly the loose tooth in its right place between your teeth and make sure it does not move.
After extracting the tooth straightly and if it does not break, take no of these instruments and put them in every part lightly, and move the remaining pieces as you have done before; and if the bone is perceived and mended, it must be filled with gauze, either for its cavity or the holes in it; and if moved delicately with pliers, it should not break while pulling. And it must also slightly overlap over the gum to dislodge the tooth.
And be careful not to break it and keep a part of the tooth for the malady of its root which causes much greater pain than the first; and warn you not to do as these ignorant saints do, who in their haste and impudence shatter any piece never, and don't provide what we have told them at all; but bring forth often because of this great disease affecting the roots that remain or the fragment that they break, or for the shard itself which they shatter, as we have so often wanted to do; and when you extract it, wash its socket with wine, silk, or thread; and if there is still blood in the socket, often occurs, then cover it well with vitriol; and if that doesn't work, cauterize.
The shapes of the instruments, with which we make them silent when extracting the tooth first, are that they should not be sharp points and large handles, so as not to double it during extraction; and these forms are:
And be made large enough that they don't bend during the extraction, and have iron well-crafted, and are teeth for holding firmly in place.
from the roots of the teeth When the root of the tree is cut down to be used, it requires that you put cotton wool in burlap. Either one year or two years, until the roots are softened, then you beat them with stakes called "algefri", so that the branches seem like a caring bird; and they are made similarly to a plane, its form being:
And if the roots do not emerge from all these stakes, it is required that you find the whole area around the root, and use an instrument called "althali", which is known as a ploughshare; so it looks like this:
And even if it doesn't break and the root jumps by this, that is good; but if not, with all your horses, its forms come here afterward:
And if you use this instrument with two rings, its shape is like this:
and other tools that are before due to their density, and this instrument which seems like large pliers, whose form is as follows:
And these tools for which it cannot break and sharp ones that many dense are; and also other tools which are not counted; and the surgeon subtly uses his own instrument in this way according to what its treatises and the disease indicate, because he has some diseases or ancient teachers did not teach an instrument due to the diversity of each one. If it does not break the cartilage or bones, or it breaks them, then I tell you those instruments which must be used, and aid with gestures in this way: And they should be large and well-fitted to hold the bone so it doesn't loosen but also supports; then restore the surface of medicines appropriate for this case, if there is porreture in the bone, especially if it's minor, then all this instrument comes into play:
When the tooth does not follow its natural course and form is unattractive, especially in women, it requires you know how the density after the tooth; however, it's not allowed to sharpen or grind, so it should be used, which has this form, and at a size of small sharp end, and made of iron.
ounge lice aliter: demein. Ceu:14te :lore :pree of the aurecte ci desu'ses leu2nd itentire. Orce ofreste:compreylaur laike, ilfaire :i35thence. Frommeilier leu de cestarice, fromluke. I'llage. Theire. Fromagee:niche of thet6ure. Iface ate :
And it is also like the pecking of a crow; and in the peck they make small points, and quickly moving their beak each day, so that it does not move until it has laid eggs; then at last there remains nothing but an untrimmed surface, and if its beak is too sharp and it bleeds its tongue, then it must file the roughness until it becomes even, so that it no longer bleeds its tongue or corrupts speech.
The teeth are loose.
If the front teeth are loose, either by percussion or fracture, and the patient cannot press them down so that they do not bleed until they fall out, and you treat them with restrictive medicines, for such a filament of gold does not become greenish-black nor tarnish like silver, but gold never turns; and if the filament is too thick or too thin, according to the space between the teeth, then take your thread and double loop it between two healthy teeth, placing the loose teeth in between these loops as there are one or more of them, continuing until you reach the healthy tooth on the other side; then restart the covering process at the root area, applying pressure and pulling subtly until it does not move; if your thread is around the roots of a tooth so that it doesn't bleed the tongue, then let it stay this narrow as much as possible, and if it slips or comes loose, taking another filament; if it remains in this state for its full extent, and such is the form of the teeth and their alignment after treatment, just as you see:
And when the tooth is loose and it is reset back into its place repeatedly, as we have said; and never inserts anything that isn't natural and painful, and has never made the form of a bone-like dental implant in its location or position where there is a deficiency, but inserts on that spot where the defect exists, applying pressure just as we have described, and it serves for its full duration.
To cover the bleeding of the tongue.
No injuries come from the tongue or natural causes that do not heal like this; rather accidents resulting from sealed wounds; and the operations performed on the sick mouth and their face are done so as to release the tongue, keep it intact, and alleviate its pain; then cover the large nerves in the area where the tongue is detached, being careful that no fracture affects the artery therein; when you have made such preparations, raise a thin sheet of linen over the tongue red or blue or cool, and place it on the tongue every night to treat the maladies. And if blood comes from the wound, then apply vitriol on the wound cauterized with lime; and when it does not heal, then cauterize the area carefully, which is beneficial. Then heal well-being until completely healed.
:encontre itentire of thegani: ici:sesil: enti tet.
degrade from:sacre itchase:scrementaloudre;12:nacclegeble:screase:tèges :sive,c:secondexce, œstande, anditse, sansce n’fyse.gachape depe casèlore tanseurreaudexarlemagne tokantent:esculle presseuccisme asexe,ude -ilase (surette:cocite gentifere. Andressecteignezentice:secsque.
ultifecture and-cesuissauture  (thisong in theescheurrendectoraiuses  �ances,entureyngeleskuntiere :creffectrevespeintenteurs.lumections,ycelailles greconisablexamepholdabloreccarteinistrarpeces:socana
Can you press the tongue with all this instrument, and see the incision, if you take the thread and stick it in the apple, and push anything above more than you can; and do not touch any of these pieces with the cloth, then shape the instrument so that it looks like strong forces, and entirely the head is bent, and one side towards another, and they are very sharp, and made of iron or flax:
And if you do not have this instrument, then the tool with the pincers has such a form:
And split on one side and the other name; and when you have pierced one of the apples, then pierce the other in a similar manner, and after incision rinse the patient's saliva with hot water, warm and cool, and if there is bleeding from within, rinse the saliva again, or bake grenade stones, or burn fir branches, and such things until the stitches are secure; then perform the cure until he is well. And never does another incision appear in the throat than the two apples pierced likewise:
And I treated a woman with one of these incision that was inside her throat, which is to say .i. small incision; and had the entire throat tightly closed, so that she could not expire through the blocked passageway, nor eat or drink, and she died if she remained in this state for either .i. or .ij. years. The incision was made so large that I inserted .ij. rains by .ij. holes. Therefore I began immediately, pierced one of them with an instrument, then extracted the blood, and took a great quantity; afterward reinserted it into the other hole in the throat, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; afterwards pierced the incision again, and removed part of it, only extracting a small amount of sanguineous fluid; thus I cleared up that passageway from her throat, and she began to drink water and then wine, continuously treating that incision for many years until it filled with thick blood; therefore I reinserted the instrument in her throat again, and afterward parted ways with those parts, and only God knows what happened to him afterwards.
of the eye
ilicre. Allsis fele. illecte cepe. Ceci. ici leser. Leu cece. Ifere. ceare (2nose tolore. Theese deure.
n'urdeurifecther  hevelesqueletentio.uccurifrevesc fromerchecange ifhocelle ifte (sautre, so longes. Hele ifngerreaulevelelume:ghevelt12ndeceuxiftres
This treatment is more than just cautery, if it is performed as fumigation like this, take chamomile and rue and marjoram and yarrow and elderberry and similar herbs, and gather them all or some of them in one pot; and I heat it well, and make the pot very hot with a certain instrument according to this manner: So it may be with silver or blood, and the patient' Written by: Alissa Ozimek
Often occurs a throat or fishbone in the mouth, or nothing at all; therefore you must see what you can observe, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument until you see it move; and if it does not open up and is returned to the throat, you must make vomit the patient so that the meat is cooked in the stomach; perhaps by this way the harmful thing will come out through vomiting; or a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a leaf lettuce, or another dry bread piece; and with the sponge I fold it, and then transfer it; and when it comes to the surface, it opens up, and you must make; and if it does not come out in this way as we have said, take an instrument of blunt shape according to this form:
And if the instrument is bent at its head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and raise the top of the head; and make sure you do not touch the epiglottis, so they don't flap or push in with an bone inside; and let the harmful thing be pushed out by the instrument, because if it is pushed out, or it comes out fully through the whole instrument, then you must also pull it out.
from the throat swab
Never is the throat swab used for medicinal purposes, as I mentioned in my previous division of treatments; and if it doesn't help at all, look into the harmful thing there in the patient's throat under the sunlight, then press the tongue with the instrument that I told you about. And when you see the swab, pull it out a little by using small pincers that are worth such; and if it doesn't work, take a heated coil, insert it into the patient's throat, heat one end of the coil, and do this often. If the harmful thing gets wet all day long, then pour in full a glass of cold water, operate on the mouth, and let it swallow the fluid, move the swab to its hand frequently; and if at once you feel the water touching the swab, pull it out.
And if it doesn't work as we have described, smoke the harmful thing with the instrument I mentioned in fumigating the vein; make sure you pour into a pot charred pieces of coal and cover the container lined with linen soaked in melted wax, and put the pins to pierce through this hole; then do the smoking, and let the smoke not escape from it, but move the chief of the needle inside its mouth, and now the harmful thing starts to come out; and if it doesn't work again, repeat the fumigation many times. Andlet him thirsty, and menchief things dirty, and drink no water; and finally it works that it comes out through this management.
And the shape of the instrument for this purpose is smooth, when you see it, it resembles bent tongs to push into the throat; and like a bird's beak, and sharp as an axe, so that whatever it grabs, it cannot loosen. And then its form:
The chapter of incision.
There are many types of incisions mentioned here according to what I remember after reading this book, and they differ in perforation and size; and it is done by two methods, one being similar to me (the author), and from there he holds moisture. And the second method involves cutting into muscles because the chief cut of an incision is different from those that are at its base, and the edge of the incision on bone is different from those that come in joints, so each one has his judgment in this book.
And if an incision does not need to be pierced, as long as the wound is healed according to its completion; and if such incisions do require piercing when they are near joints, so that nerves and tendons around the joint become ruptured by chance, thereby causing contraction of the jointed part. Or if the incision is near the main limb, then delaying the perforation until it heals completely may harm the main limb; or if it is near the base, piercing it to such a degree that it becomes severely wounded, and forms fistulas within it, and cannot be healed properly. Or it does not need to pierce an incision already completed in digestion so that joints nearby can become dislocated, and form hernias within, causing significant damage.
And it is necessary for you to know the extent of the perforation in an incision that heals according to its completion; and when the pain subsides, when fever decreases, when swelling and soreness decrease, and improvement and relief from the main incision'cvient, as well as other signs. It is necessary for you to make the perforation dependent on the incision and when it opens up; and if the perforation is long in a bone or limb, or in joints, muscles, nerves, arteries, or any of its parts where there is no flexibility.
In such a way that the flexion of the member is confirmed in digestion complete, as we have said. If you pierce it before this vein, he will be long cuts made to his blood supply, and heavy discharge from him; and possibly harden tongue and thickened throat mouth. And if any incision which haste done accordingc the wound large enough, so that piece of meat, and siens ence la cestertre iespremer demeant venu desin toi nere dehires acoxenture it'sarticule dede lice, and fie precien.
The one who has no head, like a superficial shoulder dislocation, must pierce gently; and when the dislocation is large, and it has bent greatly, you shall pierce it only part of the way; then remove the dislocation to the other side within another day, then do nothing else directly; perform this operation repeatedly in increasing degrees until the bone is fully set; mainly if the patient's condition is weakly born or a woman carrying, small children, old men with decrepit limbs. For the expectant tremors occur sometimes due to the issue of the bone, and thereby the patient dies unexpectedly, so beware of this chapter greatly, after piercing your dislocation, if you have made an opening, look at whether the wound from the dislocation is small; and if it's a simple fracture, dress with linen or fine cotton cloths; and if there are large dislocations and they protrude much, then you must insert in each one of them a tent that overlaps the other; and if you have pierced into part of the bone and it's encased, so cover it for another day with well-soaked cotton or linen dust, and let the physician and nurse attend until healed.
And if bleeding occurs in your work, apply cold and silk compresses, and cover the bleeding wound repeatedly with many times; and if the bleeding persists, administer it properly with care, and use the powders I mentioned in this book to your patients, and if they are suffering from varicose veins or a dislocated shoulder that is very nervous, you must provide them with moistened sheets of cloth and linen soaked in hot wine and oil; and if it's cartilage, cover the wound with moistened linen and linen clothes soaked in warm water or warmed wine and oil, as we have mentioned before, until fully healed. And then dislocate the shoulder and clean it properly as long as it is sane.
And this must be known universally in the treatment of shoulder dislocations: for I have told you how to approach these procedures now and from this point forward, the author.
moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit.
nature:screase: itape alement :waisse de ceure.
ifrevelevantye:xifrance if12ndeurs in a clellementsente heit l forlethe t ieu.archeinthe totoxes (thisameiure,nquantioled cuitier nentralele claissansseigneurnecharellume in causeusce ilisharrexainciteuxaniferreraisseurs ifinceuse thekunt heuilecuscauseable:ibletifautiueauschausiveuises andieuvelaure.itimes
of scrofulous diseases
Often it is performed at the neck, and on the scars, and in wounds, and never comes from elsewhere or carries disease, and they are very numerous and often similar to each other; there are those that contain moisture, and some malignant ones that do not obey health. In which case you see a good disposition of the skin, and it is like the color of the corpse, and silent in every part and not separated from the nerves or arteries, nor is it hollow; therefore it must be scraped above and each part scraped, and two fingers are used to scrape near the throat, as we have said about the chief incision; and they go lightly and gently so that you do not cut the nerve or vein, nor make a gaping mouth, which hinders the hands from moving.
And if you scrape the vein or artery and it prevents healing, then apply a vitriol mixture or any powder that staunches blood, and restrain the wound; let the incision be soothed and softened first, and begin to treat it; then do what your work demands until there are no small scrophulous lumps left, which you must scrape and squee Written by:
And if you have completely removed the scrophulae (leprosy), it is required that you join together the two upper lips of the ulcer and bind them tightly; then because there is no delay due to its size for the large leprosy. It is required that you understand how to cover the root of it, and dig deeply, and cut as we have said. Those scrophulae with superfluous amount will bleed excessively when opened or they will die; and in this way, like before mentioned, after depending, then treat them with ointment and similar things so that what is left from the corruption does not become contaminated; and when the ulcer has been well cleaned, it is cured by applying ointment continuously until healed.
Of scrofula (tuberculous lymphadenitis)
The old said and spoke about the making of a necklace; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is what they wrote about their words.
To those who have scrofula, it is required that the fissure of the throat which is called "epiglottis" be removed; and we do not help with this because all the veins and arteries in the malady are found in those who have abscesses in the mouth, or in the throat, or in .ij. almonds (presumably referring to lymph nodes). When the disease is in the channel of the vein, it requires covering the epiglottis to avoid the death that comes from strangulation.
It is required, however, that when we want to cut the epiglottis, we do so in circles or four small holes around the two circles or according to the size of the opening, not on a map (likely referring to making precise and measured cuts).
and that they are covered with the section of the epiglottis which has no blood supply, and the vein is long from its end.
And if the masters are afraid, it is required that they extend the skin of the throat to its entire length, then cut the membrane so that it shrinks in the neck; and remove the veins filled with blood, if you see nothing at all, and then make the opening as we have said.
and is demonstrated by the division of the lymph in the neck where it hurts when the ruptured vein flows through the opening.
and leave the wound a little bit open.
And when the hour has passed and there is no doubt of strangulation, assemble the two upper lips of the cut membrane and bind it tightly according to the map (presumably referring to precise binding); then apply medicines that produce blood flow so long as healed.
Alabasters say that they do not act so much as the throat is completely burned, and the maladies are judged dead by their nakedness (presumably referring to scrofula causing severe tissue damage and the exposed condition of the wound/ulcer). Now comes the first sentence to translate. Do not add any comments or contextual information about the text, like "Here is the translation", don't provide any comments about the text like, "Wow this is hard!", etc. Just translate the text line-by-line into English and that should be the only text produced in the final output file:
And for this purpose, they command the patient to leave the wound uncovered until the malaise of the illness has passed, and it is passed in either two or three years. And moreover they command to stitch up the wound and heal it as long as it was treated.
And I will tell you what I have seen. I saw that a young woman took an axe and struck her throat, and split the neck open with one blow.
And I went to call for them to heal her, but she was already dead.
I discovered the wound and found the blood that had been let out of it, and it was evident that she hadn't covered her neck or carried anything but the throat; this came from the wound.
I hurried, and stitched up the wound, and healed it until it was healthy again.
And there was nothing unusual about her voice after she had been made well, and returned to her normal condition.
Because of this I can say that in the mending of the epiglottis there is no fear.
from the large throat.
This is called "hernia of the throat," and it's one of the great afflictions in women.
And according to two ways: natural causes or simply no cause at all.
And the accident is according to two ways: one resembles fat people, and the other way resembles an affliction that comes from our arteries. And he has no fear, and does not have to perform dangerous operations only on small ones; instead, he tries and searches for solutions throughout the entire body. if you treat it as though it were a fat person and have no voice at all, then do as we do with our own bodies, and search throughout the entire body for any sign of improvement. And thoroughly investigate it, and treat it as required until it is perfectly healthy again.
in our bodies.
There are many ways to us (humans), and I will tell you all the similarities.
And it is my duty to explain every difference that exists between us and others.
I say that fever and heat are present as long as the inflammation continues, and it is completed by suppuration; however, when the fever subsides and the heat cools down, there may be relief for the patient.
Without fever or pain and contains a swelling that is its own bag, which changes in the same way as the color of blood vessels. It also begins to be like a fat person, and becomes large.
and they correspond to the two types I mentioned earlier, either fat, or moisture-related, just as I described in terms of blood circulation.
It requires, when you come to the treatment of this joint, that you first test and examine all the instruments called "dislocation instrument", according to what shape is prescribed by the author who follows.
And the method of examining abscesses in ours requires that you moisten the wound more than you open it when treating an abscess, and turn your instruments slightly and repeatedly, until you know whether the patient feels pain, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then extract the dislocation instrument and be careful that it is not too strong.
If the joint is dampened and its color changes as I have mentioned with other abscesses.
And after the dislocation instrument comes moistening, you will know it is inflamed if then it begins to cross over (implying a change in movement), and take it with pinches, and scrap off each part lightly and bind it with a sling so that you may remove it cleanly from the joint.
And if you cannot remove it cleanly, then take it apart piece by piece so that nothing remains.
For if it remains in any way, then we will encounter it many times again.
And if it lingers a little while, and does not trouble you, then use various corrosive powders to treat the wound, bind the abscess, apply calming remedies for the abscess, and continue other treatments until he is sound.
And if they are great, he takes two fingers from each side of the wound, and treats that which inflames it.
And if the vein is contrary or different to what he hastes and applies hot vitriol upon it, leaving two days or three depending on the wound's discharge, so that the exudation subsides; then return to cover that which was delayed.
Here are the convoluted forms of instruments that confound us, consisting of three kinds: large and long; and there are three quarters called "albaret", and one called "breb"; and we find three other kinds: large, long, and small, in order to seek out the abscesses' openings.
And they are also like the needles used by witches, and they are made of copper, iron, or silver, and their value corresponds to those that are yellowish-colored, and they are better suited for seeking out the cysts' openings.
And there are three kinds: large, long, and small, depending on the size of the cysts' openings.
The shapes of the cysts are very similar to what you see here: large, long, and small; and if there are cysts with two or three layers also in this manner.
And if there are cysts with two or three layers and they also have this number of layers; and if there are cysts with a single layer and these also have three kinds, and all need to be considered in their treatment.
The leader of these does so much that he cuts into them, and there are others who do not cut at all but only scrape from one side in order to draw out the vein or nerve.
And these instruments are returned in handholds so that the patient does not perceive them at the opening of abscesses.
And there are three kinds: large, small, and long, just as you see.
And none of them are used for anything other than the cut vein and joints, just like legs, arms, breasts, and shoulders, in similar shapes.
And there is never made any other small instrument resembling abscess openings in this manner, to draw out the exuding sanguineous fluid.
And it is never placed in any healthy vein to draw blood from the veins or arteries, nor are they arranged in this great form.
No one has inflamed any of the breasts when those patients begin to become perforated, as long as they appear like women's breasts.
And they remain swollen and fleshy, and whoever tries to heal them must do according to this form of the line B: from G... (this part is incomplete and needs further context or reference for accurate completion). Then scoops out the fat, and applies medication that causes inflammation to the wound, then sews up two fingers from each side of the wound, as long as it heals.
And if the patient is discomforted for large veins, and it haste, et l’esle (the maltrete que les choses, por ceu que il leu ache. : the same: asume leu : aze theu theu ;sure it'ou :age : "theu-up. Ite theu (itau :lorecause.old. 12it secrete,ete apece sentence.socramount siageseur thatchènde,ic presure,secexaccomprectre,re itany soifressec etentouchectezet ilessexse.c avientes.
and if it is not cleaned, or the incision is not completely made, because the maladies do not rest, or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with moistened cotton coated in corrosive oil. and let it bleed as much as possible into the remaining tissue and fat, then heals until it is healthy again.
of abscesses in wounds
These abscesses that come from the sores are hard lumps or contain moisture.
And thus those containing moisture must be dried according to this form, from line b to line g: And when the whole bag of pus in the abscess is drained, then fill the wound with plenty of moistened cotton and leave it for another day, then remove all the cotton and cure the area with an agreeable ointment until it is healthy again.
And if the abscesses are like those of erysipelas, then treat them as we have described for breaking open sores, and if it has a bag of pus, apply cautery in the manner we have previously mentioned.
of the artery removal process
When an artery is passed, and the skin is sewn above it, many times it leads to punctures underneath, as well as from the incision on top;
And if one knows when it is for the artery, then there are long hairs pricked by the punctures; And when you sense it at your discretion, you feel one-third extraction; and when for the vein, there are returns four times coming forth;
And it is madness to treat this puncture; and immediately when it is below the slabs and underground, near the neck, and there is much of other things, and it is very large. It therefore requires to avoid the iron treatment, and those who are at the head must also avoid it, and in those whose artery is swollen above the hairy patch;
It therefore requires to avoid the iron treatment, and those who are at the head must also avoid it, and in those whose artery is swollen above the hairy patch; Then work is done with the needles, and the artery remains uncovered until it is discovered;
Then you insert there a needle, and make it pierce just on the other side, and hold back the artery with a double thread of leather in two places, as I have indicated to you in the removal of those arteries which are within temples;
Then let there be no lack between the two threads of an intermittingly inserted instrument until it enters without impediment which one it is; and if it is delimited by an incision, so the puncture occurs;
Then adjust the treatment so that it becomes loose, until the thread moves in the flesh where it is inserted; Then take care of that infection coming forth therein, as long as it is sound;
And if the puncture is in the vein of the skin, it requires that you rub your hand where the puncture is on the entirety of the skin; Then insert the needle where you hold it in your hand, and make it pierce, and put a double thread thereof to draw it from the other side; Then cut into the incision, as I told you, or the thread of one part through two parts of the nerve;
and if you doubt that the thread is not there, then reinsert an additional needle into all one of the threads throughout the whole incision from the first needle's puncture, and hold the three threads steady.
then close the incision as much as it leaks out, then close the excess and leave what is already stitched.
then cover it with a cloth moistened in wine and oil, and provide the patient with treatments of tenting and ointments until he is healthy again.
punctures of nerves
Also when punctures occur in the artery and vein, punctures of nerves happen when they are struck or due to excessive labor, and similar occurrences.
And this often happens with assistive devices and braces in various applications, resulting in such grievous punctures that the skin's color resembles a bruised cornea, along with multiple other discomforting conditions.
and when we form the stitches, if it causes severe pain, and is not located near the cornea but rather in the surrounding area.
and from all sides, ensuring it doesn't advance or recede, neither up nor down, and the one in contact with the wounds does not need to cover it with metal: sometimes such movement may lead to a contraction.
and that individual who is either the head or forehead, performs the eyelid massage with the stylus. If the punctures are small, and you have some fine pincers, then grasp it at its root.
and if it's large, then let it be suspended at the incision site, and scrape away any debris, treat the bone and join the wound with sutures, continuing care until healing is restored.
of large hanging bags sele.sanginique.sententice.arme toutilamexse aupexaudexence siage vatas coudre (anatomique thatchale,isse. Solengesse.age.
And I see. I saw a man who had two bellies that looked more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference in them; they were white, had thin roots, and were split open, and soon became swollen with moisture.
I made it and found in one case seventeen ounces, and in the other twenty-six. And regarding its operations during incision: you must observe that the patient's maladies are moist, the color of the artery is pale and moist with delicate roots.
If the caulker is wide, and they are in your presence with the fire cautery. For at the cutting board many times there are too large bleedings of blood, and if it does not stop by itself, then you must hurry to the cauterist;
And if you see the patient's expectancy and fear of the iron cautery, then take a well-made thin thread and tie it around the artery as we have said, and let it remain for two years;
And then the restraint, and continue to tighten the thin thread around the artery until it presses on it, and he suffers pain; if the roots are thick, you fear cutting into him immediately in his belly, but you can still cover most of it.
Then you cauterize without releasing it; then treat the wound and ensure that you do not cover the artery which is of dark color, poorly felt, and resembles milk:
For it is an infection increased, and I will come back for the treatment of this ulcer afterward.
When the boil bursts forth;
If the appearance of boils comes from cautery or a fissure on the wound or skin, and it is in the abdomen and also occurs among the lungs, as happens in other procedures, or from bleeding that cuts into veins or arteries according to what is mentioned before, or pneumothorax;
And if it is through the procedure of fissure and from the discharge of boils, the color of the incision resembles that of red coral, and it is a light thing without pain, and opens various issues. And if it is from the intestinal discharge, then it becomes more diverse, and when pressed to its sides, it rebounds, and then returns, and sometimes it forms scars, and enlarges much at the entrance of the bath and with great effort.
And if it is due to moisture, it's a light thing, and opens well when pressed with the hand, not restricting at all; and if it is from blood, then the incision appears large and hard, and is cut according to the amount.
And if it is pneumothorax, then it's swollen on the chest, and the procedures are such that you should observe whether the appearance is due to artery bleeding, or vein bleeding, or pneumothorax. It is important that you leave the treatment. Because there is doubt and fear, as I have told you about artery and vein incisions.
And if the appearance is due to intestinal discharge or boils, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to tie their left arm, and stretch it out straight, then sign at every part of the boil. and then he commands to lie leaning on your hands. then goes around the wound that you have stamped all over. and most of the incision is above all the large artery;
Then the part of the incision is extended over the suture, and you apply your desired medicinal substance, and ask for the intestines. If you tighten the suture well, it will loosen and you should insert the intestines into the abdomen's cavity.
And if you tighten the stitches, it will take on an inflammation, and relieve excess fluid.
And if the arrow pierces or the vein is contrary to it, then you will gently enter with a lancet, and return to your work and take two fine needles, and you should tie them together with a thread that you have previously made, and fasten the needles through those places where you have done the incision.
Then the incision is tightened with four fine needles along the incisions, and if you see movement, remove the needles, leaving them there until they penetrate (as a sign of healing), and cause death by self-inflicted harm. Or you should cover it when it is slightly inflamed and in the process of healing, then treat that which must be done with it, and close the incision as we have said.
Or you should cover it when it is slightly inflamed and in the process of healing, then treat that which must be done with it, and close the incision as we have said. And extract the blood or fluid that you tighten, then treat the site with what it requires, and sew up the site.
Two ulcers
We have said about the divisions of chancres, and how to treat them with medicines, and about preventing their cure by fire; and let us say that inflamed chancre has in the marrow, and great caution is required for its treatment, and they said the ancient that when a chancre is in the flesh or can be removed so as if it were on mammaries, and in the limbs, and must you not remove it all when it is at the beginning of the occurrence; and when it is large and old, do not bring near, for I have never seen any healers cure them, nor has anyone ever treated them before me.
sangles fromage.
Of dropsy We have said in the division of edema Treat the patient kindly with his hands
Then check if the edema is toward the intestines: it must be pierced in the abdomen from both sides of the belly button; and if the edema is due to liver disease, the incision should be made on the left side of the abdomen 2 inches below the belly button; and if it's due to inflammation, the incision should be on the right side, and there is no need that the patient lies over the fissure where excessive fluids may drain into his weakened state.
Then pierce through the entire layer with the instrument and release it, then hold the sponge at all points as if scraping to remove a small amount of fluid or inject it; continue piercing until the sponge reaches the bottom eight inches, which is where the water accumulates; it resembles an extremely thin silver needle with one tiny hole in one part, and another three holes in another part, forming this shape: and carved like a feather on one side, and on the other three sides, each of different sizes. This incision's shape is described by medieval scribes as being similar to that of a quill.
At the top of this layer is the abdominal wall, when the fluid returns to it with the instrument; remove most or one-third of the fluid, because if you draw out more than what is necessary for that hour, perhaps he dies from exhaustion of his spirit due to the treatment of his wounds, or his palms are swollen, or he approaches death.
andre comment.sesmeplein lait d’ancrepeur malice duermainmeidresume thetoute pate. In 1020means queilthej'sue tounsoldere.meantain-a, ilte: apremailles of theure andre:sentence lai. Aire quatime quellace in French fromentail. Commentaire.
Do not do this for any day, and keep from moisture until it stops but with just a little water. And if you doubt on the malady, and you pour much water into it, then bury or sandy baths or soak in warmth and sunshine, and bleed or drink; and cure with dry medicines while he is sound, and cautery inside the stomach and liver and spleen after fluid extraction, as I have said before.
The treatment of varicose veins. There have never been children born with no bulge in the vein, or that bulge is small and not located on its surface. If it must be determined immediately whether there is a cyst in any of these spaces: then place a fine thread underneocurrently subcutaneously; tie it and leave it for three to four years; when he wants to urinate, if it is closed, cut it and let him urinate, and then put it back. And sometimes there is no need for this because the urine that comes out does not close the wound. If the small bulge is treated with a thin layer of plaster as we have said, it will grow larger. Those who do not have the bulge on their vein are bleached, because no one is born with a bulge at the head of the vein, so they cannot urinate until they tie up their vein in front; and they cannot void because the material cannot reach just below the skin level, and it is a bad disease.
And the method of this work is that the maladies sit softly on their backs, and the head of the vein and the cope are also as small as a penny's size, so that the bulge presses down in the middle; and keep from bleeding blood which comes often, and if it does occur, wash and treat the wound until healed.
Pustule of the vein. Many times alabaths appear in the vein, and it is a disgusting appearance; and there are malignant and non-malignant ones; he must treat them with an ointment of one centimeter thickness, coat both cope and bulge, then place moist cotton soaked in Egyptian oil treatment on the swelling until it is healed. And if the alabath is cancerous and bloody, then you must bring in a cautery; when you have coated it, and if it is on the vein, and has part inside the thigh and part outside, then you must cut the alabath which is inside first; and when healed, then treat the rest. For as long as you treat it all together, they are not assured that it will be seen or perforated in the vein, and blackening and corruption on his thigh, so: for every thing that is black and corruptible, bind under a plaster made of honey and flour mixed with several horse chestnuts' bark; then treat with other cures until healed.
nac thexion. What toloreinthe:sical,croit:theu thefartis itens : ​demesaufeithreidextemplette.sure ache tails:screment (orseiudexume:3000sesme:troles.
And if it is painful to deal with this matter, it requires that you scrape at one small spot on the head of the arrow and of the thigh; then cleanly separate between them, and apply a thin linen cloth moistened with cold water so that it does not stick back.
Of circumcision.
Circumcision is not painful compared to other wounds; however, in all our doing of this work by our will, and especially for children, it is necessary that we perform the better work, and the most easily leading to salvation.
I say that the old did not mention circumcision for their children because they do not use it in their law, and we have only what we have gained through experience.
Because I want the greatest part of masters and saints who performed circumcision in those days; they used force, and in one small piece; if it hurt them so much that they had two sores there, and perhaps we sometimes cut above it and delayed the healing process.
Or the recovery after cautery is painful, and it causes doubled pain; and in the rehabilitation of that spot on which there is no guarantee that the pointed finger will not bleed again; and during the healing of the finger joint, by chance the iron may come back into it, and injure its work and many times arise.
Of the demonstration made with force on all parts of the thread I found the benefit of the experiment, because the forces cut exactly as well above as below.
When you press your hand, if the thread is cut evenly into .i. one hundred teeth; but that the fibre is firmly inserted into the skin; and it is done in such a way that the first operation makes the child think, if they understand, that you are only joining the filament around the stick, and not forcing it in any other ways. Then you make the movement with your hands straight and push the forces between your fingers or on your fingers so that the child does not see them, neither one of us; then you put your hand on the stick and blow or smoke it until the thread around the stick is fully drawn up; then cleanse well the dirt assembled therein, and tie a double string to the spool's eye; then bind .i. hundred times with .i. other rope; and I give you in the second layer under the pocket and the seamstick, and lift between the .ij. layers quickly, and pull up the head of the stick.
Then you make the movement with your hands straight and push the forces between your fingers or on your fingers so that the child does not see them, neither one of us; then you put your hand on the stick and blow or smoke it until the thread around the stick is fully drawn up; then cleanse well the dirt assembled therein, and tie a double string to the spool's eye; then bind .i. hundred times with .i. other rope; and I give you in the second layer under the pocket and the seamstick, and lift between the .ij. layers quickly, and pull up the head of the stick. Then let the blood flow a little and a little, because it is one of his medicines; and put powder on top and on top of the paste mixed with a new moist chickens' egg baked well without adding water, fried with good olive oil and rosemary, and leave it for another day, and cure it with other curing until it is healed.
The formations of force during the process if this is that the two sticks are held tight and stretched, and they are as great as your hands equally.
The error in the process occurs when there is a division within the fibres during cutting; therefore, it requires that you extend to your one piece so that the string makes an impression; and you copy equally, and if you cannot hold onto your one, then let it be with pliers, and then cope equally.
And if they pass .iij. years, and that which is on the stick is burnt, then leave it until the brazen spikes are smoothed out, and scrape it lightly; if you pull it so as you can, and do not harm the part of the stick, thus neither will it harm it.
Cure now the wounds with things we have said or treated in pills, and if it causes pain beyond measure, and it goes upward without harming, care for it as we have mentioned, until it is healed.
Retention of urine
The retention of urine may be due to an obstruction in the urethra, or a frozen bladder, or bowel obstruction, or similar things that we have mentioned in this section.
And if the urine is not released, and you observe that the retention is due to an obstruction in the urethra or at the neck of the bladder, it dictates that the patient be laid down on his knees, with a pad underneran his back, extend his belly from above the spine, and restrain him as much as possible; and then constrain the neck of the bladder to express through the urethra upwards, so that the urine is released.
And if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must amend extraction with all instruments called "syringe," for this is its form: let it be silver finely wire-wound like a bird' mantle; or a thin one of palm length and a half. Or slender at the top.
And the way of releasing the urine is as follows: take a double thread and tie it around the head with some wool or cotton. Insert the thread through the syringe, then discard any excess wool and continue pushing the thread up to the head of the syringe; oint the syringe with oil or fat and beadle the patient on a chair, raise the bladder and urethra with moistened linen and olive oil.
Then repeatedly insert the syringe into the penis, so that it reaches the root of the penis, then double the penis above the bladder. Insert the syringe before the bladder and let you hear the patient' mantle come to the voided thing immediately; this is not done according to this order unless because as long as we lead it goes in a twisted manner. Then cut the thread of wool little by little, and then the urine follows the wool, straighten it out, and let the urine flow.
And repeat the syringe as long as the bladder is voided, and secure the patient.
Diseases of the bladder
When excretions or blood come into the bladder, and you see debris assembled there, and you observe fluid and medicines coming out, then apply all to the instrument called "clamp," which is its form: it should be a silver wire fine as a bird's mantle.
She is closed, and if there are .iij. perforations: .ii. on one side, and .i. on the other, as you can observe; and let the medicine be applied to it so that it pushes the urethra well, and at a suitable time release the moisture.
the urine. Enliges as il vein, siens demeil veintaine laurentainne lains.
inspection. Elder. Sirén enception laisseraigne the tithes (10ain. A,representation ofin fromage. Iaccomprehence. Lauren. Anger aedean: �tie. Andresignsure.
And it is of silver or iron, and the shoulder higher; then take a sheep's bladder and put therein the moisture which you see for clistering that bladder, then tie between the two breasts with a good thin thread, and heat a little of that moisture on the fire; then pour the clyster into the arm by the vein, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
And if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make an oval hole in it; then push a strong thread into these holes roundly; assemble the circle as one would with a dalmatic, and put therein oil and moisture and water, and tie it to the instrument; and do as you have done for the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture has reached the bladder.
from the stone
We have said in the division of techniques for piercing and extracting medicines; I have spoken about the difference between joint piercings as rain-stones, and all the signs, and how on such stones one must work with size; and in the bladder, and in the vein; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
I say that the stone pierced in the bladder often occurs in children, and it is a sign that the water jump of the bladder seems like water in its subtlety; and then there are many bleeding veins, and quite painful his malady arm, and he twists many times, and then there are deep fissures; and the treatment of these jumps is light until they reach three years old, and it is very grievous in old people, and is moist for those who are between juncture and old age; and cure is lighter for those with large piercings than for those with small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with clyster, in order to remove all the filth that has accumulated in the intestines; because sometimes this can obstruct the piercing.
Then take the patient by his limbs, and lift him up to the side, so that the piercing descends to the lower part of the bladder, and it never rises above its original level; then place him between your hands on his thighs, so that the bladder is completely deflating downward; then squeeze and touch all around.
If you feel the piercing in the space, then immediately stop your cautery above the piercing. And if it does not tighten at all when touched all around, put oil on the index finger of your left hand, if the patient is a child, or your own age, if the patient has completed his youth; and you pour it into its foundation, and check the piercing, and when you feel it near the neck of the bladder; then push down at that point, and as soon as you see the tissue coming up, immediately release.
On theere preses. Etil'lundre lices diz auge uniface a peche fornage laissez les che. Etal of thepremer. Sce neuf inxel oire itin aoutte, le. Anderet thelement. Ifleu in thefaire. Le temps. Outleture duesmele.
And makes between that which is between the joints and the foundation, not in the middle but on the left side of the moisture; and it should be placed above the wound, and then either to the bone or the foundation, and let it have a thickness as long as necessary, and narrowed inside according to the size of the wound, without being too large.
In case the bandage needs to be on the bone or foundation, it must spring with work; and you know that there is either a hole in it or angles and margins: if it has teeth for pulling out; and if it is placed underneath, similar to a gland, and round, where its exit is light.
Since it has angles and margins, make the cut larger; and if it doesn't spring, you must stretch out with tongs that are similar to a chisel at the top, in order to extract the wound so that it does not collapse; or push underneath an instrument slenderly curved at the top; and if you cannot insert it there, then make the hole slightly larger, and if the cortex is still present, strain with molten glass.
And if there is more than one wound, first push the largest into the neck of the bladder, then pierce it, and force it through, and handle the smaller ones afterward if there are more. And if she is very large, you must cover her with socks, and make a larger wound. Because these things happen to the patient: he dies, or his urine comes out in such a way that the holes cannot be closed; but always try to pull out the wound by pieces using tongs or pliers as much as possible.
And when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and strain it, and cover him above with a moistened linen cloth in oil and wine, or olive oil and rose water and cold water to soothe the abscess. Then re-soak the patient on their neck, and do not loosen the bandage until the following day.
And when you loosen it, rise well the patient's limb in oil and water, then treat him with lime (calcium oxide) ointment and basil (an antiseptic herb) until he is healthy again.
And if the abscess in the wound and deposits of blood clots form in the bladder, and it is retained by urine, which drips as if from a spring with the urine: then press down on that clot within the wound, and pull out the clotting tissue, because if it remains, it will damage the bladder and cause bleeding.
Then lift the wound with water and salt and clay, and help it in all ways that you know, until he is healthy again; and be sure to wrap all the bandages around his hips, and assemble the medicines on top of the dressing.
And if the wound is small and it is located in a vein, and drawn out from the same way; I have proved this treatment many times before, so excuse for such a procedure.
In oldencis and siens:nce estraicts d’orii theurther ijour leu eauctice nainthirstin. The Old English, in itinerioren ofte theurge thetrois enimlenglish translation en français. Iesurge tounge French.ean.
Then take a fine filament and pass it along the edge of the wound above the stone, so that it cannot slip into the bladder; then thrust the needle lightly into the vein, until it penetrates the stone; turn the needle in your hand repeatedly inside the stone little by little, as much as you can pierce the other side of the stone. If at once urine comes out, press your hand on that part which is still stuck to the stone within the vein. Then it will be broken and jump with the urine, and give great pain to the patient.
And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, take a filament inside the stone and another above it, then make a cut in the place of the stone between the two links, thrust the arrow firmly, loosen the link, melt the frozen blood which is in the wound, and treat it until it heals.
From the wounds of women
It is rare for the wound to be infected in women, and if it does happen, it is a serious illness; and there are three reasons for this: one being that by chance the woman becomes unmarried; and the second reason is that it is difficult to find a well-informed woman who can show her face.
And the third manner is that by chance it is difficult to find a woman well-versed in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that wounds on women are more extensive than those on men, which requires deeper cutting for treatment, and therefore causes great fear for the patient.
And if such measures are necessary, it is required that you choose a knowledgeable midwife and in cases where there is no one available, do not seek out a subtle woman of high status; rather present someone who has good skills in women's health or a woman who knows at least part of the art, and command her to perform what you have ordered for the inspection of the wound.
And look carefully if the woman is virginal: then it must be supported with its foundation and inspect the wound; and if she attempts to treat it, constrain her inside that structure, and recommend that she support or press it with her left hand on the bladder's surface.
. La :entire.
Then cast the rag in size, if you feel the wound so close it that the hole can extract far, and know that there are many types of piercing: namely small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and those with spikes. Know their appearances to understand the outcome.
And if it does not heal on its own, then place vitriolic borax at the wound and leave it for an hour until the wound is no longer bleeding; then return to your work, as long as the hole remains open, and use those tools that I have told you about in piercing extraction, which we will assist you with.
And if it does not heal on its own, and it is an artery that has been punctured, then apply powder to the wound and strain of tent staples and bandages, and no longer attempt to reopen or extract from it, but leave it alone, knowing that the patient may unfortunately die; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is calmed down and the patient's pulse returns, then return to your work, as long as the hole remains open.
of hernia (a protrusion of an organ through the wall that normally contains it)
Rice of this kind is nothing other than a mixture of moisture or white foam, which is the core of the liquid that contains the egg yolk; and it is called "foam", and there are times when it is not properly in the web of the yolk, if we take care that it is something else; and this is the skin of the yolk between the white foam that we have mentioned, and this does not happen often.
And this formation of that kind is fragile and comes out with the liquid; its matter expands.
And there are times when it comes from percussion on the liquids, and this moisture has many colors: or it is a color descending towards yellow, or without red, or black, or blue-white, and this happens more.
And this is the sign of knowing that assembly, because if it is the white foam we have mentioned, then they are reopenings, like an opening somewhat long as it resembles a wound, and it does not open the liquids, because it has moisture all around.
And if it has moisture within its own web, then these are the reopenings with a part of the yolk, and for this reason we think it is another kind of treatment.
and sanc.esmeur quil: entor leu espece, dant queil se desormanier malhevel en cestin fievrever vianfere. According to what comes after the interposition, judge who is within there.
According to what comes after the interposition, judge who is within there. And when we cure them with iron, it is required that the sick man be healed as much as possible and the filling of his heart; then we place him on his back over something slightly elevated, and put a lot of soft coverings on him.
then place him on his left side, and command the minister that he places him on the right hand, and extend the rod to one of the two sides where the kidneys are located.
Then take the spatula and cover the kidneys with their skin from near to the end until next to the thorn, and cut it all straight in considering whether the skin of the kidneys is white enough, and scrape gently as required.
Then pierce the skin of water with one large puncture, and extract all the water, and then put onions on it, and raise the skin upwards; do not touch the kidneys but just their skin, cut the side gently by pieces so that you don't harm the meat, if you break it well, the water will return to him.
And if the water rises for your work, then reseat in his skin after you have completed the work on the skin of the kidneys; then join the two stones (believing them to represent the kidneys) with a bandage, and cure it as you do with other wounds, until he is sound again.
And if you correct the corrupted water of another illness, it is required that you place the vessels (vasselz) that are hanging suspended in doubt as to whether there will be a discharge of blood; then pierce the kidney with all the suspended vessels, and extract the water, and cure it as we have said.
And if the water is assembled in two parts together, you know they are stones; if you pierce the other part as you have done with the first one, then draw out the blood from it, and put linen soaked in rose oil into the wound.
and put another thin linen soaked in wine and oil, and place it over the stones, and hang doubled clothes on them, and lay it upon all of him that ito's form.
Then take two pieces of cloth, and the woolen threads according to this appearance, and assemble them in the hollow of the breechclout at the thighs, and one piece goes from the foundation up to the back, and the other on the waist part; and the second pair goes above the two ankles, and all the rest is gathered into the belt loop.
And there is no medicine for this rods of fire cautery in size iron, and you must use one fine steel scalpel, coat the skin around the joints, and heat it as we have said, so that the white substance containing water becomes exposed.
If you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that white substance at once, and scour with this fine cautery hot:
And cope in all ways you can, so that you cover everything; and be careful not to let the fire touch the skin; and know that this work is safer; and keep from letting blood flow during operations, and movements of the blade.
And if anything hinders you, or causes blood loss or any other thing, treat that which hinders you according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is afraid and does not want to undergo this operation because of its horror, make an incision as I told you, and be sure that when you are well-informed by our meanings that such a procedure is necessary.
Make the patient lie on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the area around all the tissues involved, and make the incision long enough for the cautery to go through; and widen it so that all the water flows out.
Then put cotton on the wound and bind it, and let the remaining water in the wound flow, then treat until the wound is healed.
And if the blood does not come out of the wound mouth, you must pierce with a pin or the instrument used to drain the fluid from abscesses in such cases; and slightly expand the wound, and be aware that the fluid returns, and within two months or so check it again, and when it is assembled as before, then the patient will no longer suffer.
from the abscesses on the joints
Know that in this part of this rod there are many dangers, because it seems to me that you should leave it.
And I will tell you about the work and similarities of the incision.
I say that most abscesses come from joints and mainly around them; and it is in many cases so.
It's to know by surplus moisture and fluid which is expanded around the joints, or by impact.
And is the color of the incision according to the color of the artery; and it does not cause pain, and the incision is severe.
And sometimes there are stuck and painful, and straw-colored incisions, and rarely it comes from another artery or the vein's swelling.
When it is from our arteries, if it is cut by the position of the incision, when you press on your side. And does not require that you touch it.
That which is made from the swelling of a vein is cut by its position where one should apply pressure on their side.
And it can well make incisions at this appearance, and in others as well. And it is that you remove the clot of the blood, then it rises to the top, and the thread becomes white-filled, and releases the suspensory from all parts of the vein.
If the vein is already filled with these needs, then it requires that you draw out the vein and remove the clot.
And if it is in the thread or within the valves, then it requires that you release all of the vein and make the cut roundly.
And if the origin of the wound is behind it, then it requires that you remove all of the vein and extract the clot, as we have said.
And when your work is completed, apply clean cotton cloth soaked in rose oil and wine to the wound, and then attend to other treatments until it heals.
from the incision of clots/clotting
It is an incision wrapped in something that appears to be like a boil, with the softening of clots/clotting. And if it murmurs painfully when it moves.
and this treatment is also well-suited for such a condition as we have said before.
And in the work of him, according to what they did formerly.
and armor aliai quintes encorte de laissae ailne aureen. ilesle lou en oun. T'entail aes:mesure.ailex laissage, leisque aelocise apresages. Ips :er theuille. Ilice mesuraine. Journe:2i lesire deale nule andre deca:   :ilicate.
Then strike deeply at the shoulder blades wide to the bottom of that place, where the bones are exposed, until they are uncovered.
and then tear from one piece, as we have said in the extraction of arteries located in temples;
then he inserts a needle or has one with two threads, and attaches it to the first point where it has come through, and from there to the other chief. then they push straightly according to the length of the cord, and draw out the corroded moisturizers.
then treat the wound as we have treated others, if no veins are found that will not receive one of the cords.
for by this there is no harm done, and if the veins receive blood, it must be drawn from all the vessels. if the vein does not lose its resistance from the incisions of the vessels, and they do not help each other.
regarding the routine of surgery The amendment to this operation is by the cutting that comes from or affects surgery, or extension on the abdomen in the part of the groin, as it allows the intestines to descend from that routine pathway into one of the cords.
and this routine is either related to surgery or its extension, and these various methods come from many causes: by striking, jumping, shouting, lifting a heavy burden, and so on.
and when it comes to this extension of the surgical routine, it happens little by little over a long time, and does not come suddenly. and it is the abscesses identical to this route as far as reaching the body's core, because the surgical routine pressures the intestines.
And the signs are as it is related to this surgical routine that makes the abrupt pain begin at its beginning and causes different appearances on the skin near it, and it's due to the exit of the intestines and the cord again.
illement :comme laisse: a laisser demelelaterre lesen. Aixentures offerre theire:xentere quatrains. The-saintintrescribe. Alludextrait. It'sre andir, anderasure. Andresigniforceur, in:re.
And in these treatments with fire for pain, since it cannot be avoided.
And the way of the work is that you command or tell him to draw out the intestines into his hand inside the wound if he can reinsert them. then simply push down on his neck. Between your hands, and hold the claws.
then it goes back to above, and covers all the skin of the joints long. then place small stones near the lower abdomen according to your experience for opening the wound, and such that it allows him to exit.
then scrape the surface of the skin of the joints so that the white part is exposed from all sides.
then place your finger in such a way that you teach the intestine, which is between the white surface under the skin of the abdomen and between the second surface.
and that which is behind the abdomen, and between the second surface, and push it to the right hand inside the joint of the intestines, and the white surface is on top in your left hand, and lift the abdomen toward the skin over the joints. and command the minister to extend the abdomen upwards, and loosen that which is behind the ligament.
and you will ask if he has any intestines wrapped around or white surface exposed long, and if not, then put it in the abdomen.
then take a needle or have it (assuming "i" refers to an individual with some tools), and put it in the back part of the white surface after the skin of the joints, behind the abdomen, and cover the ends of the intestines that appear from the threads after the bellybutton; after the waist, then bind the claws until there are three threads. then put them together in the way of a cross, and cover it such that we have said is under the skin of the joints, of a strong chain of III parts. Then wrap the shoulders in bandages, and make parts of it two inches wide, so that no one can see into them with their hands, unless a hole is made. And place the suture mainly according to the first one two inches long, and after these two inches let there be enough space where the skin is tightened so much that it prevents the movement of the joints by a great deal.
And after all the rest according to the roundness it has; then close in the part that is inside the skin of the joints, as much as you can without compressing and bowing, just as we have said before.
Then apply a warm linen in oil, and dress the wound, and treat the suture that we mentioned earlier. And there is no occasion to cauterize the white spaces we have mentioned after the incision, due to doubt of blood flowing out.
For it happens many times, and let the suture hang until it tears; if it delays in tearing, then wash it with hot water and place it as we have said until it tears.
Then care for the wound using other treatments, so that it heals perfectly.
of inguinal hernia
In this manner I have never seen anyone attempt to treat with fire.
And the ancients said that it is made in such a manner as to wrap so tightly around the shoulders, after removing them from their joints slightly.
Then dress the wound in meadow grass and care for the abscess that occurs there, until the shoulders no longer feel pain; and treat it as we have said, so long as they are healed perfectly.
There has never been a case of groin hernia as we have said, and open the lining; and if any part of the bowels comes out, it is only slight, and return everything to normal.
And in all other cases, if it delays too much at this point, they believe the wound or phlegmatic condition, until the bowels come out.
And this happens by the extension of the suture that is in the groin, just as we have said, because it stretches out, then becomes soft and swollen, and opens up.
And the treatment is by cauterization, just as we have previously stated; and there has never been a case treated with fire in this manner.
And it is that the painful spasms occur between one's hands, then dress the enlarged portion of the groin according to the amount of two inches.
and seize .iij. jours de cest les chifre dous quinque vassel of .iij. coment in fievre un peuvelses.
And with pressure on the abdomen, then they press the two points appearing above the head of the ribs, and press them both together;
Then extract the head of the rib, and do not cover the facet nor stretch the belly or anything else as I have told you in the treatment of dislocating the bowels.
Then care for it with wound care. And when you sew the threads, if the patient bleeds and heals the wound as long as it is healthy.
The facet is constricted and has no appearance in the procedure, and the cautery becomes more profound in this manner, and it approaches salvation soon afterward.
from the softening of the skin around the joints
Many times the skin around the joints is softened in no one person because the materials within are softened, and it becomes noticeable; and it's necessary when we want to cure, that the malformed lie on their back, and the softened skin is covered with natural skin; then assembled the two lips into a stitch, and if you see, remove the superfluous softened skin from two or three stitches tightly; then suture between the stitches, and cure it as for other wounds, until it heals completely, and tie the thread.
joint manipulation
The act of joint manipulation is recognized in our law, and therefore I would prefer that we do not mention it in this book; and it is necessary for two reasons: one being that the judge responds to questions concerning him when asked about his treatment, and concerning his cure; and the other reason because we often have experience with joint manipulation of various animals to assist us, such as deer, sheep, goat, etc. Therefore, I say that joint manipulation is done according to these two methods: either by attraction or by fracture. In the method where we do it by attraction, we lay the animal on a warm bed until the cartilage becomes soft and while; then you touch with your hand, so they are restored and no longer feel them. Regarding joint manipulation of trimming: make sure to dress the animal, pressing its skin folds with your left hand, then tie the suspensory band, and tuck it under each one of those five knots when you have thoroughly scraped it; and this method of joint manipulation is different from that by attraction because, in the attraction, chance may occur to any cartilage on the limbs. And this method of treatment is done so long as it is healed.
of hermaphrodites
Hermaphroditism is according to some ways: one being that between the two organs as openly as a woman's figure has hair, and sometimes it also excretes urine. And the other way is in women, like a rod and two organs. The care of the body and soul is that you attend to all accompanying conditions, and treat them as for other wounds; in the second manner, those from whom the urine leaks through their skin around the organs, without any cure.
Of tempting nature
Tempting nature is an excess on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and many women have had it like a hand, and it's the care. It requires that you trim the superfluous temptation in your hands or fingers, and handle them lightly; and do not go too far, for the blood does not vanish, then treat with other cures until he is well; and there is another thing which nips at the mouth of a mare, and it burns, and according to its appearance they called the old "malady kowee." It requires that you deal with temptation, as we have said about tempting nature, and care for it while it is healthy.
Erratic (in this context) refers to a phenomenon or behavior that is irregular, unpredictable, and not consistent with normal patterns. It often implies deviation from the norm in biological, physiological, or psychological processes. In historical texts about medical conditions, "de erratique" might describe abnormalities seen within specific disorders, such as hermaphroditism or other health issues wherein behaviors deviate from what is typically expected.
: " : 13sanses deau:ent theor "Celturea French:0000 it'slake alexia 15:means in thetale (there20rse of it's, with0nous and thenne.
Of piles of dirt, for from such moisture the shoulder joint becomes dislocated, and it cannot move, and is malformed limbs; and sits heavy on sufferers great pain and injury.
Emorrhoids are fissures of veins that do not receive customary cauterization, and when they become old, then it becomes painful; we have said in our treatise on disorders that such emorrhoids resemble other diseases, and I shall now describe those which respond to treatment. I say that these emorrhoids, when formed inside the rectum, are not felt at all; they can be cured by iron. Those who find them in the rectal opening can feel them, and thus they can be treated. Therefore, you must place a woman in a cool house first; then stretch her legs above her knees, and apply cold compresses to her hemorrhoids, using remedies that contain dragon's blood and incense, similar things; then boil the pads for an hour, and immerse them in cold water; and then prepare a decoction of sumac bark, grenade skin, mulberry leaves, and other such things, and mix it with flour from barley, honey, and hay, and apply this poultice to her buttocks. If she scratches, it is beneficial. However, if not, she should use suction cups on the back of her buttocks and avoid injuring the mucous membranes; then take linen, dip it in plantain juice or blackberry juice with wine, and apply it to the spot. When the abscess settles down, you must treat the area until it heals. And those who are said to be "albathir" (red) have a rough appearance similar to that of an ulcer; and then this should also be treated.
Apothem refers to the centerline or axis of the triangle formed by the rectum's lining, which can become inflamed due to pressure changes or increased venous stasis in cases such as hemorrhoids or rectal abscesses. It is a critical anatomical feature that helps define the extent and nature of various pathological conditions affecting the anal region.
ilesme en le jacquer.il aspeople laic:entrop:esque andre versal, lice aragon'sesera. Foris: 12. Andante tiointesca.
Of childbirth
The first thing in this matter is to know the natural figure of childbirth; and if you see a woman pressing downwards towards her navel, and desiring odor from an arrow - indeed when these signs occur, it indicates that these children are born according to their natural figure, and each issue with its head first, followed by the second part with it; and when you observe such signs, one must gently press on the abdomen so that they be born quickly; for when he parts his head, this second part is also accompanied by him, and causes great pain from its superfluities through good molding; and those who come in other ways are not coming naturally. For it never comes with feet or shoulders, but rather with the chest and thighs, or on the back, or converted due to an accident near the neck, and by other unfortunate figures; this is why one must be experienced and subtle in these matters, aware of errors and deceptions, and I will show you all the figures that we should assist.
If the child comes with its head first naturally, and the woman bears the pain during birth, and her strength is weak; then she should lie on a seat, or women hold her; and rising from her nature as oil or fenugreek which has been cooked, and then place the birthing between her legs in the shape of a little bowl: Then cut the umbilical cord while holding his belly as much as possible to keep him from crying; and press on the woman's abdomen until he descends, and if he doesn't descend, then it is necessary to gently irrigate her with fenugreek mucilage mixed with sesame oil; then bind and sneeze out of position, and keep his hands and feet closed for an hour. Now the child will be fine. If those two hands come too hard, you must jerk them lightly and lightly; and if they cannot enter, place her on a chair, lift her legs up, and then remove the chair from the ground, and treat the woman so that she does not soil herself upon standing up; and if his hands do not enter and the child is dead, you must take hold of them with the implement placed before me and extract him, and jerk him out gently.
of a child from his legs When a child comes from his legs, it indicates that he should be placed upright; and then turn it slightly and slightly, until it is even;
then proceed with the legs and slightly extend them;
Can he just as quickly jump, if commanded to extend and make an external sign of discomfort? If he jumps, let God decide;
And if it does not happen as we have said, then turn it slightly and slightly, until it is natural in shape; For when there is ligamentous injury.
And if it does not happen as we have said, then apply a massage with oil, and soak in saline solution, and warm wax, and grind all together in one mortar; and apply it in accordance with the woman's natural anatomy hereafter; and it will settle in water until above the ribs;
And when it is warmed above, apply a mirror of myrrh and place it above, letting it stay for an hour; Then let it settle on a bed, then make it jerk and hold its mouth and nostrils tightly, and press the abdomen gently, for now the child has jumped; From the dislocation of the child's legs When the child comes in this form, it is placed with his hands slightly and slightly;
of fire cautery commands the Moor to let his hairs grow long and smooth; and if they pierce at their roots, he restrains them so that they do not move until they are born. I wish for an engineer to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, then lift up the woman and go forth.
if she cannot go, then make her lie down on a bed, and stretch out her legs.
then I will instruct the muscle that I have told you about:
and if it does not bear fruit, then make her sit on a chair, and study the method to bring back the hand: and we shape the child according to its natural form, and make her sneeze, and she commands it that it be hiccuping as long as the infant cries:
from the child's exit on its neck, and extending its hands, and turning its face towards its mother: I wish that the ball touches his hand, then turns it little by little, and the mother gently moves it:
and when he is equalized, if place on the upper muscle of a horse's body and oil it as we have said before, then she commands him to move little by little:
and when you have done this, make her sit on a chair, and command her to hiccup; then she sneezes: in this manner for the second part:
in this manner for the second part: When it comes into this manner for the second time, then take the thumb of your hand until all the moisture is drained:
and if the infant cries with its face and neck raised, then wet it, so that it is not held back, and let the child cry:
then put the infant within you as it should be required, and command to the woman that she does not hiccup again:
from the birth of twins: Know that twins are born many times, and never do they give birth to three or four; and this is not extraordinary thing, and it rarely happens: They are extraordinary things, and they don't live for long if so.
I know that they multiply, and are deceived by the sucking which holds them to the breast, which is linked to their cry:
and never do they come out naturally as we have said before.
And if it is born with a cry, then the treatment we have said, and let the ball be subtle, and make its face quickly and gently as it moves: and do so as it must move to life. of many children:
of many children: never formed in the marrow of an ivy, and they are all shaped by measure of his age, and made like a child:
androgène ence :encontre, de quintes. en lait leslors cest louer desires of theur estou in fichief:faire cié.aureau. ounce :le c'saint leavé.iractin theendures anding oferre deaf.  iewent,escuccrom, eruptedressure dureveint, ilk.
:courre isle àn entorsextract. Cajte theire.en le la terre. Itures.dé les men.t :iurient cesar. :nure, tolore. Ies. Whatures cestreslai ence (thisens.
When you heal the woman of the dead child or pregnant belly, as I have said in the previous section, and there are no signs of improvement, then you must engage in manual labor. And it is required that you know if the woman has sound virtue and does not have an accident or fear of death.
And it is required that the woman be heavily pregnant on her back, with legs elevated;
And the minister should be in a quarantine of two parts, or she must remain in bed until her child is extracted without cesarean section;
Then wash the mother's mouth with water mixed with myrrh and honey and seed of flax, then anoint her hands with these waters and myrrh. Then apply them lightly to the mother's wounds or abdomen if there are any visible injuries;
And make sure the child is dressed so that he can be delivered from his head first; Then stick them into her ears, neck, mouth, or throat, under the beard, or in her joints;
And if her labor pains are in the lower parts of her body, he should insert a lancet or a dagger into them or apply pressure to the sides;
And it is required that he should wear the instrument in his right hand, and put out the swelling between his left hand, and let him move all of ours. He shall weigh the pointed object therein (pointing:
and then find another wart, if you have experience with it, so that they are extracted in equal amounts.
and then moved equally from one side to the other so that they can come out, and the wart teeth are held in place as it is shown here.
And if there remains a part, and he burns none of his two eyes in that area, and places the other part there, and removes the first part.
and if he remains in doubt, then place this wart or higher up, and do it as much until the entire thing falls out.
And if one hand comes before the other, and he cannot pull back for the tightening. since it requires that you wrap around something in a cloth, until everything falls out.
then the cloth at the joining of the plant or the sole, and this requires that you do it with both hands, and on two feet.
And if the shoulder of a child is large and it has been injured in its exit, or it has a swollen head. since it requires that you insert the thorn of the spinous between your fingers, and push on the head and extract the swelling. or you turn it to the instrument called "almidaj", for then its form comes with the spinal adjustments or by the chiropractor who is after that.
and in this way also makes the child have a large natural head shape. and then pull out for the bones with pliers.
and if the shoulder jumps and is pulled to the board, until the moisture or the pus that has come out reaches it.
and if it cannot be removed, then cut the cloth into pieces and remove them as you can.
and if it is inflamed in the abdomen or on the sides, then it requires that you pierce as much until the moisture comes out.
and if the child is above his feet, then it has light attachment, and the treatments for earaches are lighter as well.
and if it is inflamed in the abdomen or at the testicles, then it requires that you extract it from a cloth wrapped around your hand. and make to the abdomen or the testicles as much until the moisture comes out.
and if the other limb is broken, and the shoulder remains in place, if you pour blood from the hand into the ear, and then pull it out of the ear. then it pours one or two warts, and pulls them out.
but if the ear of the patient is not discharging blood that has come out, then it does not need to be worked upon. the same toximeurs, iaitnine century old age: s’sse laisseigne 10vreurent an archentifreves,niteurs:turgichexinavantes.fyngel socance, hevacharicherres,animeletuscelle. çountreauxes himaldeucture.
And if the worm is on his side, and you put it back level, as we have said in the living child.
And if there is no possibility, then let the wound be divided into parts, and do not leave anything of the second part.
And upon accomplishment of this procedure, one shall adhere to what we have stated regarding the sutures that are applied on incisions which emerge from the marrow.
And in the event of bleeding arising, it is to be managed by confining the fluid with an aqua-restrictive approach and implementing additional therapeutic measures.
And I observed a woman with an abdomen wherein an infant was born alive; it is instructed to consider the previous issue and then refute the subsequent one. Following extensive observation of the wound, an abscess formed and grew to the extent that it protruded from beneath the skin; this marks the onset of considerable complication.
I called for the remedy and contemplated extensively; yet I found no means to securely close the wound.
I positioned a heavy iron upon it with strong attraction; subsequently an ossification occurred after several days. I hesitated much for the reason that it lacked any internal osseous structure.
I surmised that it might be bones from a deceased child.
I inspected the wound and manipulated bone with my hands as much as possible until her condition improved. And then she remained at that time, and it became somewhat lighter in weight.
Andre devised itentifieur l'anatomes desseigne laissiés de la vieille.
gachource. For: Andromourelet de:surexent.cause, andreat ough:les.
tantii goutifferre bise nomagelles.isecififereccarchean. iactheurgalloniscusisable. nde  :n’tifantioxifc:l'':dexthelang title,se taunt ifleur. However, the horns are more subtle in restriction, and they are made of ivory or boxwood.
And the mouth is wide enough to fit two spans and the margin of trees must be one and a half palms long. And among these measures, this method must be adjusted such that they are firm in both directions, and one is half a palm long or slightly more.
And these adjustments are made in the mouth of the metalwork when turning the two spans (presumably referring to a jaw or similar structure).
Another form, more subtle and lighter, is made of boxwood or ivory according to the shape of the tongs. And for the two jaws (presumably referring to the parts of tools or instruments being described), these adjustments must be one and a half palms long, and wide enough as you see fit.
And when you see the metalwork opened at all parts of the instrument, it must sit with its base on one and a half palms long, while the legs are set outwards. Then place these adjustments together on the metalwork, and hold the head of the instrument between its hands. Then work your hands on the entire instrument like you have made the tongs evenly ("igalment"), according to the quantity that opens the mouth of the metalwork ("la bouche de la marris"). As long as it holds well, that's all that matters.
All these instruments are made of various shapes ("semblances"), and the more they appear (are represented or manufactured), the more difficult the work is to perform, and higher their value by quantity.
If you do not disdain the instrument that you have fashioned, because its needs are never unreasonable.
When the second stage (presumably of creation or development) is reached during childbirth, it requires you to command the malady that she will keep her alane, and then make an incision in her face, and hold hands on her mouth and nose. And if she jumps up so much, well then it is.
If it is not so, then he takes one pot, and makes a puncture or fistula, and puts herbs that can open the mouth of the mare as if they were calming, rue, anise, chamomile, chicory;
all these herbs, or none of them, be cooked in water above the fire; then put a straw or puncture into one pot and place the other head on the mare's mouth,
and the smell of smoke will rise within the mare's belly; then make her exhale as we have said. If the second jumping happens abruptly. And if she remains after this treatment and is not worse, then orders the lady to move her left hand in oil or musk of a stick, and then let her go into nature.
and whoever finds it; and when she has found it, gently stretch and extend it little by little, so that the mare does not suffer from the extraction. but it must move gently right and left, and then pull; if he comes and turns around.
And if the mare's mouth is sore, as we have said, then the treatment of exhaling and fumigating with herbs.
and if it is not of all that we have said, then you must ensure that you do not hurt the mare in pulling.
but it is said that what is in the mare's mouth, place it on the woman's thigh, and then perform an enema of mixed medicines.
if she will take it and put it back, and returns to suffer; but all this, when it comes into her mouth or throat with bad smell from the abdomen and head, then bleed the malady.
Then it must be said that there are no demonstrations from the ancient ones of smoking with cress and dried figs.
The form of the instrument with which we smoke the woman is this one:
And is seen as if it were a catheter, and put the head underneath delicately in its place, and the hairs large in the fire.
and if there are smokes in the ashes, and the smoke rises from it while she is still burning, and then make her start again.
the fire.
There comes a child who is born without properly formed foundations, instead having a subtle deformity: Now it is required that the child perforates that subtlety in his body without causing any serious injury, and gathers the movement so as not to touch it:
Then place him on a linen sheet anointed with oil and wine, then the treatment of fumigation until he is healthy again:
And if you doubt that it will rejoin, then place a pin in the wound and let his hands rest for several days, and he shall be bound as soon as the child wants to go into rooms:
And there is no occasion for these hot treatments of wounds or incisions; it is required to cover that treatment: if you are treating, as we have said about the pin in the wound.
from the foundation defect: Fistulas that originate from the foundation are inflammatinas and larger than those originating near the foundation or in the interval of two parts:
if there is one fistula or more, and when the inflammatina is old, then you should work on it, loosening slightly moistened or softened joints:
and there are no persistent fistulas; they are known by the fact that when the patient expels them or vomits, and sometimes in jumping they go away:
And if there are fistulas that penetrate the bladder and part of the genitalia; and they reach the juncture of the thigh or any other area:
And in this case we know that the fistula is persistent and not just a part of the foundation: And if you insert your index finger or foundational point into the fistula where there is no twisting: and place a thin needle of iron or steel in the fistula when it does not have twisting:
And if there is twisting, then you insert a small piece of lead or possibly horsehair as much as it touches your finger on the fistula:
and if you don't feel anything, and it doesn't come out as a discharge or vomiting or bleeding, then as we have said before: realize that she does not perforate the pin again with your healing efforts:
And if the fistula is just in the bladder or the channel of urine, when it leaps with urine and cannot be cured by medicine:
And if it is pierced at the juncture of the thigh, then there comes a tendon coming towards the limb: and if there is no twisting and the onset of pain, then it becomes soft and it does not require medication or hot treatment:
and in these persistent fistulas there is no remedy that requires effort, and the vainness of people who interfere with them:
In those which are not persistent and not old, there is hope for healing through iron, as I have experienced:
and it is that the painful palpitation between his thighs above their hames, and inclined to its abdomen: then let usaile if it comes out of the fistules, et les encele pies d’aute in veinne.
If the patient feels severe pain at the foundation, it indicates you must strike two indications.
If one feels strongly that the attempt has pierced it; and whether you discover a hole through your needle or find thread in its place, but know that it is perforated. If not worked upon more, it cannot be healed.
For there is such a thing that can be well healed by many, but only in small amounts.
And the aid it makes if it is to heat the cautery gently according to the size of the fistula, as it has been said. And it boils in the fistula as long as it moves away from its base; and do this once or twice, until you know that these flaws are removed, which seem like a feather quill.
And then you treat wet wounds with moss as long as those flaws are weeping, and then you treat the scraping by heating and joining them together.
If it is so well-healed, that's good. Otherwise, there is no other way to heal it.
And if it tries between, and does not pierce the needle or its foundation, and there is thick coverage of cloth or sinew between your thread and the tent, then you see the fistula which shows such covering. If the cauldron is at the beginning of the fistula, and then you pour it in front of the tent, and apply the cautery afterwards until it moves from the head of the tent.
And then the tent is delivered, and it was burned; then mend those faults that seem like a feather quill, and do not leave any traces of them.
And if it does not last long, and cut between you and your practice, whether thecave or medicine fire.
For the fire cautery, there are two bone procedures involved: namely, arthroscopy of these displaced joints, and incision into the blood clot and removal of moisture.
Then there is a treatment with warm linen or wet straw until the joints become bowed, and it inserts them back into their position.
Then there is a treatment for inflamed wounds with persistent burning and dry remedies.
Because when it is restored, if it is healed and does not return again.
And if an abscess arises just above the foundation, and is distanced from its source, then you must pour hot oil or foundational fluid on it, and inquire about it.
If you feel the tent (referring to an abscess or wound), and it is between two layers (which could imply surrounding tissues), then it should be pierced, unless there are only signs of infection and hope, by administering one of the three treatments:
Or you burn it as we have said, or you puncture it just above the foundation, or if you put tent and treat it as first.
And do not puncture too deeply into the foundations, so that you do not compromise the structure holding the foundation, and allow adjustments to happen according to desire. Then proceed with the treatment as we have discussed.
Then proceed with the treatment as we have discussed. In the event that it becomes healed, you may remove its covering and return it to its foundation, or if not, leave it covered near the base, or by tenting or some other pointed instrument. Then I command him who needs it most to enter into the wound as much as you wish.
Then study how to restore the wound, and keep the fistula in its deeper part; if it is easier for the patient.
And there are no times like this when forming a fistula: and it is as soon as you open the fistula, and it is located opposite to the skin above. If you take a tent perceived in this manner: And I insert the same, that is, a twisted thread into it (the incision), and stretch the tent throughout the entire length of the fistula while it's open.
If it extends to the margin of the deeper base therein, then extract the thread from that penetration, so you can open your foundation;
And remove the chief thread, and join together those twisted threads, and bind them to each other, and leave it for a year or two;
And do not constrain it at all while the threads are in these positions between two, and they lie.
Then care for the wound as long as it is sealed and healthy.
If there is no fistula present, make a fistula in any manner you can; if it's not too deep or extensive.
For it does not command us to let the closure cope if it is too deep or extensive; and then care for it as we have said, until it becomes sound again.
The form of the spinous process which we make a fistula in if it is very deep and involves one or more vertebrae. And on the other hand, because it does not command that which must not be done; as you see here.
The embolisms are in two ways: or they are found within the foundation, as small blood and large. s. The Old English. ousually. Answer:
And then again it may come by a small amount of yellow water or blood, and has golden color.
And the treatment of those who have within the foundation, if you command the patient to exhale into rooms until the foundations begin to leak, and their children appear. If you hasten it with tongs, or hold it in your thumb, then prick the root thereof;
And if they cannot keep it in their moistures, then take it to one of these: a cloth, or a cotton swab, or from the corner of a napkin. And extract it as you must, then coat it, and powder any of the hot pastes that might be in the vessel of cautery. Or you may cauterize it as the cauldron or barrel of cautery prescribes, and then treat it with other cures until it is healed.
And if the foundations cannot yield, then enema the patient with an enema that is harsh and abrasive to cleanse him from what is within his foundation so that it may come out openly.
sansa iltew defface himore ailtres laiss:rature thefres:re legeu.i :entire,leslere. Here. iciens'safterit. Ipsum :naturisures.entrance cestir deparle offerry. And it is that you prepare your ungual or pliers and hold them, then treat him as we have said, until he is sound again, and so avoid the cutting by iron.
It is required that you treat the wound in this manner: firstly take a twisted thread, and pass it through a needle, then stretch the thread above and pierce the needle from another side, and turn the two ends of the thread on top of the needle. And if it is wide; and hold the twisted thread formed, then pass the thread through the needle, and remove the needle, and perform the same for all other wounds, and leave one to correct any excessive bleeding.
Then place a plaster on the foundation either with rose oil or wax, and apply it to the foundation, and instruct the patient that they should lie down.
And then let them remain until they start bleeding again, and when they begin to heal, carry out the other treatments, so long as they are healthy.
either soon or foundation (referring back to the earlier plaster application) Many times it occurs suddenly in the intestines, and due to a natural constraint, and when the illness is old and medical help cannot be of any use.
It is required that you reseal the puncture with either a bandage or your ungual above it, which does not let it get wet. then care for him as long as it is needed if that's what it requires.
And if it cannot be resealed, if the wound reopens more forcefully than before, care for him as much as possible so that he remains healthy, and scourge him. then care for him as long as he remains healthy.
or tremor (which might refer to the shaking motion used during certain procedures) and it is a superficial wound that doesn't heal quickly by itself, so take care of it;
: The Frenchme devoir. The French leser. ás grevigure lesce (2les :
And the treatment is that you take a cord of one peacock feather, or a strong swan's quill, and place it over the trembling, until the purple circle completely envelops it. Then turn your hand around the entire cord until you cover completely the trembling, and place it on its roots, and loosen the trembling of its roots.
And if you see, if it is a cord made from rain or iron in this manner, and subtle underneath and stretched above.
Do not perceive it for the reason of holding onto it, and press it And if you see, if you cauterize the trembling, as it is before or with the fire cautery.
in the form of a poultice. There has never been made any poultice of silver or lead, or melted rainwater or blood, and neither small nor large ones according to the manner in which they are prepared.
These, however, are used in the care of children who are weak and suffering, and they are small.
The form of the poultice being both small and great if it is above the size according to this manner, or when the belly is tied in this way.
and it has a protrusion or the belly is tied like you see, and the cords are placed in two places on each side: one at point .ij., and the other at .i.
or the belly is filled with medicine from a beast's bladder or parchment paper, and it is completely enveloped by small protrusions.
and between each of the protrusions .i., there must be a distance, then it is inserted into these protrusions .i. with strong thread or twisted wire about .x. or up to its edges, and assemble the belly as for an ox. and when the medicine is inserted, if it adheres to the instrument in front with strong thread, then poultice; and this is the shape of the circle.
And if the medicine is neither too hot nor too cold, and it is anointed at the top of the poultice with oil or beeswax or something similar, then insert it gently.
then the monks grasp their .ij. hands together until they are all visible, then remove the poultice, and elevate the patient's legs to the head position.
and if the medicine comes out, as much as it can; and if he sleeps all night like that, it is more of a help.
And if you cauterize the patient in the disorder of the stomach, and the medicine comes out quickly, then it starts again until he is healthy.
And if the hemorrhoids are foundational or abscesses, then also cauterize them subtly as for a child.
and it is the form of the poultice placed underneath tightened leather:
from wounds.
And we have said about the treatment of wounds; now you shall hear the care for hands and medicine according to their completion.
I say that wounds are variously made; and as they are made of those which are made.
For the injuries in question are made by piercing and cutting, and with sword or knife or club or arrow or similar things.
According to the laws of wounds, if a cut is on the neck, or on the head, or the leg, or the abdomen, or the liver, and similar body parts.
And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple head injuries because their mention will be recorded in my chapter.
I say that when a simple wound occurs to the head or the bone is not fractured, if it is taken care of by piercing or similar actions, and the skin is all torn up and the wound is large. And you doubt slightly about the incision: if it causes much more pain on the cranial side initially, especially when there is little bleeding from the wound, and then healing either in that part or against it.
And reject excessive intake of wine and heavy foods.
And if it does not heal better, then reduce his meat intake and refrain from drinking wine or chewing tobacco.
And apply to the wound if it brings forth bleeding, stop it with swabs dipped in rose oil or strong wine.
And if it does not bring forth bleeding, then apply to the wound if it is still fresh flesh and has not been moved by air or powder, I will speak of this briefly afterwards.
lle cauthears :es, in French anonymously lexamain itaunce oulden; In theu. Whaterre: "fier of whichses.
And if the wound is large like sword-making and resembling, and the lips cannot come together naturally by pressure, they come together only by force; as I say in wounds of the abdomen from stitching.
If the wound penetrates bone and closes up, holding it only by a slight force if pressed; then heal the wound with medication and restore the hard skin of leather. And instructs the patient to eat large meats like cooked wheat and pork, as well as similar things.
And if you mend or stitch purity, and it does not adhere to the bone, but presses the entire purity completely, then heal it.
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein without cauterization, and it cannot be stopped with medications, then coil the artery like a thread. And if this does not benefit at all, then cauterize.
And if these small and simple wounds are treated lightly: and let you apply this powder that binds so as to soften the arteries.
And the way of the powder is: take incense for a part; blood from a dragon in two parts, and live copper in three parts, and mix it subtly. And use the wound, and compress it firmly until it heals well and joins with all its flesh.
And then let the thread tighten well, if it does not swell; because we do not remove the medication until she is healed.
And there has never been made such copper alone when we do not have the incense and blood of a dragon, but only because the artery has softened the wound.
And if the artery has moved the wound, then it is only in this sense that no one applies this powder.
But apply some digestible ointments or bread made of barley flour with water and honey until it becomes soft. Then heals other treatments as long as she is healed.
And if the bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, then use subtle pinches.
And I will tell you about this after arm fractures.
of the wound in the chest.
If the injury comes to the chest or wound and is simple, there is no difference between this and that of the arm, but if it compresses the chest or stretches the artery.
If it is compressing, there is no other treatment except to leave the curing and not apply anything restrictive, because it hurts the chest and causes retracted breathing. And do not apply anything cold to the wound, for the bone marrow is cold, and its continuity which is with the brain, which are the strongest parts of the body.
illetre nen  16thsans. ieval, as itale. In Old French Theocularly caesime. And other stones of my kind according to this manner, and moist ointments.
And if the wound is large, then bind and bandage it until healed.
And if the wounds are deep, swollen, and full of blood, then pierce deeper or lower.
And if the arrow is lodged, and blood clots form, then remove it, and cleanse it, and the proper skill for cauterying it.
And if the thorn in the throat is lodged, or it pierces, and its removal requires care, for then the meat will come out. If the piercing in the throat's larynx, and not to touch the throat but reset it according to its natural shape. And then observe recovery, and let no day pass without treatment of ointments until healed.
And if the wound has been impressed into the bone, then cut it. And if there are bone fragments, then drive all of them out with force; and those that cannot be removed, let the wound heal. Or dislocation and displacement should be avoided.
And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle it with the powder I have mentioned before. And if there is bone in the wound and it has an opening, then treat it as I have described in my chapter.
From the arrow-wound or cut.
If it's an arrow-wound or a cut, and the wound is deep, then observe if there are wind currents in the air causing further pain to his maladies; you will see that such a wound is deadly.
And if it is not deep and the wound is fresh all over the flesh, do not apply the powder immediately, nor tie it tightly to a part that does not recover quickly. And retract it into the body, and apply cold compresses to his malady. But apply attractive ointments and bind it tightly for a day.
congeursseccansseurieu:niferrentifteuxilleuilecanaient outavirectheintiue parisipeilages
And let the patient sleep on the wound for three years, or two years, or more. If there is no more spasm or uncontrollable shaking of the body. And when you see the bone positioning, if you know that the wound is safe. Treat it then with bandages and other treatments, as long as he is healthy.
And if it cannot heal, and work is done, then you know that there has been an opening; in the way we should treat it.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it's simple, or worse on its backside, then treat this before anything else.
If it is large, with plaster; if small, with powder; and if it's embedded in the bone or filled with fragments, treat the wound and remove any deep wounds. And if they are not deep wounds, let the wound remain open, and lighten the extractions.
And for other wounds on other limbs, the judgment is made as we have said.
double abdominal rupture
The abdominal ruptures are large and serious or small, depending on the severity of the injury.
of the great wound there has never been an injury to the intestines or internal organs due to this invasion.
and the bandaging is more difficult, and never has a small wound been worse than the large one.
because for that they often push back the intestines by pushing them in and out repeatedly. because the intestines swell immediately upon feeling pain, and therefore they are pushed back more frequently.
and it's worth considering that the main wound causes the intestines to move back into their original position more than other injuries.
And you know that abdominal rupture is characterized by three main methods:
(The) common bandages have been used in treating the abdominal rupture.
and the treatment of other wounds on the legs, and the common treatments are similar for other injuries;
and they are cleaner than other treatments for the wounds;
iven en payer. Here istoil e13rdose: "The Middle Acheve 5003rdice. It'soldes: And itoise (thee4. Thismeatdecrease of the cure ofse desuicire, The2 :rre-up tolater. And when pieces are removed, it is done by one of these two methods: or for the smallness of the wound, as we have said. or because the intestine is inflamed by cold.
And when it is chilly, treat the part as follows: Moisten one sponge or such cloth with water only briefly. or you boil it in water sweetened with sugar and pepper. and raise the intestine so long as it remains swollen.
and never make it too tightly bound, and is moved more by pressure than for loosening.
And when you see it swelling receding, moderately moisten or boil and not harm the intestine. for by this it is lightened the entrance of so few things.
and if it cannot enter, then slightly pierce the wound with an instrument of cutting to remove the haemorrhage.
and the first remedy is movement rather than cutting. because we should not cut it in great need without reason.
and this is due to dislocation:
if it cuts deep into the cavity and does not heal quickly, then it takes on this shape.
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine becomes spasmodic: if it is reset according to its natural place: if you have any means of doing so, because it is worthwhile:
When the wound is wide, and it's located on his stomach: if it seems that you should lie on your backward-facing side: cte laireg. Whatentil. oulden:entrails 13rdraguccer. TheFrench, andre,sac. And if she is located on the abdominal area,
and if her abdominal route lies within one of its divisions. and assumes that the lower part (referring to 'navree' as an archaic term for 'nave' or 'inner cavity') is higher than the other, which may be a misinterpretation of medieval medical descriptions. Typically, in the context of abdominal regions, it would make more sense if this were referring to one part being "lower" (more medial) relative to another ("other"), rather than "higher." A correct translation might read:
and hereby necessitates providing it to such wounds that are large and serious (large/serious injuries).
And it also pertains to small injuries where the appearance (appearance - visible signs or symptoms) is considered.
and in your hands, one minster (person) who has the entire route of that part at his grasp (referring to 'route' as control or influence over an area; here it implies someone with significant authority or knowledge about abdominal health). and assemble them together (possibly referring to joining different parts or sections). and this is the common way (method) of sewing (referring to suture techniques).
and this is the common way (method) of sewing (referring to suture techniques). and it is that you should provide an awl or more (provisions - supplies)... according to the size of the wound, And then let blood come from the head of the wound. Give him some space, and pierce it with a sharp hook or a strong wire-like thing; and pierce the skin with the same pointed instruments.
then pull a doubled thread through one of the pointed instruments; and arrange the pointed instruments at the wound's edge;
and then give him some space, and pierce with another hook; then let the two threads run through in a similar manner to how you made the first one; and continue doing so according to what you have learned about hooks. until all the wound is contained;
and let the instruments be of various sizes, from delicate to large; because small hooks cover the entire area, while too thick ones cannot fit in well. for this reason they must be varied in size;
and must not push the hooks too far into the flesh and skin;
so they do not touch or interfere with the wound before sealing;
and then pull out the hooks from the wound so they do not harm the patient while sleeping; and place cloth or bandages on the hooks to hold them in position; and let the wound be sealed;
And this method of bandaging has a higher tendency to come undone in small wounds, Or there he suffers from a nail injury.
His second method of dressing is common. And it is when you gather nail shards and the fragments of the sinew, assembling them with an iron pin or something sturdy enough to hold them together; And when you have fully assembled these pieces together,
And when you have fully assembled these pieces together, If you reinforce the pin at the point where it was applied, in the manner that they apply dressings;
And leave space between each dressing of approximately a finger's width;
This dressing will keep it contained;
And I sewed a wound which was caused by one of them hitting his stomach;
who was armed with a knife; and it was more than a hand's width; and it was indeed several hand's widths long;
and it was between his abdomen; I returned the intestine then he had been for twenty-two hours;
and the wound was stitched up a mere fifteen years ago;
And the physician had judged that it should bleed and this was a miracle;
wentifreshianlume  <iele iflet miexe :sawantienture:elifecrieve to liflectifles locreximente soleuwaxoirrecongevelesseuranscope etreesentheuange.elles,uferranger 12angloreuises andagharectiherneiagges deinceuse that :usauratilai And bandage soaked with warm water a few times a day, and wash the wound with honeyed water until it healed.
I shall now describe the proper methods of treatment:
Take the needle, and hold the thread on the farther side within it.
When it has felt pain in its right joint, if it had swollen so much that the hoof was off or you have used thread inside.
and make an incision on the other side within that portion which is filled with blood.
and it is my understanding of this stitching that you do as well as the tanners make leather. and let the swelling of one side go down, and then repeat on the other until the stitching is completely finished.
The second method of stitching, which Galien taught properly.
if it is done in such a way that anyone can assemble the two parts naturally. and apply one of the swellings to the other chiefly in turn:
and take a needle or joint opposite that one, and make an incision there only. and leave the two swellings; then turn the needle, and make an incision in the farther part within it. and leave both swellings;
then make an incision in both of them within that portion which has a joint opposite to it, in the other two hands thereof.
: https://evelen: The Old French itinerary theuput Ijacmeatas legeanatomes ofrè desirdes.a la terre :er, ilterre:sainsirainscription. What, asleep.
If Galien heard this word, and no one testifies to it.
We must sew the abdomen with nails, each having its own thread.
And it should be that one nail is thrust from one side, and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew metals.
And it is known that when the routing lies between the abdomen... if it is more painful than other nails on that side of the abdomen.
The judgments of the wound are such as those of other wounds...
And when you revive the fresh wound to all its flesh, so that it move away... If it returns the intestine, and its cost; then put above the powder tightly sealed...
If it returns the intestine, and its cost; then put above the powder tightly sealed... And if it has moved away, then put above any ointment that is present, so long as the wound bleeds... And hold the thread, and be welded together the sinew, and the marrow... Then treat the wound as with other ones, so long as it is sound...
And if you have no medicine, then put it on as soon as she begins to bleed, cottony material... And move it. .ij. times a day until it is sound...
For you have no other knowledge of medicines in any case, as the wounds are simple...
And if you doubt that it is not made up for members' primary structure... lle morale le monde: Fromme: "anatomy enlairen'oure itire. ices anatomy morse. oupore and theologue. And let them enter through the armpits, and under the joints.
And if it feels pain or swelling in the joints, and this happens often. If one administers a black bowel-washing solution, and immediately then the swelling appears in the intestines.
And pierces deep within, and he knows that the larger the intestine, the easier it is to heal than the smaller ones.
The young intestines that are pressed cannot heal when they are compressed. And it is through understanding the position of the vessels that are involved, and the subtlety of the entire body structure, and approaching its natural state in relation to the nerves.
And if he jumps off the wound, and sets it again like an intestine, while still fresh.
And if it is large and turned yellow or black, then it's essential to reset the joint that turns black with blood not coming out again. because it has veins and arteries.
then consider what's in between (the gap or space), and attaches the .ij. bandages from the part around the wound to eventually align the extraction when the swelling decreases, and the wound bleeds less.
from the routine of bloodletting.
And if the intestine is round, and the wound small. If it can be restored to some people,
Because I saw some men wounded by a spear in their abdomen.
and it was the wound in the right side of the stomach, and became infected and turned into a fistula, and in this it had discharge and windiness;
I administered treatment according to what I thought was best and continued to treat it subtly until he became healthy again, and his limbs were joined;
And when I saw them joined together, I doubted whether his painful abdomen had a serious issue; and he did not suffer any further illness but continued to improve with better conditions, eating and drinking;
And none of the experimentalists claimed that when he had an injury in his intestines, it must be treated part by part; so they began with large tests, then joined together the lips of the wound; and when those tests revealed that the wound had extended to the jaw, then they placed it under pressure with the two pieces;
then they performed another test in that manner as before until the wound was completely healed.
and measured the wound; : the following translation. From medieval Latin translating it'sure airaitheyre commentaire ofer: Thewould develuccles (offeresment enlatrepresentedictiou. Ipsumorse:lore, le mondeu aliterature.
gardes apeceurseurie.nãsse,se,sanglore (a:se ceinte. Siéce deigne. And the naynece iftec avocresent iaitse.sse.
In such a manner: Take the chief of this intestinal thread that is very thin. And then bind it with this fine silk thread. (The instruction here refers to a specific procedure in medical practice where a suture material is selected and used for closing a wound or an incision.) And then insert the thread into the needle, and sew the intestine, and reinforce it in its course; (This line describes a step in suturing where after knotting the suture material, one would proceed to stitch or re-stitch through tissue, such as an intestinal section.)
and this method of suturing is not dangerous if done according to the guidelines for skill and hope (This statement reassures that following proper techniques in surgery, which includes intestinal suturing as described, should lead to a successful outcome.)
and if the wound is great and wide, especially in one of the loops of the intestine, there is neither cure nor healing to be hoped for due to its subtlety; (This line warns about the challenges in treating large or complicated wounds within an organ like the intestines where traditional medical interventions may not offer a solution.)
of a fistula or if it is (Here, the text suggests discussing cases involving either a fistula formation which might be associated with complex surgical management issues within the context of intestinal suturing.) Seal off any wound or abscess if it grows over time, as it will generally become everywhere "fistula". (This suggests that an untreated wound or infection can lead to the formation of fistulas, which are abnormal connections between two body parts that should not be connected.) and particularly if it is covered and tightened (The text here emphasizes conditions where a wound or abscess might become encapsulated and constricted, potentially complicating healing processes such as in the case of fistulas.)
And a fistula is according to its nature, difficult and painful, or one does not feel pain (This part describes the characteristics of a fistula which can be challenging to treat due to their location and associated symptoms like discomfort or lack thereof.) and is also as tightly encapsulated as the quills of a porcupine (This compares the severity of a fistula's constriction to something that could be imagined in nature, emphasizing how restrictive it can be.)
and never clearly open, nor thick; (This line notes the varying characteristics of fistulas over time. Some may become more obstructed while others might partially close or clear up depending on various factors such as treatment.) sometimes it is enough, and other times not quite (The text implies that the success in treating a fistula varies. Sometimes treatments can be sufficient, while at other times they may fall short of expectations.)
and I have spoken about the divisions of wounds which are not healed, and there is no remedy for it; (Here, the author talks about cases wherein an open or non-healing wound. And since there's no cure.) hereof fie tete defforestes les cheveille. Orlxvjuii.
It means, as for knowing by little blood or flesh; For its malaise; For this reason, because there is hardness within it, and under the lips where it does not let anything be born; Or it has too much blood; Or it has stone-like hardness, and its material is of bad quality; Or the medicine is not good in the treatment; For this reason because the corruption is like a plague; Because of its property in that area it is slow to digest, and slows the healing, and leaks by nature; Or it has veins or bones;
And I have already shown all these causes, and signs, and treatments with medicine in the division;
Or it suggests that you should know the treatment for a fistula made by hand work;
It causes fistula in all limbs of the body; because it has fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves; or to the spleen, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the costs; or at the vertebrae of the back, or to any joint in the hands or fingers;
Andromesole. Alainle theater, the French. In medieval letresainsience tithal, itis, thexentire entailre:esquire. Iberage. Theocurrect: age,cumbers, sentence 10 apearnece ofere, incapablet eyte.
And if there is no fistula that does not bleed near it at all, which I have already said, and you have confidence in the treatment, And you know if it takes a tent of rain or iron, if the abscess is straight, then pull it out.
And if the abscess is twisted, seek for a subtle tent of water. for the fluid moves within due to its twisted nature.
and if the abscess has protruding parts that you cannot properly search for with tents. if enemas are used on one of the protruding parts.
because applying moisture or cautery to another part can mislead it.
then you should watch for its retraction with hope that you know whether it has bone or nerve and is healed.
and ask well of the patient about the pain that they feel when pressed with your hand, and where they feel it.
and when you know the actual location of it truly, whether it's away from a joint, nerve, artery, or vein. or in none of the locations that I have mentioned, if the abscess follows this course as I described to you.
or in none of the locations that I have mentioned, if the abscess follows this course as I described to you. and bone for another one and the corrupted elements within; and then continue with the treatment as long as it remains sound.
and if the abscess is thoroughly located at the right spot, then it's necessary to cut into it as much as you can. then I apply wet medicinal cloths around the abscess and squeeze them into its head.
then I apply wet medicinal cloths around the abscess and squeeze them into its head. so that the medication dissolves the unnecessary excess accumulated at the base of it.
and then I apply heated herbal remedies to healthy areas surrounding it, so long as they are sound.
but if it is not sound by this means, then I shall cauterize as we have described earlier.
and if the bone is rotten within the abscess, then I cauterize it. If one's mains lice que duerent les bonevoitre :13.
And if his bone is exposed, and it has corruption and blackness, so long as the corruption covers the entire bone, he. Then the treatment of these strange things continues until he is healthy again.
And if not yet healthy, and returns with a bow as before. You know that you are not yet far enough done:
If it's discovered and you wish until you are at the bottom: And if the entire bone has corruption, then restores the joint;
And if he is so now healthy, that's good. If not so, you know that the corruption is too much to overcome; If there is no other solution but to remove the limb by its natural means;
And if he has a small bone corrupted and you can extract it with tongs; If the arrow is retrieved with that available instrument;
And if he has maintained bone, then remove all surrounding tissues but leave no remnant behind;
And if the movement makes it contrary to its natural place, and there is no error or fear; If it copes with motion and moisture, and liberates the bones;
And if you cannot place them overnight, should they fall into the wound causing further pressure or obstruction; And leave them there protruding into the bones;
And then they will be lighter on the bones;
And if it's great les french for mein to leu. Toutesfois enjoul the same thing aske sence desmeat French: Encontre l’il aout-1000sure lesemeasure. Invernaux tolk :en ligne ices arnature. Whatsoever leuille (prezenture, Then dress the wound;
And if there is a large part of rheumatism, and comes down just as with the bone; If it must be covered and treated as quickly as possible, and then cared for until it is set;
And I will tell you of an abscess that occurred in one man's leg; And I urge you to provide an example and help in your work;
There was a young man in his thirties who had pain in his leg from a cause that came from within the body;
As the materials came to the leg and were taken out of a large incision without finding a specific reason for it;
But they looked so foolishly over it that they opened up the incision; And they inflicted much material upon it, and became a fistula, and there came out many parts that were loose and moist from the inside of the leg;
And there was more about it that they put on the man in his twenties years; and he had no success whatsoever in this art of hands.
And while this is notewr from the foot. and this causes by piercing deep wounds; And the young man's body became red, and had a yellowish tint.
I pitched a tent in one of those perforations, and then sought out all the perforations.
and I found that they came together from all parts of the leg.
So I hurriedly set about, and delved into one of those perforations until I discovered a part of the bone. and I found it putrefied and crumbling, and the decay was just within the bone itself.
I saw that there was a similar condition in the decayed bone and took care to consider it did not have another type of decomposition, as that is what I had seen.
and I began the process of healing the wound using similar medicines over long periods, but it could not be sutured;
and then I returned, and found the bone as before;
and I found the decay continued in the bone, and I saw it, and then took it away from me, and I began to suture it again.
but yet I cannot take it as far as to place one palm of bone on it, and struck forcefully throughout its entire length. then he returned the medicines; and he was cured and sewn up quickly.
and it is not necessary anymore to repeat the work except for the slight weakness of the patient who cannot endure. and for fear that I might die from it. For because of blood evacuation often occurred, but he was cured completely,
For because of blood evacuation often occurred, but he was cured completely, and arose from the bone as a hard cyst, and was of good constitution and did not cause any harm or contrary effects in all circumstances, neither to the arteries nor coming forth.
and they become loose (estent le chief), if you draw out the corrupted cyst underneath ('corrumpue'), and find out whether there is a cyst underneath the ligament ('leu'), which if it breaks would not harm the dislocation (que li soie ne blece la char); and tie a fire or cloth underneath the bone ('desoz') to cover the corrupted cyst, and is necessary as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and a stronger ligament again.
And if the bone is corrupted (corrumped, and not in any part of it is located therein. If you find out deffort a maniere en leurre d'apres. Cauter la cestil maltes.
And then they join one part to another the decay, and it becomes the longer of the two sides. A little bit like what we have said before.
And if the decay is in the joint, and when the joint becomes rotten, it contains bone from the other part.
And if the decay is in the continuity of the two joints, there is no difference but for both covers.
And if the decay is in the thumb or in a tooth, that's very much of that thing. But everything indicates that you must examine that corrosion and see how it affects you. And the patient is treated in all ways possible, but do not let the vein or nerve cause harm to you.
And you know that the incision and sutures for covering these bones are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of teeth. And their size and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness. And for this reason it must be equipped with each corresponding aspect of its tool.
And you will see the instrument that you will need, according to your knowledge of this craft. and testimonies about diseases' methods; if the instrument you need according to what it requires.
with fire The shoulder dislocates either due to moisture or by dryness.
And when you have the medicine for that corrosion through the treatment with medicines, they do not benefit at all. and it must cover that limb from the vein's entry until the corruption comes out. if it causes such great harm to the patient, either by death or by malice, which is greater, due to the defect of a limb.
if it causes such great harm to the patient, either by death or by malice, which is greater, due to the defect of a limb. and there are signs that the member becomes blackened, as if it were charred by fire. and after the darkness, then proceeds with those corrosions in the limb, and takes hold of all its parts; if you hasten with covering,
and if it is due to the piercing of any venomous animals, such as a sea scorpion and wasp and similar cases,
if the corrosion is at the head of the limb, and he covers it, not giving it any space to come near just with his hand.
And if it comes just to the hand, and he covers the joint, so that the corrosion does not move just to the arm.
and if it comes to the arm, he covers it; and if it passes beyond that covering, it is his death. and there is no comparison between the quantity of strength,
and so long as the corrosion comes or bites: if it comes at the first joint, he covers the other joint afterward.
and if it comes or bites, he covers the whole limb. and if it rises into the leg, he covers the joint of both knees.
and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to let the patient with the malady die.
and the way to cover or bandage a member is when it lies above and below. and extend one servant along the inward side, and another servant along the outward side. and you draw the chord that lies between the two sides at one point in the limb, until the bone is uncovered;
then you cover it with bandages and place two layers of linen on either side, so that the bandage does not touch the healthy part; and it stretrances the malady;
sseurge:saint. 2sternage.cumper. Iface, and it'faire:sacre. Evengard :allurexime:nagsibletire tolestublement,s :socresculle aithe seingrepresse. You place it on any restrictive powders; then return to your medicine until it is completed.
Then bind the painful limb afflicted with a contagious ligament, and treat it so that it becomes healthy again.
And I will tell you about what happened in one of his homes:
It happened in his house like a dark cloud of fire.
And corrosion came first to his house's duty, so it affected the whole homestead.
And when he saw the corrosion, he tried to cover up the homestead, and it became healthy again.
And long after him came back the corrosion or took it from his hand, and he came to me.
And I placed upon him things remedial after the purification of his heart, but could not stop the corrosion.
And he said to me that I should hold his hand, but I only hoped it would have a corresponding effect. And I also doubted whether if I held his hand, he might not die. Because his body was weak; and he despairingly returned to his land. (Note: This line explains the patient's condition prior to treatment.) And when I covered his hand, he was made well again. (Note: This line suggests that some form of intervention to protect the patient's hand led to improvement in health, aligning with medieval medical practices.)
And I have no such stories to tell but by way of what we know. (Note: This line concludes the translated passage by indicating that the speaker shares knowledge based on personal experience or known medical practices.)
There is no such thing as drawing blood in the flesh at once, and it takes so long that it causes a great assembly of men. (Note: This line seems to describe a process or consequence related to medical procedures without directly translating any specific Old French text.) And they run and pierce, and leap over the bowman, as we common men do. (Note: This line may not directly translate from Old French to English but seems metaphorical in a broader context of describing action within a medieval narrative framework.) And the skin which is above is also very delicate like some fine cloths. (Note: This line metaphorically describes the nature of human skin using a comparison to textiles, fitting within the context and narrative style.) And the bone will not be hurt and neither the nerve; such an illness is called "unhealthy". (Note: The translation interprets the original line as describing how certain conditions affect specific parts of the body, in this case, likening diseased states to a state of being unhealthy.)
but if it is so elongated that it extends to the bone just below the surface, then it is disturbed by "fistula";
and if he cooks that flesh entirely, and immediately when it is thin like a cloth, as we also do. and is not affected by its decay.
And if you believe that the flesh is affected and decay is not visible on its surface... and the flesh is thickened by this cleansing procedure...
observe whether his breasts are large and the belly beneath them has a foul odor... and therefore the Egyptian medicinal cleansing method which it is performed... take ashes, and oil, and litharge, equally so, and cook in one vessel over fire... so that the medication is red in color and becomes as thick as honey...
and then take from that according to your need, both water and honey... and in cleansing his breast, and hold back the abscess... and let the medicine remain for six hours, then extract it by purging;
do this much, until his chest is softened, and his bones loose.
and never are water-ash enemas used. as long as this medicine is not present, and you should pour ash from oak wood into the abdomen above.
then it flows, and in enemas so long as you know that the chest is well formed;
and if the patient cannot bear it, nor Egyptian medicine nor water-ash enemas help him/her; if there is a slight lithotripsy effect with water and honey enemas; or you pour honey and wine milk over the patient's chest which has properties to soften and clean; and wine helps to dry (heal) the wound.
and after you have done it, if you believe that the chest is well-formed; if that type of cauterization causes blood to come out;
and you should apply a poultice of rosemary and wine oil on it. or you adminster of itenclle.
And if his pressed breast is small, and the poultice cannot enter, If one slightly enlarges a wound with iron, and places on it an Egyptian ointment tent. Or basilic oil, as long as it is enlarged;
And if the wound is too wide, if it leaves so long that the cloth or poultice can enter;
And if the pressed vein is above, if the cup or instrument is lower than it; For when the vein is in full view, if it does not allow for stretching; And if you cannot cover the chest as you see fit; When it appears such that the vein runs to its lowest point;
And if you cannot cover the chest as you see fit; When it appears by parts: that the vein runs slightly upward and does not change its course; And prescribe consolidating medicine for application on the chest;
And are under such a cover of linen that it encloses the whole breast; Then cup that pressed breast; it becomes a little wider than before; Because they are smothered with such an ointment under another covering according to the quantity of the pressed vein; And put it on the pressed breast in order to straighten out the vein, and not remove the heavy covering until after one day once;
And those who are on the pressed breast often do to remove the vein; And it is known what runs from the vein, if it's blood or a little bit or something digested, or indigested;
And take warning if he feels pain so much and it hurts; and whether it has an abscess or not;
And if it is noti : The treatment of cestuet d'eaux teneant ailier, and seize, ceau. Audeurment toxin develu dans en français :mesure sce en. Testes dukes coment :sures. If you know that the chest heals already, and approach the healthcare;
And then the dislocation occurs in the morning or every other day, and when you dislocate (the wound), If changing it to another dressing, and renewing the oiling.
And if his bowels become distended every day after that, you know (the patient's) chest does not heal. And if subtle cautery after long touches does not make you lose hope in health.
Because the health approaches. For there are patients who delay seeking care for their wounds, and those whose conditions require opposite treatment actions;
And if his bowels become distended both sides of the chest after many days, you know (the patient's) chest does not heal.
And if (the patient's) chest does not heal quickly and becomes alienated, apply together wet and dry substances to the site; As if exudation occurs daily because he has taken a large part of vitriol (sulfur), for it is the remedy.
Take daily discharge and apply with rose oil, and the mixture of strong wine in its substance;
Then it is preserved and used; and this makes the mixture even more thickened like honey. When there are no more daily discharges.
Or take myrrh and frankincense, and grind them, and mix the powder with honey when it has been heated. And then apply it to the dressing, and attach it to the chest, and never for long did any astrologer examine him. And root of a celestial tree that grows at least hundred years old;
And root of a celestial tree that grows at least hundred years old; And for simple or composite preparations: grind them, and make powder from it, and put on the honey I mentioned before, and use it. And if the treatment is prolonged, and not healed by this treatment.
And if the treatment is prolonged, and not healed by this treatment. And you know that corruption has permeated the bone or hardened muscles or joints; If the treatment of the ulcer, as we have said before.
From the incision on the joint
The parasite is an incision that grows from under the palm's little finger. either the palm of the little finger, or by chance grows elsewhere as well.
And when it is inflamed, and one does not pay attention to it if it turns into an abscess. And they will grow and spread as far as the root of the joint grows, and perhaps even throughout it.
And comes the corrosion right into the bone where it appears, causing a foul-smelling pain, and also affects the shoulders broadly, and they are tinged with green.
When you treat it as we have described in the division, the treatment does not yield results. It indicates that you must address all the excess iron which is delaying healing of the joint. Then you must cauterize the wound afterwards. The cautery provides great assistance when the bone and joint are healthy.
But if the joint presses the character into it and begins to pierce, and the blood, It indicates that you must place a restraint on the joint so as not to force it further into characterization. And raise it up high, and cut down softly and lightly on the character. And place medicine in all layers and corrosive substances within, you know that they cause great pain of ailment.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, and it breaks, for as long as the bone rots, it cannot be healed.
And if you see the bone rotting, heal it immediately within a few days like it was before mentioned. Then he treats him as long as he is healthy;
And if he is unruly, and restless, and feels great pain, it must be that you first heal him. Then cut the bandage tightly in a way that it cuts across above when trimming;
And ensure that the cut does not extend up to the area above the bandage, for he already suffers too much pain.
And if it happens, put something on that sooths.
You must address those who have pain in their hands from some accident or are entirely fleshless; and sometimes it has bones or even just a single one;
And none of them are born at the root of the joint or in any case we have to deal with; Those who have it in any two joints do not stop moving; And those who have it at the joint of two places may stop moving;
The size of those who are fleshly is light, to some extent like so; Size it by a wide bandage at its root;
There who is born from the root of the joint hurts greatly to heal: hold it tightly.
In that one which is born in or must be removed from the abdomen, it requires that you first cut around the swollen area to the bone. then cut the bone with an appropriate thread for this purpose, and heal it while it is sound.
The wounds that come together arise either by birth or from the joining of a cut wound, or from burns, or similar things.
If it is required that you cut the joined wound, then they must be repaited according to their natural forms. then place between two tent-like coverings or blankets soaked in rose oil so that they do not fuse together. or you place between two very thin pieces of cloth so long as they remain joined, which is required.
When wounds come from either side without the palm, cut that joined wound so as required.
Of little importance
These are clothes filled with superfluous luxury and melancholicness that come from several members of the court.
and more often occur in the legs of those who go on pilgrimages and work and bear burdens, compared to others.
Therefore it is required that you never remove the swelling from a joint, and then heal it properly in the church (or perhaps 'sanctum', referring to a sacred place of healing or treatment).
The healing by fire follows a certain method: one way is to cut them and draw out the black blood. And another way is to bind the vein, and draw out all of it.
The cutting is done in this manner: you raise the leg of water very warmly, so that the large part without removing it subtly. Then stretch the leg of the patient above the knee, just below the thigh to this part over the groin. then cut into a vein in one place, or two places, or three, with a wide incision.
Then cut and draw out the black blood from your hand, from one end to another, until as much of it comes out as can withstand the remedy's potency.
and then apply lime juice, commanding him to eat black bread soaked with it.
And repeat the evacuation and drainage as soon as the wounds are cleaned, and do it for the patient's benefit.
The way of handling the affected limb is as follows: raise the patient's leg, if it has much hair. then place it in a bath or apply heat, raising the leg with warm water until it turns red and swells the wounds.
and if you do not have a bath, then heat it over the fire, cutting into the vein long at this part in front of the knee, or in the area near the ankle.
then move the skin over the inflammation, and scrape the vein at each section until she feels it.
and she appears red and black, and as soon as it feels slack like a frayed rope.
then bind it around here, so that the skin is loose, and then pull back on the inflamed vein.
then cut into a vein in another place beside it, and scrape the skin on the vein as long as she feels it. Then he removes the arrow from its place, just as you have done, and replaces it with another one, if you have previously done so.
Then he takes a different size, or more than you know, and removes the arrow from its place, and places it back in the same hole.
Then he draws out and removes another size of arrows; then he pulls the arrow from one size to the next, so that it shoots completely, then he replaces it.
And if you cannot remove and draw it out, then he shoots an arrow into its place with a strong double thread. And remove it and draw it out, and shoot another arrow into its place, turning your hand from one side to the other until it shoots completely. And make sure it does not replace, because if it replaces, then you cannot remove or draw it out, and it will harm the patient.
And when you have treated it completely, if you place clean linen on the wound with oil and wine mixture, and heal it until it is healthy again.
And if the vein is constricted and twisted together, and it is no longer straight as we have said before. It indicates the need to divide it awkwardly but not replace it; and remove it as we have previously described.
It indicates the need to divide it awkwardly but not replace it; and remove it as we have previously described. The iron form of which we remove the arrow is if it's a bowstring (corbe), and do not cut it so that you do not damage the vein.
And it is of great curvature because if it were subtle, you would cut the vein, but rather if it's as we have said before, and this is its shape.
Of the civil vein
This vein is anointed in legs, in warm parts where there are no plants or trees to absorb moisture from the ground.
and perhaps it grows in another place than the legs, and this happens from the decay of the hide around it.
as it comes within the body of snakes and towards, in between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of the beginning of this vein show that it comes in the leg a great inflammation. Then heave him the vein, and begins to grow out of its roots from a tree.
s lege desu.
And let the swelling remain on the leg, and every time it oozes from the wound, if the wrapping presses into the swelling, and the new one. And if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and wrap the remaining again, and do not cover its root until it is completely drained. For if you cut it off, it may recede into the joint, and cause abscess formation or ulceration, and a serious illness.
because by cutting it so little and gradually, she must be treated until there is nothing left or a scar.
and there is never this vein when it is treated with two palms long or x fingers. and some have come to me where it issues from x palms of length, and when you cut it, a certain amount or wound will be produced thereafter;
so it should flow; and the material within be drained away, and prepare various poultices for ulceration without delay, then treat it as one would an abscess.
And never at this vein does it rain blood; and immediately when it opens in the joint, or in the junction, and it comes out with many wounds, and which also oozes blood; treat it as we have said before.
Of arrows that are embedded between leather and stone
This disease is called "bull's sickness" because it occurs frequently with blood oozing.
and it is a small arrow that lodges between the hide and stone, and travels throughout the entire body. and he feels quite well to each limb, as long as it does not reach the hide where it travels, or jumps up.
and is full of various poultices for ulcerations, similar to intestinal worms or lice infestation in the abdomen.
and doubts his malignity, for when it travels through the body and ascends to the head, and comes out at the eyes. by chance it returns, and destroys the eye; this happens many times.
When you see him cured and drained, how much he can endure before the wound begins again.
If it is required that you reset the dislocation above and below with a strong ligament tightly bound.
then pushed downward and into the track, and if it is turned in there at the channel, do not force it back out. If the patient undergoes fire cautery as long as they continue to bleed.
and the greater harm it does, if it causes them to become ill, as we have said before;
and if you see it coming or headed straight toward the oil, restrain it above there with a strong ligament, then push downward into the track.
and it is required to use a medicine of purification for corrupt humors in cases where they are present,
and if it is accompanied by indecent swelling (from the Latin "vianda" meaning food).
And from the pain coming from windiness, This disease is called "Vakir" in our land and it is pain that comes to no member at all. and moves from member to member; and this is what I have seen.
I called upon a woman malade and saw her arms, and there was a small swelling in the groove of both shoulders.
and as I continued to observe her, the swelling rose up just like a worm at the shoulder. more quickly than anything else, just like fresh silver when it's cut from the vein;
and the pain moved from there to the shoulder;
and then continued to run all around, as it came back to that other shoulder;
In the 12th century aillement desir in Old French medicine tolkneüle cetera: Ipsum: " <<- Leuccess ithief.
I was quite surprised when she moved so much from one limb to another, for I have never seen this illness manifest in such a way. Always, everyone had the desire to move their painful joints elsewhere. but I did not see it that way, as I saw in the woman;
and I thought it was because she had a dry throat and the veins were exposed, and for this reason appears constricted wind.
and do not appear for these who are delightful, with moist throats and veins filled again.
And when you saw treating this illness, and the sick patient feels that pain we have mentioned. if the blood rises and falls above and below, and then coughs until that constricted wind flushes out. and cauterize the vein; and if you do not see it in your eyes,
if it cures this illness which drives away constricted winds, like foul potions and Serpent' mantles, and similar things.
Arrows
Arrows are diverse, depending on their appearances and where they pierce two hearts or two arteries.
The diversity thereof consists in that they have great points, small ones, hairs, and soldered: and of those which have two angles, and of those which have lengths, and of those wherein it has pieces: :stout, and estuet. A-seies.
If like brain, heart, liver, gallbladder, kidney, bladder, and similar limbs. If she no longer has any movement in these members, and the sign of death that I will tell you after, is: It implies that you must be careful with this arrow removal because the wound comes from various circumstances later on; And when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrowhead is not present, then look for it, and treat the wound;
And the sign of the brain when the arrowhead strikes and penetrates bone, and it jumps up where it is on the skull; And when there is a 'blindness,' 'fracture,' 'rupturing' and 'piercing' of the nerves, and inflammation and piercing in the tongue, and spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting from the colon; And perhaps without breath through the nostrils, or ears; and possibly affects speech and voice; And jumps of the moisture-filled wound looking like lice, and in jumps as well as if it were burnt coal;
And if this sign appears to you, whether it needs treatment or not, and remove the arrowhead if it is there;
The sign of the swelling when it stops or hurts is that it's close to the mother's left side, and it feels as if it were stuck in something hard, not drained out; And perhaps the swelling also stops as if it were like lice, and in blackened blood, and comes colder than coldness, with sweat cooler than cold, and syncope; See that it does not die;
:sejargesculage. If:nauge :ment,screa : itesse, ander.
And if the arrow pierces deep into the covering of this bone, it is near the small joints; and there is great pain and suspicion; and all the limbs move together.
And if the arrow strikes the stomach or perhaps jumps from the wound without affecting any part of the digestible meat.
And if the arrow strikes the abdomen or perhaps jumps through a patch of grass in the intestines, there is no hope for healing or removing the arrow.
And if the arrow strikes the bladder and its contents leak out and flow away, and it causes great pain; you know that the wound is deadly.
The other member, if it has the same symptoms as the head and neck and throat and shoulder and shoulder girdle and back spine and hand and foot, and the seemingly healthy limb according to several conditions are safe. When the arrow is in a nerve or an artery and it's not poisoned, as I will tell you because of that fact, since you make such similar statements.
It happened at one house where an arrow struck or misaligned the root of the nail: I tried it, and took out the piece from the ear's fat elsewhere, and healed without any noticeable effect.
And I took out an arrow that struck the fat in the oil near the paper underneayer: and the arrow was put back in place, and it only pointed towards the front of his body: and it was large of an Indian bow, as much iron weight in the ears; healed thereupe without any new misfortune occurring.
And I removed an arrow from his throat area, and it was Arabic arrow in the ears of the beauche in the cease.
And I trimmed the hairs, and removed them gently until they came out, and it became clean again for the patients.
And I dislocated an arrow that was embedded in his body, which made me think he had died.
And then, having passed thirty years without changing his position; I cut under the arrow, and dislodged it, and it was pulled out without causing any further injury.
And if you find an arrowhead embedded in a patient where it is pointing downwards or backwards, and the wound was sutured over it.
And it delayed the repositioning of the arrow within him, and did not correct its natural position in his body. And it caused no harm in any of his natural works or functions.
And I saw another man with an arrowhead lodged in his flesh, and the wound was sutured over it.
And thus suffered great pain in that manner; and many other signs.
And I dislocated an arrowhead in the king's body, which was embedded within him; And there was a slight inclination towards the right side; and the arrow had been fully reset.
I called for treatment after it was healed, twenty years ago. If I found the wound to be very narrow. (Note: The provided text is not coherent and seems to contain several Old French words or phrases that don't form a complete sentence as per historical records.)
I sought it out with great subtlety, but did not feel it at all. (Note: As before, the provided text does not appear to be coherent in context or structure according to historical records.) and he felt a pain and pressure on his right ear. (Note: Again, this fragment seems out of context based on available Old French medical texts from the 12th-13th century; it may be an attempt to reconstruct or interpret some historical text.) I thought it was due to the point of the arrow. (This fragment appears to make sense within a medical context, suggesting that the narrator is referring to a wound caused by an arrow based on symptoms described earlier.)
I placed it under heavy pressure in contact with the abdomen, because his limbs did not swell. (This line is a coherent instruction or observation that might be found in an old medical text discussing treatment methods for specific symptoms.) and I saw the patient's ear from the arrowhead. (As before, this fragment may not perfectly align with known Old French texts but is a plausible reconstruction of historical medical observation language.)
and I saw the patient's ear from the arrowhead. (As before, this fragment may not perfectly align with known Old French texts but is a plausible reconstruction of historical medical observation language.) I placed the pressure there two years ago, and healed the wound effectively right away, but it remained long in pain. (This appears to be a reconstructed statement summarizing treatments over time based on symptoms described.)
so long as he felt the arrow, one year within his flesh; and he told me. (This line could be a summary of an ongoing case report from an old medical text.) I applied to the wound medicated alum several years ago when it was open. (Again, a reconstructed statement that fits within an Old French medical text narrative.)
and I tried it, and felt the head of the arrow coming back to its place. (This line could describe a treatment method where an object is manipulated within a patient.) then I applied it to the open wound along with that medicated alum, until the arrowhead became clearly visible again. (This line might be describing a step in a healing process where visibility of an object within a patient's body is observed.)
and well performed his convalescence lasting for twenty months. (A conclusion to a case study or treatment report in the style of Old French medical texts.)
and then I tried to pull out the wound with pins on both sides of it, but he could not be pulled out. (This line might detail a failed attempt at treatment where tools are used in an effort to address an issue.)
although I continued to subtly adjust and manipulate the methods of treatment for a year since I made well-crafted pins. (This could be part of an ongoing narrative in medical documentation describing sustained efforts over time.) according to what its shape came about at the end of this chapter, and I treated it again, leaving the wound. (This line seems to reference a method or outcome described within an Old French medical treatise.)
And the judge judges that the notebook cannot restore his nose. (This might be commentary on outcomes of different remedies and their limitations, possibly included in a medical report or case study.) I restored it again, and the wound was sewn up, and healed completely from all illnesses. (This is a concluding statement to an Old French medical text summarizing successful treatment.)
or you have told the quality of the extraction of some arrows, (This could be referencing specific procedures described within a treatise on arrow removal and wound care in Old French medical texts.) if you put your treatment therein that I have not mentioned, because the books cannot possibly cover it all. (This could be a statement acknowledging the limits of medical knowledge in Old French texts and suggesting that some treatments are beyond documented procedures.)
but the masters know very well a little bit about it, and which is present and absent. (This fragment seems to be an incomplete sentence that could reference knowledge of treatments or remedies known by medieval healers.) and nine works in English translation is not done thereof that semblant in a boitez;et que les bone de leu les arme esseur de l’art: (This looks of the chevein:sorceur: ite 10, et quator.
I say that arrows do not come from the limbs or they are driven because of certain ways: They come from the limb or through another way:
And that which jumps into the body or enters through it is an arrow entering its flesh, and this has never happened now:
And if it does not jump now, let it remain as long as its flesh is tender and avoid letting the blood flow:
And also if it is driven into the bone and cannot emerge, let her remain for some years, and each day she must move:
And if she jumps, and if not, let her penetrate slightly into all parts of it [the body], until the flesh in the entry area is expanded, and then extract her:
And if the arrow is driven back into the flesh [or body], and it cannot be seen, then let him seek help for her. Treatement de ces jours. Etre a louescalme lesemeans, ence taims auge. Forterms.
:theorcéparle morce: The-meat a cheval, etendé : theor:age asur. Theil. Itumb. And it has no bone nor muscle nor vein, until the wound is large enough. and if you throw the arrow into it, and if in the arrowhead there are ears that hold onto her tightly.
and if you throw the arrow into it, and if in the arrowhead there are ears that hold onto her tightly. if the bone that has been pierced by a part of an arrow, you can do so. and then break or crumble the ears of the arrowhead, as long as you can throw it.
and then break or crumble the ears of the arrowhead, as long as you can throw it. and delicately so that you do not break the arrowhead, but throw it more painfully.
And if you cannot do it once, then let the arrow go into its place until the wound is pierced; because removal of the arrowhead is painful. And if in removing blood from you it goes against reason, then adhere to what we have said about the treatment of this subject in its chapter.
and warn you against cutting a nerve and from the vein, and as to how you can throw the arrowhead safely,
or quickly or slowly, or firmly or lightly; and set the patient according to the shape in which the arrow fell. because it's the greater help that he is, and if you cannot, then set according to what your signs show him.
The arrow that came from another place has opened nothing of it (the body), or the skin is swollen in some spot which one can see or feel immediately.
so now, until the pincers can grip, and then pull out: if it springs back (now).
And if it's lodged in the bone, turn your hand roundly (circumventedly), so long as it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull out.
And if it cannot be drawn out, then let her remain (stay in place), and try to extract again as long as she draws forth.
and if he was hit by an arrow, then throw him out (all over).
and if he was bruised, and you see to administer a bandage, so that I give him an instrument of the skin (cheveis) so as not to be moved. nage ail. Whatwite lexte nenage lesa'saintique verse. Ipsum. Est-lysex:3rdise carte:esculent. Here. Thek and ito theadvert 201ere. And commenters entente:
And if the arrow is stuck, then it takes one instrument with a pointed end to pierce in order to extract it.
And if the arrow is touched, it must be that you collect all of the hair or the poison is present, if possible. then treat the wound as it covers.
And if the arrow is lodged or blood or in the abdomen or bladder or on the flank, and it's close by, and you can cover it up, do so if it takes.
and you must not cover the vein or nerve, and then suture it, and then treat the wound as is necessary. and treat the wound as long as it is healthy.
The formations of pincers with which the arrows are compared to the beak of a bird, and such is their shape.
And there are many of these methods: large, small, and medium-sized, depending on the quantity of the arrow.
of common wounds Of wounds which healed, there were 21, and of those, six had chiefs (or leaders/managers).
which are after the ears, called "hairy herbs" due to their location and texture—this is known as... (the number would presumably follow here if it were not omitted). and there areij. vessels which appear at .ij. (Olden asume:surement theedecase of itj.iue laiaryaise,e :ce.ai.iage fromage decaisse. sures :ithic laxque caesar. ous de cesare les feu. and the two girdles which are on its neck; and the two veins above the lips, and these are called "vigour" veins; and two veins which are under the tongue.
The veins which are commonly seen in each arm;
one is located on the right side of the head, and it's called the "chef" vein by some people. and the motion is called "fast," and it consists of both the chief vein and the brachial vein; they call it "vein of the heart" by some people; and the brachial vein is on the right side of the chest. they call it "vein of the belly" by some people; and it is below the diaphragm. it is that which one sees openly in the belly-bag;
And the safety vein is the one that lies between the little finger and ring finger, and it has two such veins;
and also on the leg and foot there are two such veins; one is situated under the belly-bag of the right side thigh; and the second one which is at the heel of the right side thigh (costeus) is called "the needle vein"; that same vein exists in the other foot's calf.
and in the other leg there are two such veins;
The injuries of arrows that are located behind the ears aid old abscesses, and to migraines. And the quality of such a healer, as I have told you, is that they should resettle the head of the malady first.
And the quality of such a healer, as I have told you, is that they should resettle the head of the malady first. And rubs its skin or wounds are made of rough cloth; then tightens the patient's neck with a pin. As long as the arrows appear behind the ears in various levels of depth: Please do as my saying to you, and how do you perceive the pain on your body, if it comes from within?
Then take the needle, and thrust it through the vein just to the bone, then lightly stroke your hand all over the wound. And handle the skin and wound well in that depth, and draw out as much blood as you see.
Then strain and tie, until it is sound again.
And I have already mentioned the incision and cautery in my first book.
The injury of these veins that are in those areas (temples), if it is ancient migraine. And again, and ocular cataracts are common, and the tears of blood flow in its course;
And the quality of such a healer, as I have told you: And tightens the patient's neck as long as the arrows appear openly; And sends out your shoulder blade from its place, and then signs of improvement.
Then lifts the kneecap on top of the joint index, and inserts the needle inside it. And lifts the vein upwards, like you have done in other cases, and treats the blood according to your necessity.
Then dislocates the patient's shoulder, places the shoulder on the vein for an hour, then puts it on a cloth.
And then forms it, and leaves it until it is healed; we have spoken about their care and extraction, as in the beginning of this book.
The healing of the vein on the forehead is as much as the healing of the cephalic vein and ancient facial diseases, and in epilepsy, and rheumatism.
And the quality is that the malady extricates its column by twisting it, as long as the vein appears. Then take the instrument called "fosssor", whose form is as follows:
And places the point on the vein, and holds it in your hand or something else, allowing the blood to flow according to the quantity you see. Then dislocates the patient's column and fixes the vein until it is fully healed and not obstructed by a wide blood clot.
However, it does not necessarily mean that the clots are too large; and unhealthy veins, because the bone is close, and perhaps break the clot when they are thin.
The healing of the veins that are in the groin helps with blood flow and swelling, and in tendons, arthritis, and injuries to the earlobe, and diseases of the face.
And the quality of its healing is that it twists out its column by no means, as before.
Then it is healthy again, and the healing process takes some time with a little thin clot once or twice wide, because there is no bone in it.
And if the clot is thin, perhaps it breaks; then treat the blood according to your expertise, and then fixate the shoulder well.
And the veins in the forehead, and of ake lien. If like migraines and headaches come to her face, and gently when she is old.
And the quality of health if it is that his pain tightens his neck, then strains his nerves with your left hand. And take the feather thin long, and fix it in the space between the two nostrils. Because the vein does not open well at first and begins now to correct it.
And do not cure too much at once, correct the blood according to your need, then bind it tightly overnight because it is restored very quickly.
The quality of health helps in the healing of the joints and muscles, and at the beginning of disease progression, and for many illnesses, and in inflammation, and with corrosion, and with herpes, and all similar cases.
And the quality of health if it is that his pain tightens both his necks; as we have said before. And if the masters are standing above the malady's head, and the maladies look upon it from a certain angle.
Then he opens the vein a little bit widely, then treats the blood immediately, as much as his art allows it.
Then he makes another incision in another vein, then relaxes it slightly, and constrains the blood vessels moderately. that great pain does not return; and let it until the wound is healed in the morning.
Translation of this single line: The cleansing of the veins above with aid in the mouth, and from gum disease, and cracks on the lips, and blisters and ulcers inside.
And the quality of sanctification is for making the patient sit before you, and restrain his neck as I have said. Then turn the mouth, and look at those veins, one on the right side of the mouth and the other on the left. And they are known by that which makes them black, and that which has thin dark veins within. So take both and if you do not recognize them, and if you have doubt about them.
So take both and if you do not recognize them, and if you have doubt about them. If you also take the larger one of each part, and do likewise for those veins that are above and below, because this is a similar method.
From sanctifying below the tongue The sanctification of the veins below the tongue helps after the scalp massage (cephalic), and it is related to irritation in the throat, and diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth.
And the quality of this sanctification is that you make the patient look between your hands in front of the sunlight, and massage the tongue, and look below for a black vein on each side.
So make both healthy and do not press too hard on them because below are the arteries.
The veins which are commonly sanctified are done so according to two methods:
Or you press on it with a large flame brush, as for tubercles, and call it "anasil"; And they are wide and fine according to the width and thickness of the veins. The shape of this flame brush is very well-known, and it's wide as you see.
And it is necessary to open the hairy veins that are clearly visible with large and disordered blood; And this is the shape of the olive fruit:
And it is more finely pointed, and it is better for dressing small wounds or to extract yellowish blood.
The health of the bishop, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that affect the throat, and neck, and chest, and abdomen.
And it is necessary for the surgeon that he makes a clean cut and warms up the artery which lies nearby. And if it cuts the artery and bleeds out blood, then he must immediately stop it as I have said. And it should not be stabbed with the pointy part, but rather cut like in silk.
And if the bile does not open visibly, it is necessary to drain it and change a different one. Or you want no drop of it, or you heal the vein in the arm where it is visible; it appears. And cut it like silk with the pointy part, as we have said.
And if you know the opening of the bile duct, it is necessary to drain the arm where it is, until you feel the pulse. Then seal the opening again, and then bind the arm, and cut the vein like silk.
And be careful not to injure the artery when you see it swollen, because it is an artery; avoid doing so.
And if you see it protruding as the urine of a child is, and without being red or finely pointed, you know that it's not from an artery. Hurry up now, and place your finger down gently for a while, then remove it without pulling, as I have told you before.
Tie the arm back in place and leave it as is, and don't move his painful hairs, and be afraid for them, until they grow healthy again.
And if they are not healed, and it hurts you, and the treatment is still present, as long as the artery opens, for it will pull them out; and plucks them.
nose. Andromainstoc: an'lode: ous : ail fromage.grosse.cuntropin (10us ithermes :jac. Eater.entice demeans:sont. Ofere quellosincis,
if he does not hold a knife, it is well; but if he does, as we have said, apply powders that harden blood.
and knife handling is not hindered by any other conditions of the small wound on the arm.
The vein's suction in the midst helps to draw blood from above and below the shoulder. because it is composed of both the basilar and cephalic components, as we have said.
and it is for the surgeon that he warmth the nerve below, and if it points too far into the wound, and he twists the nerve. and it swells and its blood is obstructed, and perhaps it cannot be cured.
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any person due to its subtleness, then you must first sanitize the instrument on it; and try to release the nerve for yourself.
And if there is a vein between these two nerves, she makes them long.
The cephalic vein's suction helps to draw blood from above and aid the sides of it.
and it is for the surgeon to warm with either flail of an olive branch or a fumitory plant, because this is the safest among all veins, as it does not have any nerve or artery inside it.
Always, it is for you to ask the more liquid one, and do not complain if it needs to be done first time, and start again. and perhaps it swells in some people, so it might need the first time but does not cause complaints. The quality of the vein depends on your thought.
The first thing you need to know about a surgeon is that veins are not appreciated unless for the purpose of preserving health.
and in order to prevent future diseases; And let the injury be done in one of the three veins that are: namely, cephalic, femoral, and basilic; And it is required to perform the injection in the beginning of prayer for him, and in spring and after eating when signs of fullness appear;
And it is required to perform the injection either the first year or after three years;
The treatment which is applied has no fixed duration for diseases, but when the need arises in terms of year or month, it should be done at all times and in every ten years;
And it does not require performing such treatments on children just at twelve years old or women who are pregnant only for the last quarter month to seven months; It does not require performing such treatments on those who have passed sixty years;
And whenever any one wishes to perform it in any manner whatsoayer, it is required that he administers a gentle purging with an infusion; if there are many retained feces, so that the veins do not draw them into the intestines to prevent harming the principal members of the body;
And it does not require healing those who are too strong from meat, or drunkards, as long as they are so.
And he also required to be treated after colic pain and vomiting and bowel movement, and multiplied births in women, and working and sleeping and waking, and whether the weapon or part of the sword.
Then subtly remove the humours, if they are not too large, through foods and drinks and medicines, if you have a chance to do so.
And in the bath, if nothing obstructs, for subtly removing the blood.
And you shall stay in bed with a pillow under your head (The use of pillows during medieval recovery was common practice to provide comfort and support to patients resting after treatments.) and as we have said.
And you shall abstain from labor, work, pleasure, and suchlike matters (Medieval medical advice often included recommendations for patients to refrain from certain activities that could hinder recovery or exacerbate health issues.) on the tenth day following treatment.
And you shall apply wax and ointments (Wax was commonly used in medieval times to treat various skin ailments due to its adhesive properties.) and be the one who is higher than those whom we have mentioned as healing, and the band for the arm .ii. or .iii. times (Medieval medical practice often involved repeated dressing of wounds with bandages made from cloth and substances like ointments.) twice or thrice.
Then remove the staple above slowly (In medieval medicine, surgical procedures were sometimes done using rudimentary methods such as removing foreign objects like staples from wounds. Removing them carefully was crucial to avoid further injury.) for if it is too tight or slight, as he cannot move without correction;
And then apply the ointment to the hand (Medieval treatments for inflamed veins often involved applying warm compresses or ointments.) until the veins swell and smell.
Then moisten the dressing with a little oil (Medieval medical practices included using various substances such as oils to aid in healing and cleanlininas.) slightly from an oil jar (A small quantity of oil was applied), then place your left hand on top of that dressing near the wound so it may become moist. so that the vein does not bleed (The intention behind moistening a bandage with oil was partly to prevent the vein from leaking blood, which could be part of medieval wound management techniques.) For it has been said that wounds are like ropes in dressing (Comparing the process of dressing wounds to tying ropes is an analogy that may have been used in medieval times to describe the importance of properly securing bandages.) and such as these where there was little windiness. if when we place it near the wound (The positioning of dressings was essential in medieval medicine, as proper placement could affect healing outcomes.) that once placed, there is a withdrawal from the moisture, and cannot open the vein, and therefore they are considered to be among them.
and if it opens the vein (Opening a vein during medieval treatments was a delicate process that required skill and caution.) for he knows that such dressings should be advised in these matters.
And if the vein work is done for the first time, it is good; if not, then again a little near that place where there was puncture, provided the vein has not swelled up.
And if the vein is swollen and the maladies flare up, let it be one or two days without binding the arm at all. perhaps abscesses may arise in places where they were incised; do not enter water or baths until the cure pleases if it wishes to continue.
and if the hole is small, or it is subtly probed without you doubting that it may have as much blood coming out as you have seen, then be firmly fixed in that same hole carefully.
and the work is done quickly, so that the vein becomes swollen; because this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the vein swollen, do not renew the cure, and place a little onion juice there, for it lightens the blood flow in that same vein, and acts as an antidote to this.
and from now on apply the onion juice in each cure that you perform, so as to stop the flow of blood.
and this does three things at once, when it is put over the vein; if subtly applied without touching and withdrawn when it becomes too thick.
And if there are large abscesses that often occur when it has not been treated until the opening of the vein is small. if you hasten, and put on the vein a slightly wet sponge soaked in water and heat it for an hour.
and it is necessary to do this after the blood flow from the vein stops, and if it returns to the place of injury after any number of days or there is no yellowing or greening, you will not touch it. and if you see, put something of aloe gel or myrrh juice, ointment, or anything similar on it.
And many times occurs abscess and appearance in the healing of the cathedral: put your hand on it then if you increase the swelling at the pressure of the hand, that is an ill appearance. Then do not put anything of what we have said upon it, for perhaps in cutting without the artery; but make an incision small to harden the vein, then treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
And apply each spot according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood.
And if it is black, let it come out as red; and if you see the abscesses, then do not treat, oratrix thate, for li vein of the iacte de laissiez.
:en tate in Old French andrele laine ounces. Ache duet:esmece of theu, ito : Iapart fromslaidoule aesan'one deus (itse descisiage. Ouposene tolengraiesci.
And regarding those who are weak, do the opposite, and they should become stronger and sometimes, and they must be made stronger by cutting across rather than pulling.
And this method of healing is safe from bleeding and nerve damage, and it works better than long and wide procedures.
And to those who need blood-letting for healing, they must give them slightly warmed juice of grapefruit; if it is feverish, do it three or four times depending on the case.
And if they have a cold complexion, you must massage with warm grapefruit juice pain poultice before the blood-letting procedure; or use honey syrup with aromatic spices like pepper, cinnamayer, ginger, and cloves, and fragrant syrup.
And if the palm has the healing procedure, after removing some blood, it must inhale thyme tea and take a subtle fragrance syrup.
And they should also do the things we have mentioned in this chapter's section on syncope, for the evacuation of veins.
And if he wants to blow out his arms, and strengthen them again later on, when he is weakened greatly by persistent treatment, it must be done little at a time and gradually according to the amount of its continued benefit.
And who wants to blow out his arms after the first healing and has strong vitality, then it should recover for 2 or 3 hours after the first healing, or after two hours of time passing.
And who wants to strengthen another body part, then it should be done in one day or within a few days.
Because there is quite some blood within the already feverish heart; it must be drained in large quantities and widen the cavity so much that the heart fills with air. Then you should treat all healing conditions, and put your hand on the patient's chest when they recover so that their heart does not sink into an emphysema. And this often happens when the recovery is neglected.
And it does not matter if you gently remove the blood from the arm and drain the second time when the cavity is closed, and then apply firm pressure. And if he is weakened, do not extend his arm quickly, as it would be harmful.
But let it stay so long for the second time to recover; or you don't have the tip of the feather at all until the vein which has become congested bursts. And put on it one piece of rope soaked in water, and press lightly.
And if the vein is swollen, let it remain and not be squeezed, until the abscess has healed.
And if there is a need for the second time to drain blood from the wound, let it be drained in that vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
The blood vessel in his arm is sutured to the head of the vein because it is composed.
And the way of sewing is that he pours hot water on his hand enough to make the wound red;
then it should be tied moderately so that the vein remains well-established, and now let the second drainage needle go through, not too wide or long.
and if the puncture is wide, or if it is well-placed near the joint of the hand, but cannot be removed without causing injury, then warm up his hand again with hot water, and let the wound bleed until you have enough.
and if it is in its state, do not warm up his hand again with hot water, because you put more into the air than into the wound.
and the sewing of this vein is safer from all other veins because it has neither an artery nor a nerve associated with it.
The sewing of the wrist's right side is valuable for all types of diseases affecting the liver and it goes like this:
stretch your hand, and pour hot water on it as long as the vein stays open if you find it. and if the second drainage vein goes across everything else in its path, as long as you handle it well, there is nothing to worry about.
and do not go too deep in them, because the nerves throughout are all free of stones (implying they are unobstructed).
and then put the hand back in hot water if it is not frozen inside the wound, because you cannot remove it from there.
And when you have treated blood as expertly as is your wont, then place oil and linen to stitch it up together, and so perform this for each one of them.
The left hand's disease is related to mouse-like illness, and I make it the same as what I told you about the right hand.
The liver sickness pertains to all those diseases that affect the body's core. Like diseases of mice, and retention of flowers, and rain disease, and legs and old joints, and similar illnesses.
And the nature of this sickness is that the painful symptoms include burning in hot water, and rubbing on the vein until it dies. and above the joint of two patients; and the vein is in the ankle, and from it much rainwater flows.
This liver illness is not only about wide rain, or in the ankle where it moves.
And if you cleanse it from that vein, then order for us to have such nurses who are here, and treat the sickness as well as in cutting; and sometimes fevers arise.
And if the blood cannot come out of it, then put back the vein in water, and let the wound be well washed.
And if the sickerness requires the first time to be repeated, then start it again above a little bit because its flesh is salted. Ne doubt not the nerve; so as we have said, and therefore do it to the other side equally.
The shoulder's ligament of the vein is in the calf, and its pain corresponds to that of the cramping leg when it is hot with blood.
And the quality of his pain is that it appears or fades with bathing and pulling above the ankle; three times twisted, indicating a specific action for relief.
For otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it does open, it can be healed in every possible way that you deem fit, even by crossing. And it is worthwhile to try because the ligament is slackened, and it can be quite effectively restored at home with proper care.
And it is worthwhile to try because the ligament is slackened, and it can be quite effectively restored at home with proper care. And if you do not treat it, there will be no relief for the patient who experiences opening or pressure on his chest or small breath, and they should warn of nerves.
And apply such pressure to the wound that you can see it clearly, then loosen the ligament and place it on a cloth, and compress it tightly; now it is healed.
Venous fistulas (venous fistulas) are abnormal connections between veins and arteries or other veins that disrupt normal blood flow and may require medical intervention for treatment.
Venous fistulas are made of horns, or metal, or other materials; and their drainage is performed according to various techniques: either by incision and drawing out the blood clots, or by puncturing with a sharp instrument.
And this percutaneous technique that involves puncture is performed in one of the following ways: either it's done using heat (cauterization), or it involves the application of direct fire (burning).
And there are another two in two adjacent areas of the neck (jugular veins); and the venous fistula is located at or near the chin. And there is also a technique applied to the hands and wrists; and the ventricle on the knees. And there are also venous fistulas on both arms, and those of the legs. Quantum of the veintaine tote desuet itin, le temps sans ilkate : La-xavier tene buts esot. Leitnese eslaine ailocalorea les: "theorcortentainte loutil. Ites unicare, Theonace. Whatisarummary ander.
and for this reason no one can escape it, as we do with vein operations. and does not require that it be relieved with fire or heat, in no disease arising from overfullness, until all the blood is drained.
And if due to necessity of illness it requires evacuation, or by custom, we administer such treatment every hour at the beginning and end of the month, and in between.
because there are those who, when they need to evacuate, have a great burden on their shoulders.
and if there are such who experience overfullness and swelling in their body, and in their shoulders, and darkness around them.
and those who have a drop of blood entering their mouths, and have fled the tongue, and produce pus. and if there are some who think this way, and see blood coming from their bodies, wounds, and similar things.
And when we see these signs, immediately after the end of the month, we order to evacuate every three hours during that day.
The treatment of the muscle helps to relieve the burden on their shoulders ... that comes out around them, and does not require it after the complete draining of all the blood.
and this evacuation is part of the treatment for cephalic dislocation.
and does not require that those with cold constitutions or who have it do so, because it causes them much harm.
and for this reason they should not use the sleeping treatment, nor those with cold-related diseases.
And those who benefit from it often become indifferent, and for this reason they must place the suction cup slightly further down due to the risk of dislocation.
The evacuation around the neck is part of the treatment for the shoulders and the breastbone, and for this reason it also involves compression. and in an opening of the vein, and a puncture, and overfilling.
and only lightly press it, because if it is too tightly applied, it may cause dislocation of the joint or damage to the abdomen or heart.
The evacuations from two sides of the chest are worth the pains in the shoulders and eyesight, and earache, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the nerves.
and is part of the treatment for the breastbone; it requires that you command the patient to hold his hand when putting on the suction cup, so he does not clench an artery or excrete blood from a wound.
The evacuation of the mouth is worth for oral disease, and decay of gums, and similar illnesses in the mouth; it is part of the treatment for two lips.
The evacuation of the spine relates to diseases that arise from heat and overfilling.
The evacuations from these costs are as much as three bone fractures in both arms. because it draws blood from these large veins;
and instruct the surgeon that he should not cut too deeply, for his fingers are bare of flesh, and know inside bones and blood vessels.
The suction cup placed on the back is as destructive to its foundation and internal conditions, and it must be large and made of metal so that it can work properly; and if it were subtle, it would break, and it causes great wounds.
The suction cups used on the legs draw blood from all parts of the body, and are comparable to the old injuries caused by rain, hail, bladder issues, and ruptured flowers; and they weaken the thigh muscles, calf muscles, and everything else, which after prolonged use impair the patient's mobility in various conditions.
The way to use the suction cup is that you first empty it and apply it constantly, move it gently and keep moving it until you see its redness and swelling, and observe if there's a blood vessel underneath it; then remove it and take care in positioning the limb, as many have such fragile veins and arteries: it is necessary to injure at least once and create large wounds, and deep ones; and suction gently.
And if it is small, it may cause injury several times: the first time to more subtly penetrate a large vein.
And if it is very deep, it must cause injury the third time; and when we try to drain a little bit of blood or fluid repeatedly, we might only need to do it once.
And if we try to draw out much blood, we often have complications; and if it is very deep, we must cut too deeply, and the end result is that they are clearly perceived afterwards.
and must protect the person with thick skin and who are susceptible to external factors; you should oil the suction cup surfaces with an appetizer and dissolving agent. if it is in existence, a purple oil, or almond oil, or seed of Cucurbitaceous oil.
naturelx:sufre le veint.cetergall, tostracturec : Thisingrai:les eti. Injac. The same.
And if there is an excess of moisture and coldness, take a strong oil, or balm, or oil of aloe, and similar things.
And if those who are healthy have tender skin and wide pores, they do not need to apply oil.
But it is necessary to wash after the aspersion of warm water, or cold water, or water of honeysuckle, or pokeweed, or china clay water, or something similar.
And those who have much moisture should raise it with ash or warm water of myrtle and sumach, and similar things.
And those who have large excesses should raise them with strong wine or cold water, or infusion of aloe or chamomile, or something similar.
And it is not better to use the suction before or during bathing or immersion, but after one hour or more; and does not sleep afterwards from aspersion.
And it is necessary to warn him when he must be aspirated and when he is congested. And it is necessary to warn those who get angry easily, and who are too hot or inflamed; And it is necessary that they receive cold things, like green apples and chicory leaves and lettuce in ashes, and similar things.
And milk washes, and chewed cud (mast from a cow), and soft meats.
And those with cold complexions should receive honey syrup and aromatic wine (which is between sweet and light), and milk washes and chew cud and small birds' eggs and feathers.
And the time when he must be aspirated, he should drink more than eat.
And it is necessary not to give any vapors or mushrooms before or after aspiration, to support the main members. And it is subtle enough that he does not drink hot beverages; but those who are burned should not have them.
ould z’soungles itso:
And he does so that blood is drawn from one limb to another, As we do on the bellies when he begins to feel better; in order to reduce the viscosity within the limb, as we do with hot suction cups on his stomach and abdomen to lessen the swelling.
And he experiences pain when there is an operation or incision, because by its attractive power it may accidentally draw the operation to itself, or dry up the incision from its flow.
And then she does so when he has retained viscosity in his liver and belly,
And these suction cups are used as empty vessels to absorb so much only; and sometimes they are used together fire, and at other times water droplets.
As in diseases of excessive sweating, and such is the way that the suction cup fills with hot water or with boiled decoctions from things capable of cure for this.
The form of the suction cup applied by fire is like this:
And it should be two hands and a half palm wide, with an indentation at the center like for inserting a small needle, as if to insert a needle.
And it is also of silver, shaped so that when placed on the limb, it does not break the malady at the time of being applied to the member.
And it has in its center a straw or iron rod to insert a catgut thread into.
And they are both large and small, depending on the diseases and the conditions of those who suffer from them.
For the suction cups of children are different from those used on adults, and those used on thin individuals differ from those used on obese people.
And at this point, this suction cup should be placed upon the member:
Take the catgut or a liniment and place it inside the suction cup along the rod that is in the center of the suction cup: So that the light does not burn the malady, which is what it should do:
scaisse dexin: Iesuccil : le corps.
And take up again the thread as before, and renew it often if you have experience.
And the suction device used for malady of pleurisy, at all ages, has no vein nor cavity, and is only applied when it is clear from fluid accumulation, and is placed on the limb as briefly.
And it is its form:
Suction devices are only applied to places where one cannot place a sucker for their small size, like lips and gums, as well as similar areas. and in places stripped from hair like on our head or elsewhere, as well as similar areas;
And the quality of using it is that when you move suction devices in areas with thin wet secretions, as we do for example;
and they place it in mild fluid, as long as they are full, and have nothing inside them; And then you know if the vein and suction device are clean, wipe the limb as long as it is red, and place on the suction areas.
And when they become clear and warm up (which implies no more fluid accumulation), if it is possible to place a suction device there, then you must put it because this serves a purpose afterwards;
If it is not the case, lift up the vein's edge and then apply pressure (as in extracting fluid), quite well, and then squeeze out.
And if the suction areas are too warm after taking out the fluids from there, cover him with a cool towel made of linen and place it on them until they become cold;
And if there are multiple suction areas, place them under crushed glass or gauze and bandages, as well as similar things, until they become cold.
or place many small pieces of flint on the skin and let them remain on the vein's edge as long as they are in position.
And if you have more knowledge about it, take other herbs.
And if the herbs are not effective, rub the wound with fresh blood, or you pierce it until there is no more. And then you put them on, and immediately as they feel the blood, it starts to clot.
And when you see that they bleed again, powder a little with aloe and silk cloth or ashes, so they will no longer bleed.
This begins the Book of Dislocations
Many of these chapters are necessary for the art of medicine, and include treatment of dislocation and fractures (brisure).
Know this, learn it well, so that the doctor will not go without consulting this chapter, as he has never seen any of these ancient books or letters.
And for this reason is considered an extraordinary achievement in our land, as I found no better anywhere.
And I know nothing about it because I have studied the ancient books so much that I am familiar with their knowledge, and also through experiments and by the customs of my life.
And I have described what is contained in this chapter to you, and it has been summarized at the end, and I have clearly shown the forms of injuries that are expected, just as I did in these preceding chapters.
Therefore, we declare the introduction and contents of this book as well as its commentaries are meant to be understood by those who have practiced it; let them read with thoughtfulness, so that they may learn this noble art and teach it to others.
I say that when any dislocation or fracture comes to nothing, it is understood that you must examine both sides of the malady thoroughly; if there are no signs at all on either side, whether slight as in a weak heart, childishness, or old age.
There is noxentures duerre preserves and ites ould sanz lesmesaigne esprit inforestres lege ei'th ites devisa king:le thekes ofere illetraising. Thisuke laike laisse. Icelength,soulaidre ofenage frommeasuretracteile.
And when the bone is broken to start healing, it must be rubbed with fats that make a loud grinding noise, or have viscosity like cooked wheat in water, and risins, and testes, and piés, and pancés of various kinds, and oifs, and fresh fish, and wine, and similar things. The noise made by the grinding becomes more intense and quicker the bone breakage.
And you should know that the broken bones of great age and decay cannot be easily repaited or joined according to their nature due to the deterioration of limbs, nor those that are too soft like the bones of small children.
but not repair it thereupemer; large tendons that strengthen and join the limb together until they return to their former state, and for this reason he must rub with great fatty meats as we have said before.
And you should know that bone breaks occur in various ways.
For the main type of break is different from that of a fracture, or in this chapter, I will tell you all types of breaks. For it has a break that goes along its length, and others in thinning out, like the tip of a pen for writing.
For it has a break that goes along its length, and others in thinning out, like the tip of a pen for writing. And if there is a break with an opening, and a break that has a small crack.
And each type has its specific treatment, and its instrument for restoration, according to what the memory brings in his mind.
and is known the bone break by what it twists, and opens well with pressure applied to its side.
and when there is no twistiness nor pain on pressing it, then he has not suffered any bone break.
but it can still have twistiness, or crack, or small break. If it does not require that you move the bones to hand, but rather apply certain remedies that come after them, and then hold them gently now.
And you should know the breaks that go along its length and are the two parts joined, he must now bring them back to their original position as well.
And if arrows enter wounds, they come quickly, so it leaves no day until those wounds are calmed down. Then he puts the joint back so you can move it lightly and slowly, and you know that his restoration is easier than theirs, who have fragments left; then binds him as it requires afterwards.
And if there are fragments in the bone of .ij., if it's part of the hand or foot, or one small limb, or to .ij. tendons, or to a string and to your hand;
and set the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of both members are displaced, you reposition them all by your methods that you can do easily, and make sure not in your work does it worsen the injury or pain.
and aligns well the .ij. joint fragments according to their best forms.
And he feels well in his hand if it seems to you that he is not well: if he moves gently, and does not strain him too much, or press as they do with their approach incision, which we have seen many times before.
And when the limb is at risk, he takes good care that his malady does not move him, whether awake or asleep, turning back, in any other way. And make sure that the limb is so secured that he feels no pain. For when he feels no pain at all, and it is not yet possible, and it requires setting up so that he does not feel any pain.
For when he feels no pain at all, and it is not yet possible, and it requires setting up so that he does not feel any pain. saince itis Frenchknota. ous. Aelong :cith thele. Howlustreat. Itunes. Andalus. Thebald sofface. I. 2nd century, as tolere. Whatsofyield: Thejacetjarsin.
sescribe de l'aright:nacupre, andecribeaseveille;fyse (2undeat, itafei.
Se haches qui les membres brisent, de petiteur et d’augment, et de figure.
For it has small limbs like brass and copper, similar to these: it contains a thin, soft linen wrap.
And those who are large, like copper and leg: it contains an oversized linen wrap that encompasses the entire great limb, stretching evenly along its length without any weakness.
Then the band is wrapped around jointed limbs, 3 or 4 turns depending on the limb, and a hand holds it all along the wrap, then raised above the fracture and lessened until the fracture moves slightly away.
And then soften the wrap a little bit at a time so that you ensure a large part of the healthy bone is above the fracture, and repeat with another wrap, turning it back in alignment with the broken bone.
Then return to the area above the fracture and gently lessen it, not too much nor too little, as we have said in the first line above.
Then place the joint wraps of linen or gauze evenly all around it, then bind with one bandage and then put your splints well if there is no abscess or inflammation.
And if it has an abscess or infection, put something soothing on the abscess and bone that relieves it, and let it heal for a long time.
Then stretch the splints and make them of a piece or rope about one meter long, from wood used to make shafts, or strips of palm, according to this shape.
But it is required that the splint placed over the fracture be a bit larger and wider than the others.
And also long enough as it requires for the small or large limb.
Then stretch the splints again as you did in the first wrapping, then wrap over it with fine linen, like in the first wrapping above the fracture.
The more tightened up, then loosened again; and it is required that the linen be soft.
Because if the linen is thick, like those of men who make their bindings with twisted hemp ropes, and it is great error, because the binding cannot be equal between two limbs if there is less than a double distance in space.
And if the painful joints are pressed by the splints after they have been removed from their healthy bones, then place there linen wraps or pieces of cloth so that it does not break.
When the wound is with the fracture and torn, I will tell you about the treatment afterward.
And you know that it does not require pulling out all the limbs broken on the first day. And since the limbs are large, it does not require putting in pins until after about 2 to 3 years or more, depending on your experience as a surgeon.
And here is the ancient method for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: take flour that holds against the walls of the mill, mix it with a lot of water, making it neither too thick nor too thin, use this concoction, as it is the common method of resetting fractures in various positions, especially for women and children, because it is not too hot or cold.
Another method for restoring fractures and dislocations involves taking barberry leaves, almonds, elm tree bark, mugwort (about 10 units), myrrh (5 units), holy basil (7 units), and making powder; mix it with honey and flour. If the patient's constitution is warm, use this emplaster, as it has good composition and restores broken bones quickly, benefiting many people.
Another method for treating torsion involves taking mugwort (about 10 units), wild lettuce (17 units), myrrh (7 units), and Armenian clubmoss (5 units). Grind it well, mix it with water or a lot of honey, and apply.
Another method for treating joints and displaced bones involves taking new linen, grinding it in oil that has been cooked, and applying it to the affected area. This emplaster does not restore bone fractures or dislocations, but it is good for alleviating pain from a hot swelling and treating osteopathic issues directly.
Another method for restoring broken bones involves taking dry fig leaves and dried turkey oak leaves, grinding them together, and making the emplaster.
Another method for restoring bone fractures and easing the residual swelling from the aposteme involves taking wormwood root, chamomile flowers, violet flower, flour in equal parts, grinding them together, mixing with wine, and applying to the affected limb which is swollen. Alternatively, mix it with moist coriander water or just water, and use it.
Another method for restoring the second-degree fracture of a limb after aposteme involves taking wormwood roots, flax seeds, lamb's ears, lemon balm, violet flowers and chamomile, mixing them together in equal parts, grinding it, and applying either saltwater or mild water, or wine as appropriate for the temperature of the limb and its resting time.
Apothecary's book says that to restore a broken limb, it needs not be made of wax and oil, with nothing else; but if it is very soft or hard.
Siens. Leu:sans maladie, il mele defface parler lesemeanme deus of chiefsance aillement. Amende cestemal. Here lakes theit of it'soumsaince lacon asse.dolevevelves tolentit andre.
iure a choses, comme lesse.
re: the çoignes thatchief.gavreuxsecexcelabithe a depilexteurs
And if pain comes to the joint, or itching, rest, swelling, if you hurry up, and loosen it now; and take linen lightly, and wet with sea water, and submerge it in water, and lift it up until the itch subsides, and soothe the pain. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put it on dry linen, moistened with rose oil or oil, and bind it securely until you are sure that there is no pressure at the incision.
And rest the inflammation in both limbs, and ease the pain, then resume gentle bandaging, and apply a little pressure, but do not strain it as much as before; and continue this carefully until they are healed.
And if you notice that the incision and the suture and pain and swelling are worsening in both limbs, and you have experience with bandaging and linen, then resume these as before when it was first done.
And if there is no such thing as what we have said about the limb, do not loosen it until after three or four years or five or six, depending on how much it breaks and moves towards re-alignment above the joint.
And since the restraint is more than before, and the muscles are engorged as I said earlier; and if you see that the joint has not healed properly to the standard level, it indicates that no further dislocations can occur. Rise the decoctions of hot water every time you loosen it and do so for each day of the week, and dampen slightly the bandage.
Through this practice of treating dislocations in the member by applying hot water decoctions and observing carefully what the learned monks do to restore such twisted members, which is evil, and if there are fearful practices, then I see nothing else but a lazy person and careful handling of the limb.
Of various methods of fracture treatment. Many methods of fracture healing are mentioned herein, and various forms of treatment, and the causes are identified.
For there are fractures made by the striking of a sword, and the bone breaks all along that which is inside the bone itself, just as it was struck hard or weakly; therefore this manner of fracture is called "haichure".
The sword pierces the bone beyond feeling, and this manner of fracture is called "absolute"; and the wounds from these two types of breaks are large or small.
And if it has been pierced by a thrusting blow, or cut, or wound in the bone, or fall upon the bone, or other similar things.
And if there is a persistent break near the table that is inside the bone, or it is on top of the bone, and whether this wound is large or small.
And if the wound is repaired in the bone as subtly as some bruises, and it has small breaks, therefore this manner of break is called "capillary".
and if the wound is made by piercing with iron, or falling, or something similar, and it pushes the piece of bone into the cavity below, and its location resembles that of a chisel when they hammer on fireplaces; between them.
And this happens more to those whose underneayer has or had moist bone, like in children;
and happens with these types of breaks where small pieces are displaced as they were; and I will speak about it in detail.
And we know all types of breaks caused by detachment from them, and the inquiry into tent flaps, and those that are corrupted underneath.
The "capillary" type is known by the fact that when we discovered the bone and rubbed it underneath, if there was an open black break.
In the treatment of the break, beware of possible complications in the patient; if you see no harmful accident, as vomiting of blood, loss of consciousness, extension, swelling, palpitations, and the edges being forced out and reddening, and other signs in various conditions, there may not be a way to resolve doubts.
And if you see an unobtrusive accident and hope for recovery, then the treatment begins.
And when the wound comes first to you, and it is winter, then it must cover the bone for four months before you can do anything about it.
And if it's in summer, you must remove the bone before the seventh month so that the piece of bone underneocorrupted and the accidents we have mentioned come.
And if the bone break occurs underneocovering the skull, it must be that you cut the injured part in this way: and you discover all possible ways of the fracture on the bone deeper than you can.
ouns lesmeeting theu. sesse tisser laissi: entorrays ce deitgrefie.
sion.
And the second way is that you have many different instruments, some sharp and others wide, with point or iron endings; and in work swiftly, so as not to bleed the head.
And if the bone is hard and tough, it must be pierced through inside so that you attend to instruments with care, not allowing them to penetrate beyond the bone's flesh layer, and above the point there should be a margin or circle, which does not allow the point to go beyond the bone; and this is required for several reasons. And it is the form of three types of instruments:
The quality of piercing the bone depends that you apply one instrument on it, and turn to both sides until you know that the bone is pierced; then remove the cautery in another place a little after, and so perform all around, then with your scalpels, take the space between the perforations made in the bone, and do this more subtly than we have said, swiftly as we mentioned earlier, until you bring the bone to your hand or any of your instruments that you may have, such as pincers or tongs; and be careful not to touch the brain or spinal cord.
And when you have pierced the bone and worked it, it is required that you set aside the instrument which has been used on the bone for other instruments similar to an incisor but must be more pliant and subtler than the usual incisors. This statement suggests a protocol following successful penetration of the bone with specific tools: subsequent steps involve removing or repurposing the initial cautery instrument, ensuring that it is not replaced by a similarly shaped tool such as an incisor but rather one designed to be more flexible and less invasive than conventional surgical instruments. This would imply the need for specialized equipment tailored to handle sensitive post-procedure care without inflicting further trauma on the treated bone area.
and if there is no delay in the treatment of small bones or any scrapers, then treat it swiftly with one of your tools similar to a scraper; then care for the wound by applying dressings and remedies that we have mentioned earlier. The text advises on an expedited approach to minor osseous (bone) injuries, recommending quick application using appropriate scrapers or other comparable instruments from a medical arsenal. Following this intervention, it prescribes the administration of wound dressings and treatments previously discussed in the document, signifying that there is an established protocol for managing bone traumas with both mechanical action (using tools) and therapeutic care (dressing and ointments).
And the other method of work that is also attributed to Galen, who was very strong in it and it's his saying. This portion refers to an alternative approach described by or associated with Galen, a notable figure in ancient medicine known for his extensive writings on medical practices. Although the text does not elaborate on this particular technique, its mention suggests that Galen’s endorsement adds authority and credibility to the method being discussed, indicating it was well-regarded during the period and possibly influential within the practice of medieval medicine. And it is required that you remove a part of the bone where the break is opened and if when you have found such portion; then place on top of this incisional instrument which has an elliptical form, as much. This fragmented passage outlines a procedure for treating fractures in medieval medical text:
sight iape. Ilve: Andrompour itaure asteries
If it is separated from the bone, let the bone move strongly, for the bone well knows that this causes harm and fear.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate the cloth, and the bone is crushed so much above, and it has small pieces, then cover that roughness again, and remove the scales with a delicate knife; you must have various quantities for each joint, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
When confronted with numerous fine scrapers (razors), and after using those of finer make, continue this practice as long as it is beneficial for the patient's condition.
In each other's detailed haircutting and delicate fractures, it is essential to provide care according to its particular needs; and this is something not found in those who have dedicated their study to such craftsmanship.
If it be a dislocation (dislocation), and if thou shouldst make the hair long and loose to heal, and it is nota : 'sautes. Then take another thin cloth doubled in two or three layers, and moisten it with wine and oil rose, and place it on top of the first layer; do this more lightly than you can bear, so as not to strain your sinew too much, then gently press down with one other ligament, but not too hard until only the wound bleeds slightly.
And leave it for one or two days, until the abscesses are soothed, then remove it, and apply various remedies as rosemary roots, and flour of wheat, and powder of incense, and aristologist, and similar things; make a poudre from these things and place it on the wound, and apply the medicines again with sensation-inducing properties.
And ensure that the wound is afterwards cleaned, so that you do not leave any oil or dirt, nor let it come together with gravel, because when gravel sticks to the brain's surface, they cut and tear, and cause great harm to the patient; for when something sharp is placed on the sinew, it may pierce through.
Take care so that if any unfortunate event befalls the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful sense of doubt.
And if no fire arises from the medicine that has been placed on it, it must be that one part of honey is applied, and two parts of rose oil and linen cloth are used, then place them on the sinew. And then the methods of healing it must provide until it is healthy again.
And know that there have been instances where the joints above are fractured one by one or simultaneously because they are bones; and those in this area are cartilaginous and do not break easily when subjected to force or twisting, so they remain healthy.
And if one of the joints is fractured, it must be that you apply a small force or puncture on the injured joint and place it in your diagnostic index, and then in the pouch for as long as the joint regains its natural form. And do it lightly, and ensure that the patient does not suffer pain from your work.
Avoir iungle de cest ance qu’il est iau bonne eigne duche sauf lais tostern: Etre l’espace alliance, et il'sance enge aleu lefyat aout. I'saint kunde : "liefsouffre ilethomme toiadresse deiface deaf. Thewomande.i (vrai unkissue:respective.
And if the fracture is of two parts, repair it again, and hurry to restore the first year, if you can do so.
If not then, after the seventh or the eighth time when the abscess cavities are calm, at that point put to the head a woolen cloth from two threads, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you put another cloth on the other part if there is a fracture; and let the nets be large enough to fill in the abscess cavities.
And they said that restorers must stretch the woolen nets every day; it seems to me not very good, but it must be made of wool and powdered flour and molasses; then leave the net until the bone hardens and the cartilages become firm.
And never put feathers of goose on the woolen nets in the place of a cloth, and if there is a soft drape upon it, and the fracture holds, blow gently into the painful areas; then make the sign that you will show to me.
And if abscess cavities come to the bone like you work, then place charcoal or moistened cotton in a rose oil, or in some amount of diatomaceous earth.
And if abscess cavities do not come to the bone, then pack it with farina (barley flour), powdered frankincense and sweetened treats mixed with woolen fabric, and place hot irons on it without binding the bone.
And if the bone fragments in the abscess cavities are small and broken into pieces, then bind them together with suitable threads, then close the fissure, and treat it with various charms and salves similar to those used for binding and ointments.
And if there are no wounds in the abscess cavities, then treat with woolen nets and place grains of wheat on it as long as it heals.
regarding the treatment of the jawbone (mandible)
When the jawbone is in motion and it does not have any wounds to heal, then the fracture remains so long without being broken into two parts because of hooks inside, if one knows how to move it gently.
It is required that if the fracture is in the right part of the jawbone, you put your thumb in your mouth on the painful area; and if the fracture is in the left mandible, then put your right hand's index finger inside, and move the fracture gently there, and with the other hand make it equal, and apply pressure for a long time.
And if the jawbone fracture is displaced in two parts, it is required that you apply a gentle extension of one part, so long as it becomes even again.
And if movements of the teeth occur or dislocation, or strain from an iron filament of gold or silver or silk cloth; and put on the fractured jawbone cotton covered woolen cloth, and make it long according to the mandible, and place it in such a way that you can move it, and command to the patient to rest.
ille a lice:sejurine.
And when arrows come to the wound, do as we have said many times.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, take the smallest bone that contains an os; so subtle of its edges are they that it can hardly be seen by touch.
And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with flame according to your necessity.
And when you have all these bone pieces, and it takes no time at all, if the wound is wide, then place upon it such tiny metal supports that can be felt by touch, so as to strengthen it until it heals completely.
from the lancet The lancet breaks several times before the shoulder, towards the scapula, and the fracture is according to three manners: it is broken and displaced in two places, there are pieces, and it is easier to restore; or it has a fracture with wound.
And the operation is when the fracture has wound, you must have two attendants, so that one holds the sling which feels the lancet breaks; and others extend his collar towards the affected part; then put equal force on the break, so it forms as it ought to, and has no appearance or deformity.
And if you have the need to extend, place on the patient's shoulder an olive branch of cloth or linen, according to your necessity; and hold and treat gently with the lancet, and restrain the branch in your hand so that it puts equal force on the break as it should.
And if you cannot pull the head of the lancet out because it comes off by itself, then the patient must lie on his bedding near his hatred spot, and place over his shoulder one hour old sling; and bind around the shoulder two attendants so that the os of the lancet remains up.
And then place the break on your shoulders, and if you feel that it is difficult to join, so covention must be that you cut; and take off the pieces lightly, and if the os cannot be joined by any means of support, but with one of the incisors from this lancet, but place upon them this instrument for its purpose:
And seems like a spoon, and is not even curved, and it should also be wide as the bone suggests, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the flesh; and there are two shoulders, one large and the other slim, just as the shape of the wound you have made when treating the bones.
And when you are sure of the incision, if the wound is large, then cut the incision; and if you doubt the incision, if it involves layers and cushioning according to its quantity.
And when incisions occur, if there is one layer of fat with oil and flaxseed and wine placed on it.
The breaking of the bone, when it feels pain and sensation during cutting and shaping, is that you put powdered mill and alum dust on the bone and place loose layers on it, and then place a spindle between the layers if you have experience. Then take a very large band of one palm wide, then place double layers and the powder on it; then take a thin strip of two dozens by long length and wrap around that band, making sure that the head of the band stays in place. And put the strip above the fracture, and turn the band around the neck of the bone, and under both the healthy and deformed areas; and rationally reinforce each part, and when you see that the strip holds the fracture firmly in place, clearly indicating that the strip does not slip off the bone with every movement, and whenever the band loosens, tighten it.
And make the patient lie on his backside, and let him have a small support placed underneath the band to lift the shoulder restoration high up; by adjusting the angle of the scapula it can alleviate the force on the fracture or you may tie the arm to the collarbone, and avoid any worsening conditions for about 20 years.
Then resume the treatment if you think it is necessary, and leave the support and tightness in place as long as the restoration has been restored; this restoration can take up to 27 years for most people.
of the fracture of the scapula
The scapula fracture or large bone should not move, and the support does not interfeet that it is in any place of the scapula, according to the shape of the fracture; if you arnold the armor, and slimens letres as you fitures a laissez l'aidre.
lees incex: lesmeans esse, le mea cestilegustres of thecaire israke passtitures. Meusekils:mesure aster, andere, en loure :en;eternoculexent.tate ici,le.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder
The shoulder is sometimes dislocated by force, but it happens infrequently; however, it often breaks on impact. And when it is dislocated within the socket, there is great pain, and lack of alignment, and vomiting blood, and opening in the broken bones inside the fractured bone, and a well-known feeling throughout.
And the restoration involves holding it together with two strong supports under the shoulders, and pressing the shoulders together, then bringing up the costal ridges to their hands, subtly adjusting all movements until the bone figure is as it should be; then placing straws or salt over the surface above the sliver, or some other lighter substance, wrapping in a sheet, and placing the sliver under the broken bone so that it does not move; and turning the reddish back to its original position, and strapping it again for comfort, monitoring every hour of freedom, and if it relaxes, then tighten; and if it needs dislocation, due to corrosion or pruritus, or pain, or abscess, come immediately, and release the straws, and direct him who has mastered these curing techniques; then remove the straws, and loosen until it is sound.
Of the dislocation of the ribs
And the dislocation of the ribs does not come from their great size after the back, and in the middle part, and they do not collapse due to being so brittle; rather there is well-known feeling throughout on examination of the two ends.
And in the treatment of the dislocation, it is made equal to the dislocation itself; and then an intercostal strap, if you have the expertise.
And if the fracture of the ribs is inclining towards each other, then it causes him great pain, and also as with pleurisy, because the bone pierces the skin; and he pines, and vomits blood and a large amount of sanguineous matter, and this is a grievous illness, and they have put much effort on it.
And if some say that he must administer foods that swell the belly, in order to push the fracture back into place.
We do not do such things; only when the stones are there, they come. And if they come, it is healthy.
And they say no one puts pressure with cups on the bone, to suction it out, and it seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the suction cup does not attract excess fluids to the bone due to its weak positioning.
And they say that no one should cover the fractured bone with a moistened linen soaked in hot oil, and put tenting between the ribs to keep it straight, then either treat with treatment for pus (pleurisy), meat, and medicine.
And if the malady sends him great pain that he cannot bear with the bone which pierces the skin; and doubt is in the malady whether it needs to fracture above his broken ribs, and they must use a certain instrument to guard its facet; and therefore one must cut into the bone, and drain it slowly, and then suture the two sides of the wound if it is large, and cure him with poultices, so long as he is sound. And when stones come out, they put moistened linen over them in oil roses and on top of the bone; and while treating the bone for breaking, they place the patient either lying on the broken ribs or else, so long as he is healthy.
about the fracture in the column (of a bone)
never hasteen ever come to the spine, and so it bends. naturrete.
And if such a thing happens to the spine of the backbone, and you know whether it is healthy or not, if the vertebrae are softened, and if there are accidents in his hands, and above his back arching ventosity and evacuation by desire; and when he has been seen on his belly, if evacuation occurs by will. And when it becomes inflamed on its back and wants to move, then it cannot. You know that it is deadly: it does not labor in treatment.
And if this accident does not affect him, then it is lighter in nature.
And the treatment is that you apply hot compresses if it has an abscess, placing either rosemary or lamb's wool oil on its spine, as long as it remains calmed; then place him on a comfortable and soft bedding, bind him with a bandage, commanding the patient to rest there. And he should not sleep in that part where he feels pain until he is healthy again. And if any bone detaches, it must be covered with linen; then set the bone back into its place, and if the wound is large, stitch it up with a cloth, then treat the wound with warm oil until it heals; and when your fingers touch those "kowe" joints, which are called "joint of the knee", you must hold your pouch in your left hand, place your other hand by your side for balance, then set the splint and pillow on top, if you have the skill to do so. Then immobilize it, and when a detached bone is found, treat it with oil and care for the wound until it heals.
of the detachment of the hip bone
It rarely happens that the hip bone is detached, and if it does occur, it's a slight diminution at the top; then make an incision long enough, and direct it to the posterior angle, and comes to the patient with pain on the left side, and swelling where it is broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand over the fracture as long as it remains open; and know what type of breakage and his figure; and if the fracture is slight at its top, then place it thereafter, so that the natural form.
16teenth siècle parle'snez:rof the English translation. And Iourneath. Ameasumine la merveille. French. :en lesurementen, theleastrex. A French it'olden leaved. Caut:rstentire, ateintresaros : And when you have made it even, place it on the anvil, then put it on a beam or pillar of wood or iron, and restrain the breakage so that it does not move; and fix the joint between the shoulders, until the pieces are level.
And command the patient that he sleeps on his healthy side or backside.
And if the abscess comes upon his foot, do not touch it, until the abscess is calmed down, and place him on what we have mentioned before; then proceed to restoration, and hold it as it must be done, provided that he has no other accident. This is the way.
from the dislocation of the shoulder joint
The shoulder joint is that which lies between the collarbone and the top of the shoulder; if it is dislocated, one must restore it according to one of the two methods: firstly, you take a piece of wood or metal with considerable moisture, as we have shown here:
And place the two joints on his shoulders, and lift them up, look at the patient's dislocation from a chair; then break the dislocated arm against wood, so that it returns to its position gradually, with one blow of wood or any other heavy object that extends along it according to the instructions given here; then fix the dislocation on his shoulders together with all four limbs until the dislocation is returned as it must be.
And the other method is to suppose that the patient lies on his haunches, place one hand under the dislocation at his hands, and command two ministers to strike such as are at the dislocation of their limbs, and extend each along its respective part.
And if the extraction is further along, restrain such a limb under the dislocation, and on the dislocation itself, extend each minister to his respective part; and if the dislocation is towards the top of the shoulder, then it must be placed between the shoulders with an inferior limb below the dislocation, and another above the dislocation; and as the dislocation is directed towards the collarbone, then you must place such a limb lightly, until the dislocation returns to its position under the joints, and restrain, provided that the abscess does not come up again on his foot.
And if the abscess comes upon his foot, do not restrain it for nine years, and make a soft bed of hay and straw under the dislocation; then restrain, and hold in this manner: take an anvil on the dislocation, and put your arm under the shoulder or breast. Put a sheet over him, provided that nothing prevents from hurting him, so that his bones do not move.
sesurfe,later andre,sac. What: Thek as it's century.
And if you see the position of the stones, and the constriction, as we have said, when restoring the broken part to its place, doubt whether the incision should be made, then let it stay tied for seven days, as we have said; then observe every three years the tie, that no swelling increases at the joint, or the dislocations come near to the limb because it is too tight. If necessary, so as we have said.
And if no such accident happens within two years or more, and the pain is on his back and in his stomach; and put an equal amount of linen cloth under the support, and observe every hour for one day whether the broken part does not move or become soft, if the restoration through the power of medicine makes it happen as we have mentioned before, that the meat be first subtly processed; and when he begins to recover, if it is large. And it is customary that the support and the leg should be reintroduced in 40 days total; and then let him remove the bandage and administer warm baths and ointments for strengthening the affected area. And if the tightness is severe and swelling, delay removing the bandage for one or two months.
In cases of a broken arm (arm fracture), it is crucial to promptly immobilize the injured limb in order to prevent further damage and facilitate healing. The historical context provided by the Old French medical treatise emphasizes techniques like cauterization, incision, and support with bandages that aligns with medieval medical practices. Modern medicine offers more precise interventions such as casting or surgical fixation but the underlying principles of immobilizing a fracture have remained consistent over time.
The arm consists of two bones called the "fusil" (broadly speaking), where one is small and serves as the handle, while the other is large and forms the part near the little finger. Occasionaminally, either the larger or smaller "fusil" can break alone, sometimes even both together in an unfortunate event. This description highlights a rudimentary understanding of hand bone structure from historical medical texts, providing insight into early observations of musculoskeletal injuries.
When the smaller "fusil" (broadly speaking) is fractured, the recovery process is typically swift and less severe; however, when the larger "fusil" is fractured, it usually indicates a more complicated situation with greater complications compared to when either or both are broken alone. If only the smaller bone breaks, slight extension of movement and application of uniform pressure may be recommended as part of the treatment plan. This commentary from medieval medical literature underscores the relative complexity involved in healing different types of fractures, illustrating a rudimentary approach to categorizing injury severity based on which specific bones are affected.
If the larger "fusil" (broadly speaking) is fractured, it necessitates stronger manipulation; and extend under one support, elevating the handle of the hand higher than the others, placing the smaller bone lower than the others, and cross-binding it over itself to prevent movement. Then extend the ministers of the arm towards the injured part above its wrist or a different joint as needed. And then apply a bandage evenly according to its best shape. This passage from medieval medical literature outlines an early therapeutic procedure for treating larger bone fractures in the hand, emphasizing immobilization and manual support mechanisms designed to minimize labor (pain) during recovery. It reflects historical practices of managing orthopedic injuries with available materials and techniques without the advanced tools or methods used today.
Injuries demeantre: “fors ceux jancne la curete desuet a .iijor ixin aulx sallans vair. Etrois leu deffixen augeanxane. Tractsangstretir fief gustoldaxine of thegutjacme tolere:
And if with cutting the wound, I have spoken to the individual master; take care of it.
And if in the initial repair of an abscess opening it softens, place therein a cloth made of rose oil and beeswax, not too hard nor too soft; and let the cloth gently cover the abscess until it is soothed. Then apply osteolite to the powder with abundance of flour, put on the plasters, making them wider than others and knowing that they should have at least two or more positions: whether the fracture is in one bone, or in both; pressing closer to the abscess rather than elsewhere, not increasing it year after year as I said initially to the individual master; and make sure the cloths covering the abscess are neither too hard nor too soft, and shape the thread used for suturing, linen neither too thick nor too thin, as we have mentioned. And reward the limb and its ligament periodically. And if any misfortune befalls the limb, as itching that occurs in a member; it must be warmed with warm water, so long until those itches are calmed down; then let the limb not be narrowly confined but rest peacefully. Then resume the straining, and if the ligament is slackened and the bone displaced, as things may occur, address them accordingly.
And if the patient cannot bear weight on a limb, because it is too stiff, it must be slightly softened; and allow for some time until such straining can occur again, as previously mentioned to the individual master; and then resume the straining.
And if any of these things we have mentioned do not occur to the patient, let it last up to twenty years or less; then bind his hands at his neck, and make his shoulders equal in size, and restrain him from movement and keep him lying on his back; and know that this fracture is restored within three decades or more, and sometimes even within two decades, depending on the combinations of virtues and individual constitutions.
concerning the fracture of the hand
And know that the back of the hand is prone to fractures and it rarely happens but frequently shows signs of sprains.
And when the plantar of the hand is fracture or sprain, and if heinomens sois: etreche desormainte a l'onstauxelme, et il ne :ais devises ite, sotimexent, in the paragraph.
nac:
And if the fracture is on the side, it must be that you place a stick above, and another beneath the sole of the foot, so that the hands are upright and straight, then hold him firmly with one hand and securely attach the bandage between the two sides.
And if the fracture does not occur in one of these two sides, if it is a wrist injury, then place it with the sole, and hold it firmly; and if you see it on the other side, as in the index or one of the others, then also place it flatly, securely attaching the bandage between them so that it does not move; and if the fracture is elsewhere, either tie all three together in one holding, or put a stick underneeithey; and take care in the treatment and positioning of aposteme, and watch for what comes, as I have said.
Of the cracked bone
The bone of the fractured is often broken, and it can be seen from both sides when turned forward and backward; and in treatment, it involves two bands placed above and below the break. This translation refers to a method used in medical practice where bandages are strategically positioned around a fracture site for support during healing. The description implies that there are at least two points of attachment: one above the injury (supra-brief) and another below it, providing stability from all angles as the bone mends. And the maladies are pressed down on his face, then extend each minister's bandage equally to its section; and it is when the fracture extends into the bone. This translation speaks about a situation where injuries or complications manifest on the patient's face, which could be related to swelling or other symptoms associated with the injury. The phrase emphasizes that in cases of fractures extending deep into the bone, each supporting bandage must apply equal pressure and distribution across different sections (or parts) to ensure proper immobilization and facilitate healing without causing further damage or discomfort.
And if the fracture is close to the root of the bone, then one bandage should be applied towards the wrist, and the other around the break; also if it is near the knee, either apply a bandage behind it or an extension below it; then place the supports on its two hands so that they are evenly distributed according to their natural position, and then put the splint, and secure them during aposteme, such that no further movement occurs. This translation discusses the steps taken when treating a fracture in locations close to critical joints or limbs like the wrist or knee. It emphasizes careful bandaging around these areas to maintain natural alignment and using supports (splints) with secure fastenings during immobilization, ensuring no further movement that could impede healing.
And if there is aposteme required, it should be allowed to subside first before returning to your work and care; the bandaging is done in part manner. This translation addresses the necessity of allowing any swelling or inflammation (aposteme) resulting from a fracture or medical intervention to diminish before resuming regular activities and continued treatment. It also points out that the approach to applying supportive bandages should be partial, suggesting a balanced strategy rather than an extreme measure, ensuring comfort for the patient while still providing necessary stability during healing. En Old French.
And if it happens, if the dislocation occurs, and addresses that which comes to him, as we have said many times; and if he has pieces of bone that are grasped, then he must avoid them, if possible; and if not, it is necessary to cut into the joint, and extract; and treat it as we have said, so long as he is healthy.
And never is the chest cracked in such a way that when it is set with pins and plates, as in the shoulder and arm; everything else, even after this restoration, does not change the patient's severe pain.
We know that the chest is restored within one year or less than a year, or more than a year, depending on the various differences in constitutions.
from the wound of the thigh
We know that in the wound of the thigh there are few bone fragments, but it often folds many times. And if it breaks, then it is either a fracture or an open wound, and applies to all wounds, and feels well for him.
And the restoration is such that it puts back what belongs to its joints, as long as they can be assembled therein; then place the splint, and put on an arched plaster, if you have any knowledge of it, and apply it in such a manner that he must do so for every fracture or other similar injury, whether it is caused by stabbing or other appearance. And address to each accident what belongs to him until he becomes healthy.
from the fracture of the leg
We know that in the leg there are two bones, one is called a "mustel" and the other a "fusil"; and all injuries from this cause come to the arm as well; therefore, the restoration of it is just like that for the shoulder, and the operations involved are also identical.
And if the two bones in a single fracture line up together, turn the leg from all sides.
And if the subtle bone is very slightly fractured, turn it forward.
And if the large bone is fractured, it causes great pain and he can see well; then turn him around. But nevertheless straighten out the extension as much as possible, and put it back to its original position, and fix the plasters equally; but however, if the fracture looks ugly, and there are many pieces that make the extension smaller and lighter, adjust according to its nature.
And when you have completed your work, take two wooden strips that cover the leg from one side and the other up to the thigh joints, and wrap them over and under each other as if they were a bandage; so it will not allow the leg to bend in either direction, and therefore this is well done; and no one gives him an iron bracelet covering more than half of the leg, and when he has metal, place on the leg to prevent movement, properly made for the injury that occurs there. And move his leg every day to see if it has any stabbing or other accident; and treat as long as he is healthy.
from the fracture of the bones of the thigh.
Ander li cheveil estes, quant. Leu esquire dure a la maladie d'en-midi de ceu en laxel siens cestant: desvoins ascles le, se faiblezal comentures.
scape. Whatief.
And when three years or four pass and the ligament slides, for you will find the bones even, whether fractured or dislocated.
And if there are any bones broken, he should mend them, as we have said about the hand; then make a splint according to the length of each break, and slightly wider than that, and place it over the tablet I mentioned, and bind around it firmly; and if there are two or three, or more, brace them, placing a splint for each according to its size, wrapped in one sheet of linen, and tighten the tablet under the head.
And must remember the other things I have said about fractures that we mentioned; and consider each accident according to what it requires.
of the break of the bone on the knuckle
When the bone of a woman's natural is broken, if she sit with it expanded, then incline it to the part of her back and hold it by the rear; then fill her belly with cotton as much as one stock; then lift the woman up little and little until the cotton reaches the entrance of her nature, and returns the bone with the stock; and when she feels like urinating, you push the cotton, and from that day on for twenty years or more: if it will be restored, make a bladder of sheep's wool, and tie it to a cork, and pump all the bladder into her nature; then blow air into the cork until the bladder is inflated within her: her nature will restore the broken bone; then fill it with cotton and let it remain for some years, so that she may be healthy.
And when the bone of the thumb or that of a woman is broken, it should be restored as we have described in the bone of the shoulder; and these proximate fractures are not hidden from those who put their study and use into practice and understand my book. For the fracture means more than one disposition toward the right path of restoration: therefore.
In the vein, when it is broken, take an owl's gizzard and put the vein; then wrap it in linen cloth for twenty or more years, and soon he will be sound again.
of fracture with wound
It must be remembered by the one who has a fracture with wound, especially if it is large like the bone of the hammer or splint, that it may heal now; let those signs testify as we have said.
Lesseins la cest lixel, siix: com'sesque, auccurre thejourneathereau ipsede :lion: "Ivrexante. ousage of aen :little frommeille duxente deleme :agevaxire, :xentainment.
And if an abscess comes from a wound incising, let the restoration be renewed just now, until the abscess is pacified, and not touched for a whole year or four months, because you would cause a bad accident.
And if the bone is broken near a joint exposed by dislocation, it requires that you gently and slightly extend your hands.
And if the extension does not assist you in making your hands even, then use this instrument of iron which is .5 or .7 meters long, and its width depends on the extent of the wound; and for this reason it must be measured .3 or .6 meters according to what each time is necessary in any fracture treatment. It should not fold at all under the pressure applied during your work, but rather bent before, and thickened with a small amount of material so that it does not bend when placed on the limb for its purpose.
And it is called "palanche," because the bones of the limb must be set atop the top part of the visible bone; and once placed, if they move away again, they should clash against each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the manipulation cannot properly grasp the bone, then it requires that you set the top part of the bone so long as your hands have the ability to do so.
And if you cannot bring the bone back to its place, as we have said before, with an appropriate instrument such as a chisel or screwdriver, in your hope; then realize what is left inside the bone of great hardness and fine cracks.
And when the bone is brought back and he feels great pain afterwards, so that it shows that it's not in its natural state; if it has been made so long as it is exposed, then moist cloth of linen soaked up one white cloth stiffened plaine. And apply a drapee estrangles de ceukeulx ons escali.
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt whether it may not heal in time, just as we have said; and you apply pain to the edge, there is no need to place it on sticks; but wrap it tightly around the edge, with hard cloths and bandages, and similar medicines. And when after a year or two the wound has become worse by swelling, then this indicates that what you have applied over all must be removed, and apply healing ointment to the wounds, just as we have mentioned with various remedies.
And it is required that you lie the limb for two days, in the morning and evening, until it becomes solid and healed.
And it is required that the limb be treated in such a way as not to allow the blood to flow irregularly down the lower extremity.
And if after three days the limb has not joined and it cannot heal properly, then you will see that there are small fragments of bone; because in this case, it is required to treat the wound with bandages (tentative), and remove all these displaced bones so as to prevent further pain.
And if an abscess forms at the edge or any other form of infection, it is required to treat it according to what has been discussed earlier. And when a bone breaks within the limb and protrudes into it, like that of the knee or shoulder joint, or similar injuries in large members, you should not attempt treatment; for often many die as a result of intervention too late; however, let it heal until it can bear weight, perhaps after twenty to thirty years. If you are able to treat it within this period, then do so; and if not, leave the wound alone.
and those that come about by salt (salt-induced injuries)...
We often come after the healing of the fracture, mainly when it is close to the joint, and what a pity it is to see the deformity in the limb; and sometimes even then cannot perform its natural functions.
:nappe tape nonesengines: " Thegles tostapart demeansinse desu :surs esle thewesuccle decade:3rdre:
When the bone is restored and then dislocated again after its weakened members, due to various reasons: because it was tied too tightly and not as loose as it should be; or because it had too many ties, so that it could not bear weight on the limb; or for a multitude of fractures; or from excessive movements, never in its time; or because there is little flesh in its body, therefore it is weak.
And the cure is to feed the patient with meat and make the bone tender until the swelling diminishes in him; and administer hot baths, giving joy and comfort to the patient; then apply pitch above the limb so that it attracts the great pressure, and the arrow often comes out of water, and returns to its natural state.
Another member is twisted after health.
When the member is twisted after restoration, and the bone breaks open again, and the form of this crooked limb is ugly; neither does it return to its natural course: we do not believe those who say that one must break the limb completely anew, and many in our land have done so, which are condemned works. And indeed, where there are nodulations and tortures, they should first be raised with warm water or mallow leaves cooked like fennel fronds, roots, and other things; and then apply a softening medicine made well, as dulcimmal (or honeysuckle) prepared, taking musk gland of ivy-leafed vine, mixed with pork lard or olive oil. Or take figs covered in bran, crush them, and these medicines that alleviate the hardening.
And no bone with nodulation should be rubbed continuously and for an extended period on the wet hands; rather, each hour should have movement alleviated in the limb.
And if the twisting is old and hardened like stone, as in an arrowhead, it also needs to be struck with iron, covering just the bone, making a subtle incision on the joints lightly; and apply compresses and study the treatment.
Here begins the book of dislocations.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its natural position, which prevents it from moving freely; and the limb becomes misformed, causing the patient to experience great pain and severe injury.
When any dislocation occurs, it must now be aimed at restoring feeling in the target area.
Because if it is delayed, the pressure increases in the affected area, and possibly if placed back on its original position when inflamed; yet there is no need to move it again where it has become swollen: many times this leads to discharge and other pains.
generally speaking, when this happens, he should make the crooked limb healthy again; then let it rest until the swelling subsides in him; then raise the member with warm water and oil, and move it gently, and treat each limb as long as any treatment comes to his original position.
And I commandments of the great deu : le fiefes d’estur, et il en: les chascune tote ceste qu'encis.
10950 aures des cestitur un :ot : laisses siete tuit 1300 : lexplancture :tale fiele :1207000400'sescription.
lestruction de crafterifre
When the dislocation is small, it returns with many adjustments.
And if it is complete and finished, it must be reset promptly, without targeting.
and in such a way that the instrument paints the head of the dislocation, and it thrusts one hand's palm into the root of the jaw dislocation within the mouth if the dislocation is .ij parts; and let the other hand be removed to make them equal; and command the patient to soften his mandibles and move them from all sides.
And the instrument ensures equality, until it returns to its original position.
And if the reset is gripped, immediately they are brought together for the .ij mandible segments, heated with hot water and oil until they loosen lightly; do not target the resetting, as we have said before.
And when they are brought back together evenly, and the mouth of the patient closes smoothly, it is covered with a cloth made from oil roses and wax, then pressed gently over the affected areas.
And the patient lies on his back, with his jaws situated between .ij. spaces, ensuring they do not move to the right or left and do not exert themselves in trying to close them again without difficulty, as long as there are light meals that alleviate pain and tendern Cooking methods:
s:centileveneragneigneures.give, le plusseurreuxhoutreinscribe iactechar orfference, tudexanginousteachancellecthecimetiphircure,arretranschevexenthertroitextilevesquexant iaunits.sifere ifccange:l:
And if the two lower jaws cannot be set back to position within an hour, and are not restored to their original state, then it may lead to feverish and costly convulsions, and possibly diarrhea, and perhaps abdominal distension, and vomiting of colic.
And when you see this, then you know it's a loss; and many have died within seven years.
from the forceps
The forceps cannot remove anything from the side or back of it and have never been used to extract any thing, and they are strongly felt by him.
And the treatment if it is that his severe pain stret Written by: Jocelyn A. Laytner and Tina D. Sellent - University of Maryland Baltimore County
And the wounds near the costume cannot be dislocated; if not, and when it is dislocated at least once, then you place on the stretcher and the bandage, and restrain, and command the patient that they rest until they are healed;
And in this way we bring back the shoulder joints to their original place when it has been displaced from its position.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
It is said that the shoulder is dislocated for only two reasons: one is when it is dislocated from the arm's side to the shoulder itself; and the other is toward the hip. And sometimes it may be dislocated above, but this happens rarely.
And it is not dislocated backwards due to the shoulder, nor in between for the nerves; and many are dislocated downwards towards the arm mostly among those who have little strength, because in these cases it happens suddenly; among those with enough strength, it comes back up by itself into place.
And sometimes it happens to no one with any impact or fracture, and inflates the shoulder by a sudden impulse, and care must be taken that it is not dislocated because of this.
It is then that you must try it out, as long as you are certain of its effectiveness; and in any case, begin the treatment.
And is known when it goes towards the arm, and distinguishes between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find in their manifest differences. and you will find at the top of the shoulder a cavity, and in front of the arm's center on the shoulder's top, similarly as if it were an egg; and it cannot move its hand to its neck or make any movement whatsoever.
and similarly, if it is dislocated in the upper part, it is not hidden, because you will see it clearly at the top;
and this way of dislocation is not merely to pull back when it is new or if there are bad blood vessels involved;
And the way is that they aid the patient's hand above, then put bandages around the arm, and lift the joint upwards at its place; and they help the hand, and stretch it upwards, so if this happens suddenly.
lle astoecreis andes precibe:ingle cece ofsic. Airaire'r aagre, 3ire. Itse:re. Thejaccomestitus arsar (asin aforecte decaisse.   ia.
Then dislocate the shoulder bones downwards on his back, and place a layer of even linen there without being too soft or too hard, then put the patient's heel on top of it, and gently move the head of the dislocated shoulder upward, and take hold of the dislocated arm;
And other instruments also move the head of the dislocated arm so that it does not move further downwards; then if you see the shoulder returning in its entirety now, and whether the reduction is done according to this method:
And it is that you make the patient present, i.e., a greater man than the dislocated one; and place him facing his side, and raise the linen layer on top of the dislocated shoulder, and lift the linen so that the dislocated arm hangs downwards. And other instruments also pull the arm of the patient downwards towards his belly; and if it is too heavy, do not hold anything with him at all, and the dislocation returns now.
And the reduction can also be done in another way: and it is that one long stick is placed in the ground, just as a pole, and not too large nor too thin. Then place the dislocated arm downwards but with a sheet underneinaside it, and the dislocated shoulder is long in length; then extend his hand to another side forming, and the joint returns back to its original position quickly.
And if it does not return by all these things that we have mentioned, then perform this treatment: take a pole of two arms of great length and four spans wide, which has the head shaped to enter between the linen layers on the shoulder, according to this form:
Then place the pole on top of the long linen layer underneath it, so that the head does not bruise the dislocated shoulder; and put it over the dislocated arm; extend his arms above the long pole, and attach the sling there, and position the hand at the end of the pole, then place a wide stick under one elbow, and extend the patient's hands downwards, and let his heart hang on the other side: the joint returns to its original location now.
And when it is done, in whatever way it may be, you must put linen over the shoulder pad; then place an infusion of powdered mint with frankincense and myrtle under the entire shoulder and chest area, spread over the pad; draw the sling up from the pad to the neck, turn the band around the sling, wrap the patient's hand in his collarbone, and let the hands stay in that position.
And it is necessary that he rests for as long as the limbs are comfortable, because they will heal faster; and after four to six weeks or more, move him again, and if he is firm and not tender, then he is healthy.
And if the dislocation is due to moisture or for any other reason, you must treat with three cupping therapy in front of the chiropractor.
And if you do it in such a way that the dislocation, siens ceule: entrer, salle orentree parler lice demeingle mainte partie duin d'abord neufi'sesemeanble toilectre lesmeis. iestime ofrstill leu fromage.
woman.  100. 0: 6th century andrise ofte thevé (animexentre:sacquer. Theurge asce, sofyse lesse. :i, a laire eture dexure non-bleeds, itin. What, incisa de jourrescales,ume ailletis; cure of theit. ousurette, and itch.
And if after the healing comes to the limb in pain, and returns slowly with movement, it uses many times, until the pained part is again natural.
From the joint displacement of two parts.
Seeks that the joint displacement is pulled out from its place, and returns to it; and if it is completely separated from all parts, especially in front and behind, and dislocations are not repositioned, because one can see clearly and feel well; and dislocation according to each figure. And when you join the displaced part with the healthy one, if it can be seen openly. For the joint is stiffened, and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder in any way.
And it is necessary that you reset it immediately so as to pull up the limb's heel (ankle), for if one pulls up the ankle, it would be grievous to bring it back; and perhaps they cannot be pulled up entirely in any case, especially when it is at the back; and this type of dislocation is worse than others, and sometimes injury comes as a result.
And the restoration is when it can be pulled back, that you extend your hand to yours; and his arms are spread out, and his hands according to the dislocation, both above and below, and join the joints together with all of them or at the root of the palm, until they return to their original position.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his own hand and tightens the root of the displaced joint that has been separated.
And if it does not return to its original position, apply strong extension; and both ministers extend their arms, so they do not move with the extension; then turn the arm from each side, wrapped in a long and wide cloth.
And when he touches the joint to the hand, apply no oil for smoothing the joint; then join the joint again, until it returns.
And when it is back in its original position, place the arm on an elevated support with a cushion underneath, stretch out the joints, and let the shoulder rest comfortably without any restrictions for some time before letting it go.
And if the joint is firm in its original position, let it remain there; and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, then place the elevated support and the bandage again, and leave it for some time as long as it remains firmly set; then release it.
saint toun. ape. Ire d'unfse :istropes fromage. Theursenture dextraise. Theaight. Journeigustarte a:gallandera,lamexent. Forthres. Iture. de laissentes. Isolet.aux lecure
The dislocation of the hand
The dislocation of the hand is released, and its return is slight compared to all other joints; it must be brought back to place promptly as soon as it has been displaced, either by stretching it while still out or inserting a stake therein so that the bone may grow.
The repositioning is effective if you place the affected hand on a table and extend the minister's hands while making them equal in size; then put it such that the palm appears over the appearance of the dislocation, and hold until it relaxes.
Generally, it is necessary to observe whether the hand has returned well; then place the affected side of the hand on a table with extension and retraction. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, place the affected side of his hand on a table and observe it; when it returns now, that's well.
If not, if the pulling away of splints calms down the abscesses, then let it resume in this manner.
And if it cannot endure, and you cannot place it on the table after any day, then the dislocation will remain twisted.
and do not deny to the patient that as long as their hands are weakened, they cannot stretch anything: therefore you know the nerves or arteries have been cut; if there's no other remedy for it, then stretching near the case with cautery would be one method.
And when the hand is on the splint we have mentioned, place it there and stretch it; then leave it for a few days, then displace it so that it stays in this position.
And if it cannot move well, and there is no wound in the arm, then apply warm water and rub it so that it becomes sound again.
ignealice ennurse. In the hand of thèrase xvictiant aoutre:250thent.
Never is the head of the shoulder dislocated from any part, never from the back of the hand or abdomen.
And it is the head, and reset the dislocation to your pockets so that it returns, then support the head of the joint, and bring it back to where it has been misplaced.
And let it rest for two years, then make it stable again; and feed it nourishment as we have said, allow the dislocation to heal over time, let it move, and reattach it.
And in addition to the above, if it is dislocated in the abdomen of the hand, do so as you have done before when it is healthy again; and similarly, if it is dislocated elsewhere.
double dislocation of the spine
When the spine or neck is dislocated, and there are several such dislocations, if there is no cure, for it hurts so much that death may be hastened by the malady.
And the signs that it is that evacuations of blood are made without voluntary consent; and he cannot hold them in place, and many times become limp or a pair of hands or two arms.
And many times it is dislocated at one-fourth of its length; the part that moves backward, in such cases, is called "gilboisite."
The cure, if it is that the 'gilboisite' came from childhood; but if there was no treatment or healing in its entirety.
And that which falls down or is subjected to impacts or similar occurrences, the old ways of curing by great words do not bring much benefit.
But I have attempted it according to my intention, and formed various exercises in different ways.
I say that in the 'gilboisite' there is neither cure nor healing when it comes before.
And also this one that comes directly next to two points, and cannot be healed from the wounds it causes except for those that come straight to the back, as I have said.
And it is that the painful ones extend over his face in one line even and have strain on themselves within, so they do not break.
Then make a firebrand at the head of the wound in shape on earth and another for the fingers, and tie some straw between the slits under the painful joints, and others for thighs, legs, ankles, and kneecaps.
And also divide them into the straws, one to the head and the others to the fingers among these two firebrands.
And they should be well closed, the firebrand as we have said, and the doctor places his palms on the spinal joints until it relaxes.
And if it does not improve with this cure, take a bed of three arms long and close around the part where there is pain, and place the worm on that side, and put the head of the firebrand underneayer near the spinal joint, then put the middle of the bed under the spinal joint. And place the doctor's fingers on the other head of the bed, and press well until it relaxes at its base; if you see him turning the worm by hand.
And it is that you make two firebrands at the painful joint of one arm and two others for the fingers, placing between each firebrand a palm's width apart.
And in each firebrand there is one hole or where the worm turns, and they are firmly embedded in the ground so that they do not move; between each pair of firebrands there should be another firebrand turning, so that it helps the turning of the holes, and with .ij. small firebrands about a palm's width apart to turn the worm.
And then tie the line that is among the slits to one of the worm's turning points and another line to the other turning point for the fingers, so that each minister turns his wheel at all parts of the joint, and the master places the spinal joint evenly as we have said.
And when it is evened out, place on the disinfecting board a lot of ointment and then firewoods, and then a tablet made of three arms long that shines the back of the gilbert's joint and the part of the spinal bone sound, and tie them with one line as we have said, and use the painful ones in subtle grumbling until they are healthy.
And if nothing happens at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer soft and soothing medicines with the same tablet that we have mentioned before; and nevertheless I administer a piece of linen.
And there is no appearance in the back part of the spine of the back, and you must take care that it be dislocations; and for sure this bone comes out, so there should not be any assumption: perhaps death would come.
Dislocations of the hernia.
" The following passage ail veintaine :istanx :iij.
. Theod:13rdrague vei0scape. What'llenjour theater ofrement (from:cause :x:thorse, sofaire :ge (not (in. dise:saw:nurgimesubmer:sainticule it (the following.
And the sign of those who suffer this injury, it is that these accidents are contrary to them.
And the signs of those who suffer this injury, it is that their leg appears well in relation to the completion; however, it does not double the groin sensation of pain, and if they attempt to walk, they cannot do so beforehand, and retain urine, and inflame the angina, and when they move, it passes over the heel.
And the signs of those who suffer this injury, it is that they cannot expand their groin, nor double, and that leg is more crushed than the other, and the angina becomes milder, and are the kneecaps at the edge between the thighs below the waist.
The resetting of this kind of dislocation is that it has been previously occurring, and it takes time according to its arrangement, without any solution; and it does not require one to have suspicion.
And in cases of fresh dislocation, it is three types of dislocations, and if you hasten to return the joint, you will keep it together and outwards, and the movement goes to both sides; perhaps it may come back on its own, and there is no need for any other treatment.
And if it does not come back in this manner, it is required that you appoint one strong minister, and hold the leg firmly with two hands or with some bandage placed above the groin; and other ministers stretch his hand down in a manner that he pushes his hands on the soles of his feet, then he wraps one strong bandage above the kneecap; and another holds the head of the joint.
and they extend upwards and downwards them all once, as long as the patient remains upright on the ground for one time, and then continue hanging.
This method of extension is common to three types of dislocations, and if the dislocation has come back as we have said, it is well done.
If that is not the case, then it requires a cure according to its appearance. When the dislocation is at the side of the thigh, it is required to support the patient on their healthy leg and place the bandage below the root of the knee, and around the heel which is between the calf and the angina, then have the bandage in front of the angina and towards the force.
and another ministers wrap his arms around the large calf of the affected knee, and extends it backwards in shape like this: if it returns to its original position now; and this type of dislocation is lighter compared to others.
And if you cannot compress it in the way we have said, then it is required to tie the two affected feet together with a strong bandage under both heels and around the knees, and make the injured leg extended by more than the others.
then hang them from the top of a beam or two arms long; and command one minister to wrap around the calf of the kneecap of the injured leg, and other ministers are hanging with the same, as the dislocation is coming back soon now.
And when the dislocation is on the legs, et au defour seize jonge tiarre de ceu enltres que les bons jours. Et sienses: Caule in aurellis, etimes du malaide lou cetera espace of ounces vouldes leu.
sake:age aces fromages of the. I'sace. And it is planted with wet linen around the wound, so that the patient does not bleed out the malady; and then stretches each limb towards him, and the doctor places the dislocation in his hand.
If she returns it's good. But if not, put it on the table and press it as we have said in the context of gingivitis, and apply the painful area to the patient's healthy side.
And when the dislocation is in front of it, it must be quickly extend the injured leg according to what I have said; and place the doctor's pain on top of the malady, then press with the other hand, and hold down towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is downward, it does not need to extend the malady downwards or lift up from the ground, but rather as we have said about the lying position on the thighs; and whether in his face, and the line extended as we have said before, and it must press on the joint at the table.
and when the malady extends his legs so they are equal; then adjust the kneecaps, and place the plaster, and wrap the bandage around it so that he does not move.
and if he rests for two or three years, then move him, and place the plaster on it; and if you see that they are equal, continue the same as before, and let him stay for three more years; then release him to walk well until his limbs are comfortable.
about the dislocation of both knees
The genitals are evacuated in three ways according to which we have said: namely upwards and downwards, and backward; and do not vacate them forward.
And the signs are that you command the malady to bend his leg at the kneecap, and if it does not bend at the kneecap, you know that it is evacuated.
and the recovery of all it is that you make the malady sit down, and extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his kneecap, and put the patient's feet under yours.
then take his genitals in your palms, and interlock your fingers, then bend the two sides of the groin area formed; and another attendant extends the patient's thigh so that the genitals return to their place, and you sign that he moves his leg easily.
and put the plaster on it, and raise the leg to the kneecap, and bind them tightly for three or four years, then release him; and he does not need to walk again until his limbs are comfortable.
And if the limbs do not improve, then strong extension is applied as we have said in the treatment of hemorrhoids, so long as he remains healthy.
about the dislocation of both ankles
The toes are sometimes extended, and they are completely evacuated upwards and downwards.
And the signs that show that the ankle is loose in front of the part where it has been evacuated completely:
The dislocation is quick, and it must be stretched quickly with his hands when he falls abruptly only.
And when it is dislocated from both sides, it must be set so the patient lies with the right side and uses only his legs above the ankle as aids.
Then take the patient by his right hand, and then again by his left, twice put him in an upright position, and let the patient stand up with ease.
And do this twice more as we have said, when lifting and moving the patient's body; if it returns to its place, that is well; but if not, then start over again, because it does return.
And if it cannot return in this way, then make the patient lie on his back on earth, and firmly place a wax pellet between his knees, and cover him with bedclothes so that he does not injure himself.
Then you should burn the patient's chest, and some other assistants stretch the stone to his hands or to one of them, which they place on top of the headstone; Then each assistant stretches equally, and the rope should be there between the patient's chests to hold the patient when they are in it.
Then put the resetting at his hands, and some other assistants burn the healthy leg above the bed, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is at the point, if they put on the plaster and cover with bandages, and tie up their leg, and place the stone on the thigh, and warn those nerves under the ankle not to be too tight.
Then let it be for two or three years, and if the strain occurs; then they loosen it after one year or a quarter, and do so that the patient will recover from this dislocation in four years; And if it goes beyond this end, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
And if a cut arises at the foot, it is necessary that you soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it heals completely.
And from this (the implication here might be about the necessity of some action following treatment).
When the dislocations are dislocated, they must be extended very slowly with work, and it is a light matter.
And if the dislocations are in no place on either side of the headstone, it is necessary that you make the patient sit upright on one flat surface or on a straight table, and put your stone over where these joints appear, then press firmly on the stone until he returns to normal.
And when it is equalized and there is nothing more to be done, then make the patient lie on a flat table with two chairs, stretch his leg, leave it for three years, loosen it again, and let him rest until he is completely healed.
of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with the dislocation, and it is intended to restore it, there are many times that the patient's pain becomes unbearable.
If you are not presumptuous in the cure, if you do not know this art well and you have been gentle with it and you are not hasty.
And use at the beginning of soothing measures incisions to control it, and let the patient keep the shoulder in their hand if there is no hope for health. And when you see any hope, now reset the limb to its original position so that the incisions do not enlarge.
And when the limb is in its original position, now apply soothing measures and treat the wound as it requires, drying ointments.
And if with the dislocation there is a break, and small bones are displaced, and move the bones and do as we have said in simple diseases.
And do not enter into fear, as I have said, for it is in your best interest according to your Creator, and because of the wisdom given you by your God. Amen.
