O ye, most dear children, I have completed this book which is the last of the knowledge of medicine along with filling it in, and I have made it complete through its expositions and by its declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I shall complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work on hands, namely "surgery".
And since the work on hands is practiced in our region and is widespread throughout all, its essence has been lost and scattered, with nothing left of it except for small descriptions in books from ancient times where hands have moved them. And from this arises the error and folly, with closed understandings and distanced knowledge.
Or it seems to me that I will revive this treatise with the arrangement of its parts according to the method of exposure and explanation and abbreviation; and come together the forms of instruments for cauterization, and other tools of surgery along with the assistance of preparation and declaration if necessary.
And because no good masters are found in our time to practice the art of medicine, it has been abandoned. It is necessary for the one who undertakes this matter to be knowledgeable in anatomy as Galen says, understanding the judgment of members, their forms and connections and separations, having knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and the number of joints, and their movement and moving vessels and stationary ones, and where they originate.
And thus Ippocrates says that the one without a hand is greatly impaired, and with work of the hand is little; especially in the art of the hand.
We tell you in the introduction of this book that those who are not aware of things previously mentioned, should beware lest they err and kill people; therefore, I have wanted to mention many times about these who undertake this science and abandon reason and sense through experience.
During this, I saw a mad surgeon who cut an abscess of hard swellings or neck of a woman, and severed the vessels at the base; hence so much blood poured out that the woman died in her hands.
And I saw another surgeon treating a stone in a man's bladder, and the stone was large; he took with it a part of the bladder itself, and the man died within three days.
And I had already been called to treat it, and I saw the condition of the sick person and the size of the stone, and well knew he would die if they cut into it.
And see another physician who took care of a duke from our land whose leg was broken, and with the fracture had an open wound; and the ignorant physician reset the fracture onto the wound at the edges firmly, without giving any bandage to the wound, and left it in such condition; and commanded that he should not dislodge it. So it remained until the leg was fully healed and came to ruin.
I am called forth to come to him, and urged to dislocate the leg; and when I did so it was peaceful and he felt no pain.
But the infection had already taken hold of the limb and could not be healed; and the corruption continued to spread through the limb until it was completely lost.
And see one other physician who has caused an abscess to rupture, inflamed by the ill will of his lordship.
For an ulcer, when it is free of black bile humor, one must not touch with iron unless the part can be fully removed there where all corruption exists.
And therefore, dear sons, you should know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, where there is danger in many arrangements; and I will show in each place within this book where there is fear and danger.
t, a. 1.
Take up your arms in consideration, and begin treating the patients gently yet firmly, using the best method so with God's grace you come to health and are praised; leave aside diseases that have hopeful remedies for great health; and put away doubts about these methods, trusting fully as able to come from this world to the other of glory.
In some of his warnings: "Do not take care of illnesses that might call you foolish master."
I have devised this treatise in three chapters.
The first chapters are about the fire cautery and medicine caustics, and they are ordered from the head to the feet; and on the forms of sores, and tools for cauterization, and everything necessary in the work.
The second chapters are about surgery and cutting, and cupping and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and they are organized and on the forms of sores.
The third chapters are about correcting dislocations and twists, and similar things; and they are ordered from the head to the feet, and on the forms of sores.
Thus we remember our work, it is necessary for me to tell the quality of aid and harm from each composition.
I say that the quality of aid and damage is in lengthy words and subtle science and secret solutions; and on this matter many wise men have spoken and agreed, but their words are few to me because I repeat at length.
I say that fire cautery assists everywhere there is matter, because there are two types of constitutions: those hot and wet in nature, and those dry and lacking moisture.
In complexions that are both hot and dry, some say fire cautery is greatly helpful; and others argue the opposite: fire cautery only helps with illnesses caused by heat and dryness.
By the nature of heat, it is warm and should not be treated with warm illnesses due to heat or sweat; and those who claim otherwise say that fire cautery greatly helps in treating warm diseases that come into the bodies of men. When you examine the body and its moisture with the hot-blooded temperament, you find the body to be cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it by experiment at no time.
And in every way, do not meddle unless you have experimented it yourself and know the craft of cauteries for a long time, understand the variety of human constitutions, and their dispositions and causes of illnesses, occurrences, and duration; we take no heed of other constitutions, especially in cold and moist diseases. And all the masters gathered and agreed on the cautery.
byde as they in t: The her it’s.
The fire is simple, and does not cause harm except to the limb that is cooked, and it harms no other member if there be none named.
Hot remedies come from one limb to another aligning, and bring about grave diseases in healing the member; and sometimes it kills the patient.
Fire for its high temperature and goodness of its essence does not do this unless there is excessive usage.
And this is what I have found through experimentation and from the service rendered and study that I have put into the art, it stands on the truth of things; therefore, I excuse myself for the length of my words, as it does not please me to take away your secrets which are contained or hidden by fire, nor the quality of the work, how it confronts the diseases of limbs, as the philosopher explains in demonstration; so receive it into your thoughts.
And know, son, when should the cauterizations be made and punctures performed.
And I say that cautery is suitable in all times, because the damage suffered occurs from lack of aid by cauterization; and especially if the cautery is necessary for urgent pains that cannot wait until greater harm comes to the limb.
And do not think of it ever, dear son, as the foolish masters do; for in the disease healed by cautery there is no return; and they say so; but it is not as they believe, because cauteries are not a medicine that changes temperament, and dries the humors which cause pain, and its value lies in being faster than regular medicines, and due to the virtue of its work and power.
And there are factors that disease may occur at any time according to the temperament and location of the illness and its strength; and they are combined in him excesses by the acquisition of meats and similar things, unless cauteries are administered where there is little excess and moisture, as with cauteries for pain, and other things, so that pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
Many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last of medicines, and it is true; but they mistakenly believe that cauteries are worth less than medicine, while their understanding is false, for when we administer treatment methods in any disease and they have no value, then we administer our cautery, and it has value. Then indeed, cauterization is one of the latter methods of medicine, not according to the whims of foolish physicians.
The ancients said that surgical instruments of gold were more durable than iron, and they claimed this not because of the quality of gold but due to its substance's nobility; and they stated that the heat of cauterization does not cause putrefaction, but rather it is not true as I have tested it, finding that it can occur in some men. Gold instruments are less durable than iron, as they said.
it is to cez:
And so we use fire cautery, which has been prepared for our work.
Thus I have ordered this chapter from the head to the feet so that it may be easier to find.
of the olive oil caustic
they  se ce est lesse the c; it is not that more. If he c, and so as the main; t l’s on bac: the time after:
The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a solvent medicine that modifies the head iii or iv, according to what its virtues and nature and the accustomed habits of the sick person can tolerate; then make the head return on the sick person.
And then make the patient sit with crossed arms, and place their hands under his thighs; after that put the root of your palm on the base between their two eyes; and wherever comes in your two forefingers, it bleeds slightly then apply the cautery called "olivare", which is as follows:
And place it on the area soaked with ink, and gently drag and pull your fingers back and forth while turning; then lift up your hand slightly, and watch as you see the bone one small dot; if you do not see it, continue applying cautery until you see the bone as I have told you to; after that take a pinch of spittle, and put in moistened cotton inside, and place on the area, leaving it there for iii days; then apply soft cotton cloth with butter; leave it until the burn is healed; afterwards treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is fully healed.
When they are old, if an open wound persists longer, it cleanses itself more; therefore help the movement to heal.
And each of them said that one must not overly heat the cautery and if part of the bone is burned, then remove what has been burnt from the bone, and heal it.
(pour est su. Mcle tiraud far faire it et so ;
And these two methods of cauterization do not seem to me entirely good in all cases, except for some men where there is room for fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them. For the shoulder becomes weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we testify with other limbs; similarly when the shoulder of a sickly person is naturally weak, and the first appearance of cauterization is more healing and moving for me, so in this case my work proves beneficial together.
Of anguish pain in the head
When pain in the head comes chronically and lasts a long time, one must use years and pills called "cochie," along with cleansing of the head and oils and poultices; and if you do the cauterization that we have mentioned before, it is not effective.
If the patient's head is of strong character and not too cold, then cauterize below that fire cautery a little as we have mentioned above.
After performing cautery on each of the horns up to the bone as we have previously mentioned, then make a fire called "vessels"; and there are places where you put dressings; lift your hand so that it does not reach the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cauterization than in others, and I will speak of them elsewhere; it is necessary for the cauterizations on the horns to be more subtle than those used for the middle of the head, which are done as follows:
On fire cautery of the head. When sudden pain occurs in a part of the head and the illness extends to the ear, and the shoulder is purged by cleansing medicines, and other treatments have been done as I mentioned in the division of diseases, but none helps: then one must do cauterization in two ways, that is with cold medicine and with fire.
The cauterization with cold medicine involves selecting a small portion of skin and removing the surface and covering it with two pins, then making an incision in the temple where the pain resides so that you can replace the skin piece without the leather; and when it has been reattached securely and left as is for twelve hours; then remove the adhesive on the skin piece, and leave the wound thus for two or three days; then apply cotton plunged in butter until pus comes out.
After the ointment treatment until it is clean; and if you see any of the burning medicines that I have written about or mentioned in treating with burning medicines.
The caustic of iron is thus made. Heat the caustic as follows:
And it is called "closed" because the head is shaped like a bell with .i. points of corbels, and within a small space; place your hand over it gently until you feel the middle part thick enough to pierce; then remove your hand so that the vein does not burn ahead, and flows abundant blood.
After placing cotton in the wound for three days; then put moistened cotton with butter, and treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "culletare" at its tip, be careful not to cover the artery in this migraine that is not old.
of migraine
When you treat migraines as we have previously explained in divisions of diseases, which do not profit from and see that the cautery before is of medicine and hot iron does not suffice, then it must be heated with what is called "cultelliare" until it becomes red; and press once on the aching spot for a half-inch long line, remove your hand once, and ensure you do not cover the artery and let blood reach as far as bone; guard against jaw movement when bitten, and nerves have no regard except to cause spasms in the patient, and beware of bleeding from the artery after it has been tied off, or if there is great fear and particularly for those who do not know or are untrained and unaware; but I will tell you how blood returns when an artery is ligated, and I will show you where this occurs in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not alleviate the illness and patients are suffering greatly, cauterize it between the forehead as we have said before, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, provide the cautery we described for artery extraction, with a cautery that has two blades; this type of cautery is better than those mentioned earlier and more helpful.
And it has been treated as our before recited fore the betterment to do not soignez.
When there is pain from cold in the ear, and you have applied soluble medicines and other treatments as we have mentioned in that division, and the pain does not subside, then cool this cautery called "point," which has the following form:
After cooling the entire ear of the patient, where either one or both sides hold pain, move it slightly above the root of the ear once you have set its position; and there are ten points around each ear; treat the area until it is healthy again.
Regarding the torture of the mouth:
The torture that must be treated by fire is only those caused by dampness, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not apply a fire treatment to similar ones that come from itching and pus discharge of veins.
When you treat this type of torture caused by dampness from worms and purges for the head and gargling, which is not effective, then it is necessary that you perform three fire cauterizations on the patient: one at the root of the ear, another slightly behind the temple, and a third between the two lips; place the cautery in the part that appears healthy, and let the first cautery be just above the head's horn as long as half its size is burnt; this is how to perform the cauterization.
And this is the type of incision that we have described before, but it is somewhat more subtle and requires that the knife be slightly larger; after you treat them as I have said before, let them heal until they are healthy again.
When apoplexy is early and you treat it as we have said, and there is no benefit, and the patient does not have fever, then apply four caustics: two on either side of the temples at the back of the head, one in the middle of the forehead, and one near the spot called "foramina" as we have previously mentioned, followed by a caustic treatment over the mouth of the stomach; proceed with care as we have said before.
In case of lethargy
In this disease, give the patient large years and purging tablets to cleanse the brain; then lift up the head of the patient entirely, and place on the occipital bone the plaster of sinapiac as written in the treatise on poultices; and here is how you do the cautery: do it as I have described.
If it is healed thus, well done; and if not, then do the following: three cauldrons placed above the head by descending to the neck, with each gap being two fingers wide; treat as with other things, and if you see them gathering, and the patient suffers, then make one cauterizing in the middle; and if necessary, two others on top of the two horns, and treat until healed; and be the cauldrons that are called "olivariums," as I have previously mentioned.
Of coldness in the head It is necessary to warm the head as we have previously mentioned; after warming the head of the patient, then make one caustic on top and under each horn, and one behind and three above the spine at the neck; and if there's more need for it, and the body is moist and the patient suffers greatly, making the disease worse, then make four caustics above the back. Leave them until as much of a color change appears in the skin, then remove your hand; after treating as with other things, be the caustic that is called "olivarium" which we have previously mentioned.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use a hot caustic unless they are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to purify the brain with methods we have described in the section when patients suffer greatly and endure hardship from medicines.
And if it is a child who cannot bear it, he should do gargling and chewing to purify the brain often with good meats; afterward, put oil in his head as we have said before, and cauterize over the scalp, and on each horn; and if the patient suffers greatly and endures hardship, then apply cauterizations as I have told those who have paralysis and softening of limbs, along the spine at the back and neck, following the method I have described.
If the patient is a child, perform this subtle cautery as follows:
When due to melancholy there are excesses or corrupted humors and thick flegma, then you should perform the cautery of parts as we have told for those with paralysis.
And if due to melancholy there are declining excesses towards melancholy, and the body is weakly moist, then give him a drink that clears his brain, according to what it was in the division.
ça themud un car (sguirian se contils.
When you see the need to cauterize with many points across all of the caustic area, this method of cauterization soothes the brain evenly; then place woolen cotton in butter and lamb fat.
from the edge of the eyes When the signs first come to the eyes as I said in the division section, then begin and give the patient something that cleanses the mind, and protects from all dampness, and make them sweat or bathe multiple times at a time without food.
After the command to lift his head again, and make a fire cautery in the head, and make two cauterizations on top of the forehead where the duramen is at both eyes together, or if it's only one eye, hold all the veins and arteries coming from above the crown; and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple; and take care not to cause bleeding, and if you see too much blood flowing, then bind them tightly as best you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and making an incision how to apply cauterization; never do cauterization or use hot irons below the two bones behind.
The body's tears
When the tears of the eyes are ancient and accustomed and on the veins, or near the arteries that are in appearance outside at the forehead; and one sees it is due to cold and watery excesses, then you do the cauterization as I said at the beginning of this chapter: i. cauterization within the head, ii. cauterizations on both temples, and ii. cauterizations or near the bones above each eye; and if more is needed, carefully cauterize below the eyebrow with a small cauterization.
Within the body's tears through the eyes
When you treat according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three nights' worth of a hot drink; afterward on his head, and make a fire cauterization or oil-olive caustication; and two cauterizations with the caustic called "clavelis" above each eyebrow, slightly below the forehead; and protect the artery so that it is not covered. And this is the form of the fire cautery, called "clavis":
When the paper of the oil is softened by illness and moisture, then apply the ointment of this fire cautery called "olivary". Here is its form:
And if you see two cauteries on the two warts as close together as their edges are; and do not let go of the hand except until one-third of the paper is burnt down, according to the manner that I have described.
The hairs growing long and pointed towards the skin; and when these prick, they must remain still until grown. There is never a case where the hairs of the scalp turn into pearls, and prickle, and one performs cauterization in two ways: with fire or burning medicine.
The fire cautery instructs the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; if they prick at their base, one must hold the eyes steady so that they do not move until grown.
When they are born and become equal in length, then place the patient on their back; after signing with your seal like a bellows for wind, the beginning of the sign should be as close to the hairs as possible; then apply cotton wool soaked in egg white and musk essence above the oil.
After the area you signed with your seal has been cauterized several times until it is scabbed over, ensure that the health of the work shows on the paper when retracted; and as the hairs grow to the height of the oil, then remove your hand and leave in this manner for iii days; then apply cotton wool soaked in butter until the burn heals; after applying a salve until it is well-healed.
And if after this the hairs come in, and the paper is softened then you may continue to cauterize on that same spot as before; and if the hair falls out, cauterize until the skin rises back to its natural place, and they are even, and do not poke into the oil.
For the hot fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make parchment in the shape of a sprig of myrtle; then take French soap and fresh salt, half an ounce each, and grind them together well; apply quickly so it doesn't cool down, then excite over the form you made like the sprig of mytle, placing paper on top of the hairs; if the disease is only in a particular oil, work should be done there first, and elsewhere as well; place cotton wool moistened with olive oil underneath; keep the patient's head steady and position your two hands over the medicine, and press gently every time they feel tingling from the medicine, because it feels like burning. After you have done this for a while, if the medicine is in its place correctly. After the mordication is gone, lift up what you see the place as if it was lifted by fire or cut into; and if so, then well. If not, put medicine again whereupon li leu or medicine has worked there that work to evenly, and place of cotton wool in be placed, and after done, "called healing at, and otherwise.
If it is necessary for you to carefully guard your work with great caution so that none of the medicine escapes from the eyes, and if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick at the oil, then resume the medicine on the spot where it has been made malleable just as before; after curing make sure they are healthy again; this is the form of the flute with great mystery.
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to this your restrictions should be; and do not return them on the direct path for those who seek knowledge in this art.
For the treatment of a fistula by cauterization
When you treat a boil as we have said in the division of diseases and your treatment proves unhelpful, then it is necessary to apply fire cautery in this manner.
Command the patient to place his head in your hand and wet the minister's head between your hands so that it does not move or droop; then put cotton wool moistened with vinegar or rose water on the oil: heat the cautery which is partly inserted as if shaped like a pigeon's beak, ensuring the point of the cautery faces upwards, and ensure it looks even from one end to the other, just like a tent; but note, that which is facing downward is for your procedure.
After pressing the open fistula and treating any pus, dry it; if it is closed, then close it up and treat the hollow space; afterwards place a heated cautery on it firmly, holding your hand at the painful area above the oil so that your hands do not cause injury, and insert the cautery into the oil's fatty substance, and corrupt.
If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good. If not, resume the cautery once more, and if needed do so again, leaving for three days; afterwards apply cotton wool smeared with butter, and treat the dry ointment until it is sound, and after forty days pass when it becomes sound, apply corrosive acidic medicine until the bone recovers; then proceed according to what comes in your chapter.
And there is a method of cauterizing an abscess that none of the ancients mentioned. Regarding an abscess, and find its location; then place in the opening one subtle piece of material which has this form: And you make the quantity of three ounces; and hold your hand or tool firmly, ensuring the patient does not move, until the metal has melted in its own oil; then it is necessary to place a cotton wool soaked in vinegar on top where there is an abscess, and this will heal the abscess wonderfully quickly.
And if the fistula is healed by the fire cautery as we have said, it is good. If not, one must administer a cold poultice and draw back the fistula to its proper place in accordance with what is best for that location.
Regarding ruptures in lips. Often, occurrences of cracks in the lips are called "hairs," especially in children's lips.
When treating these wounds as we have previously divided, and the treatment does not help, then apply a small pointed caustic according to this method:
And place the ointment in those wounds until it dries up; then remove the bandage completely when it is dry.
For an abscess on the throat
de m; the bencente.
Movement of teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and teeth move, and you treat it with medicines that don't work, then place the head of a malady in your health; after soaking the cautery as described previously, then place a hankerchief over the tooth; insert the heated cautery into the gum hastily, and hold your hand until the patient feels warmth coming to the root of the toebone; after lifting your hand, resume the cautery according to your will; afterwards fill the mouth of the malady with salt water, and let it soak for an hour and a half.
And in this manner the tooth that was moving is stabilized, the softened gums are constrained and the corrupted moisture dried up.
From the pain of teeth
When tooth pain comes from cold or heat, and medicinal treatments do not work, then it is necessary to perform cauterization in two ways: cauterization with butter and cauteraturation with fire.
Cauterization with butter is done thus: take butter from a vessel and the tip into an iron or copper spoon; then wrap cotton around it like a tent, cover in melted butter, and apply hastily to the painful tooth until cooled; do this often as long as its virtues reach the root of the tooth. If you see woolen cloth and cotton soaked with cooling butter on the tooth, place it there, then heat a piece of iron until the fire reaches the dentition's completion over the tooth.
The fire cautery should be such that you grasp a needle of iron or copper, and it is large enough so the flame does not reach the patient's mouth. After heating the cautery, the formed piece will come afterward, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery has cooebed; do this often, for the pain will subside that same day or the next. It is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in anticipation of the cautery, and then wipe it off forcefully; and this is the effect of the cautery:
When the scrofula is of cold humours and moistures, and does not obey through medicines, then warm the fire cautery mentioned above so that it comes afterwards; and make two openings for fumes to exit from the other part of the cautery; and apply hot cautery once or twice as needed until it reaches the fontanelle of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, place the cautery according to its size and leave it so for three days; then after that, apply cotton swathed in butter until the inflammation subsides. Then treat the area with ointments and bandages until healed.
When moistures prevail in the ducts of the pharynx, particularly when it comes from a cold complexion, first allow the patient to be relieved through soluble medicines; then apply cautery at the root of the throat and ensure that you do not reach up to the throat but just lightly scorch. Then make another cautery at the joint of the neck near the top of the spine, and use the cautery called "clavile" as we have previously shown; then treat the area as described until healed.
When moisture prevails in the ducts of the pharynx, especially when it comes from a cold constitution; therefore first allow the patient to be alleviated through soluble medicines; and thereafter apply cautery at the root of the throat and ensure you do not reach up to the throat but just scorch lightly slightly. There after make another cautery ducts neck of the joint near top spine, and use the called "clavicle" as we described previously shown then there treat the area until healed When all diseases of the pormon are due to cold moistures, and the patient has neither fever nor chills, and it is an early illness, if there are two cauteries on the wrists in their roots; and another cautery amidst the thigh between two mammas; and let the cautery be called "clavile" according to the form previously mentioned.
And if you see it, make the cautery by inserting into all the "points" called in the disease of the ears as described previously; and let them be up to xxx or near it. Afterward, treat the roots as stated before, and the other cauteries should have iii rains according to this form:
And because these are lighter cauldrons, for you make them in three parts.
of shoulder dislocation When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movements as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. Afterward, treat the patients on their backs and sides of their ribs; then lift the core that is inside the twin shafts with your left hand's middle finger; if the joint is dislocated within, heat the cautery that has two nicks in its shape:
And cauterize the vein as it is pierced until reaching the rib, and the figure of the cautery comes together with four cauteries; and thus, the cautery is made with the cautery having three prongs, so that the shapes of cauterization are in these four cauteries; and they resemble a nerve according to the subtlety of a tent, and it is the form of the cautery which has three prongs.
And at no time are they approached near this one nerve because there are eight cauteries on it.
After placing the cautery for grinding with salt; afterwards make the patient rest and do not move their limb for long periods until they are well-consoled.
When it is dislocated above, little happens at first; then make a caustic poultice over the swollen area, or many small burnings. Because the joint is reset, and bone is moistened and the patient's health improves.
For the caustic treatment of pleurisy
The ancients said that for pleurisy one should do caustic burns with aristolochia root: take the longest root you can find, dry and cut it to be as long and thick as your fingers; mix it with oil and hold it in flame, then cauterize. One small burning between the clavicle and collarbone, two smaller ones slightly downwards on the lower part of the beard; two burnings between the fifth rib and the sixth, leaning backward a bit; one burning at the groin, and another above the stomach; two others on either side of the pelvis, and two more along with the flanks. Do not press hard but do it gently as when smelling something pleasantly fragrant.
A certain ancient said that no man should use fire cautery as though it were a razor, heating and placing it between the ribs until reaching the abscess; but with this treatment there is pain or immediate death for the ill person, and sometimes a fistula occurs which cannot be healed.
Amongst various treatments, some involve bloodletting to alleviate certain conditions. This practice was common in ancient medical texts.
When you treat the disease of this type that we have mentioned in divided cures, and it does not help, then there are three methods of cautery which all work well.
There are three ways to do this: make .iii. or .iiij. cauters, lined according to the length of the wound, following the figure of the liver cauter that we have said before; and do not press your hand on all the cauter, so let the patient turn over his back.
Another way of a cauter is to show the cauter with .ij. nerves, as we have shown in shoulder dislocation; and lift the bone that is at the location of the wound, or where the pain from the patient comes towards the left side, and there are elevations which you lift the bone according to its size, according to the length of the body, and the cauter be according to the width of the body.
After placing the .ij. (2) inflamed nerves until the bone is pierced on the other side, and then pull the cauter out; thus there will be .iiij. (4). And if you see, cauterize the entire cauter with .iij. (3) nerves. Afterward, as it has taken feculence for a long time, this is what makes those other previously mentioned treatments fail.
Of dropsy
For cuirades are not effective against dropsy, except for the method called "ascites". When you treat it according to the methods we have discussed in divisions and treatment does not work, then it is necessary that you make .iiij. cauterizations around the buttocks, and one on the stomach, and another over the liver, and one over the bladder, and two behind the back above the spine, and one place on the udder; and let the cuirades be close to the area of concern.
After leaving the cuirades open for an extended time to drain pus, and do not cease care of the patient after the cauterization; and healing will hasten, and they will be together with both intentions aided by God's help.
The form of the fire caustic for the belly should be the pearl we have shown before; and for the back it should be olive-shaped, as previously described here.
Of the swelling of wounds When the wounds are swollen in someone who is jaundiced, and filled with yellow pus, you must causticize above the back between the little finger and ring finger; lift your hand while applying the caustic. And do not enter too deeply, thus it will restrain the yellow pus, and let the caustic be shaped as follows:
s the present/c'sthe or and
Of muscle strain
When the solution of stomach comes from coldness and moisture, as long as the virtues that retain and digest in the stomach and intestines are obstructed, and cannot be treated by usual remedies; and you see the patient suffering greatly and with strong vitality, then perform a large cautery on the stomach according to what was said here before or stomach cauterization, where the cauterization circulates around it; and four delicate cauterizations within the fold corresponding to one subtle scalpel cauterization, and two cauteries above the hips.
And if you see abundant moistures and the patient suffering, then perform a cauterization on the wrist, and one subtle cauterization on each finger, and two small cauterizations above the stomach near the large one, for the remedy is beneficial when there is good assistance.
Treatment of boils
When there are multiple boils or a few old ones that consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, they should be treated as we have described in divisions, but if it does not help, then apply three cauterizations above the spine towards the back from under the arm pit angling downwards slightly, and one cauterization below each nipple;
and if you believe the stomach is cooled, and the flesh does not cook, and you see the face swelling, then apply one large cauterization to the stamen as previously mentioned, and another on the liver, and a third at all points of the clavicle; leave the cautery open for long periods. After curing the lion until it is healthy again.
of the inflammation known as "theolule"
When you address the inflammation called "theolule," if it appears like a scab, and then ignite the fire cautery on top of that inflammeback; let your hand rest there with the burning until blood begins to flow from the vein, so the poison is expelled; do this once or twice as we have mentioned. If there is much "theolule," burn each one as we have said; afterward, treat them with healing ointments until they are healthy; and if you use a large fire cautery on the hematoma, it will be of greater aid.
of wounds that were poorly treated
When the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, we will explain in detail; if a disease comes that cannot be healed except by fire-cautery.
When a fistula arises with decay and putrefaction due to corrupt moisture, the procedure requires careful attention throughout, and you must know how much of each part is involved. After heating the caustic substance that appears like powder, insert it into the fistula according to the quantity it has entered, and resume burning until the diseased and rotten flesh is completely gone, once or twice or thrice, depending on the amount needed; and be careful not to burn any nerves present there. If the fistula extends to the bladder or intestines, take care of these openings as well, but do not forcefully dilate them too much, and understand that they are not always permanent. After curing the opening until it is healthy, if the matters have been drained for a long time, then you know the lew (opening) is completely healed; and if the matters have not been removed, recognize that the lew is saturated and the bone at its root is corrupted; thus as one of these we will explain in detail.
Regarding the disease of kidneys When the pain of coldness comes with great swelling and loss of desire for women, then it is proper to perform cautery on both sides of the groin with a pointed bar, as we have previously mentioned; if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three linear cauldrons, and they will provide greater assistance.
Concerning the bladder. When the bladder is large and cold due to moisture, and if it causes the patient to retain urine, then you shall perform cautery on the area behind the bladamoor with a pointed bar, starting from where the hairs begin at the thumb; make one caudron on each side (right and left), which should be as long as your finger. Also, make a caudron on the back if needed; and use two cauterizations according to the previously mentioned shape.
Of the armor When the marrow is cold and moist, unable to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted with delayed maturation; when they come, it causes great pain: then one must make three cauterizations around the buttocks, as we have said for a bladder cautery, and two on the back; and let there be a clavicular cautery, as we have said.
Of the thigh
When the viscous moistures descend to the hip joint box, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the nerves are dislocated in their departure, so you must cauterize the patient over the hip joint box with a caustic resembling a circle, and ensure the box turns within the circle as if it were turning, so that the box be inside the circle; and let the caustics be such as those which have been used to cauterize the stomach.
And if these caustics are not present, use three large olive-shaped caustics, and let the caustic be as wide in all directions as possible; and cauterize until it is adequate.
For the pain of the hip When pain comes in the groin area, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient suffers as we have said in the division and treatment does not help, and the illness is long-standing: then you must purge the patient of large humors with foul pills or other good-smelling pills.
After the fire cautery; and the manner of the cautery is in two ways: that is to say, with burning medicines, and fire cauterization. Fire cauterization has many methods among which one is as follows: you shall cauterize on the groin area three triangular cauterizations according to this shape, making them well-profound and large, and leaving enough space between each cautery about the size of a pea; they should be olive-shaped. Never make a cautery in the middle atop the head of the groin, as there are four according to this shape:
And if you see the cauterization on the circular cautery as we have previously mentioned for the dislocation of the groin; but do it in such a manner that the circle encompasses the entire groin and all parts within its reach are burned.
In sciatica when the pain is in the hip and does not reach the thigh or leg. And if it reaches the thigh and leg, place two cauterizations where the patient indicates the pain holds, and one above the ankle four fingers away on the left side; make a litharge caustication, and grind to thickness of cheekbones; and when the patient feels that the pain extends up to two or three finger widths from the buttocks or near it, cauterize at the spot where they feel the pain with three or four points on the cauterization called "points."
And if it works, if it does more; and if the pain is from under the buttock toward the thwart, do cauterization with litharge or circular caustication, and be sure in all your cauterizations that you don'te burn too much on either the nerves or large arteries, and don't cause further harm or contraction to the patient.
And I have seen others who did cauterization on the ankle bone and burnt so much that the leg became all withered, and the foot also, and it was pierced and corrupted completely; after a stomachic remedy he died.
And if the pain is in two parts together, make cautery on one and the other according to this manner. // And the wise say about the cautery of the haunch, which follows this manner, make a piece of iron as big as a small navvy's thumb or slightly less, with spaces between like pins, extending from one end to the other by the quantity of a poppy seed; and have two parts over each space, also evenly spaced, and it must be well-made iron in form.
And make the iron red hot and well-greased, then place it on the sick haunch's casing, turning along its edge; cauterize once with one piece of iron and leave for three days. Then apply a honey ointment, leaving the wound open for long periods until healed, followed by medicinal salve until well-healed.
Albuquerque says we use this little cautery due to fear of its nature, and few employ it; yet it is one of the good ones, if someone can tolerate it, and where he applies himself.
From great pain of the back
When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or percussion or excessive evacuation, or from seemingly spread cold matter, none of these appearances calls for cauterization, lest it be caused by an infusion of cold substance.
After the patient has voided of foul pills or other similar matters, make on the back where the pain is located, three lines marked with hash marks (#), and in each line five cauterizations or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can bear; and the cauterizations should be made as per the type of cauterization called "points"; if so, make .iij. cauterizations or .iiij. at the midline according to this form:
Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs at the beginning are that their spines become narrow when they stand up, causing fear; and you will find it in the last vertebra of the back with a protrusion above the other vertebrae.
When you see this and observe its course, apply fire cautery to it as per this procedure.
If the fire cautery appears to be needed for each part of the vertebrae, apply it evenly along them. And if you see that around the spine, use a sharp cautery making 2 or 3 lines close together; then cleanse the area until it is healthy as we have instructed, and be careful not to perform cauterization on an inflamed spot near nerve tissue.
Of joint pain
When joint pain is from moistures that spread to each body part, and when the pain comes in waves, which people call "gout" properly, and when it is of cold cause and remedies cannot heal it, then they are treated with caustics thusly: make a circle of caustic around the joint of the foot, and let the caustic be olive-shaped according to this form.
And if there is need to touch the face of the foot, make caustic all over the caustic called "point". And when pain comes up to joints and other joints, as it often happens, then you must do caustics on each ankle .iii or .iiij. of each part, with olive-shaped caustic; but if more is needed, make more, but do not hold your hand away from the area to be scorched for longer than the time it takes for the color to change.
And if the pain extends to the neck and back, treat with the cautery as we have mentioned in this chapter. And if the pain is in the hands, make two lines around the fingertips; and if there is no pain in the fingers, rub each joint and the hair of the hand; and if the pain comes up to the edges or shoulders, cauterize each part, give good care to the patient and prescribe appropriate medicines. For if you provide good care and relieve phlegm, he will be well aided by God.
Of treating scurvy
When scurvy comes between the ribs and it causes new bleeding, when you see this happening, do not let him eat that day; have him consume things that relieve his stomnache so the bowels can evacuate from his belly. After he sits on his back with your hands supporting him, command him to dip his sleeve until the scurvy is repaired, and massage his elbow joints, and put pressure underneath the scurvy over the bone at the wrist, and make a sign like half of a circle above the body; then heat the cautery which is as follows:
Until it is white and the surface feels smooth. Then reset the joint to its original position; and let the minister hold his hand over it so it does not move backward; and work well on the patient's thighs, putting a cushion and a shirt under them, and another under their buttocks, holding their hands; then apply the fire cautery across the mark with your entire hand, straightening and tilting until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it on the first attempt, try again multiple times until you get to the bebone; and be careful that no pus comes out when making the cautery; so as not to burn it; and prevent any death or other harm to the patient.
And understand that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your efforts are in vain. It is necessary for children's fire cauteries to be delicate according to their size, and large people also large according to their measure; after three days heal the place of cauterization with butter until the burn is hardened; then apply other ointments until it is sound, and let the patient rest on his back for forty days so that the wound is well united; and ensure that the dressings are changed frequently, so that no pus comes out when he gets up to walk in chamberen.
And after cleveux se pointee et que li xlors les jusqnent, and dous quide lou mesoie et leu est par ier; et lour. Amende: il. Et quant il neir de cotez d’acque, ou sere iecle la boiret se crois tuit et demele. of the condition with the stomach
When certain conditions arise in different stomachs and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, then perform the following procedure with cautery according to its quantity; and let it be two-thirds of what is prescribed; afterward heal as we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one should use cautery at three angles in this manner:
But draw the mark along this route, and then another line after it; and do not apply too much cautery furthermore in order to make two lines more:
of ancient pain in any limb When pain comes in any limb, whether from falling or injury, and this pain persists for a long time with medical treatment proving ineffective, then it must be treated with the caustic called "points" on a fire cautery according to the length of the member, its size, strength, location of torsions, and pain. If the first cauterization is satisfactory, that's good; if not, another cauterization should be performed above it as custom dictates, so it must turn inward on the limb close by because it is necessary to continue making cauterizations until the patient is healed.
of medicine
The bandage is healed at times by fire with great aid, especially diseases that arise from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. If you see it needing to be cauterized, take care if the disease is in its beginning stages, and if it has been treated as we have described in the division, neither recede nor stay; and suspect whether corruption will affect the entire illness, then make 5 fire cauteries on the head: one at the top of the nose, another towards the forehead near the end of the hairs; two above the ears, and one behind the temple; leave your hand with the cauterizing instrument until it reaches bone, and as long as scabs form from which vapors of large humors can escape; then cauterize on the wound according to its appearance.
And if the malaise is spread everywhere and clearly visible, it requires that you perform fire cauterizations as we have described: on the head where we mentioned five (5) cauteries; one near each nostril, and two over the spine at the neck, and six over the spine of the back; a large one below the navel and another nearby; two above the shoulders, two over the groins, and two over the tendons of the hips, and on the palm pits; around all joints in hands and feet, and in their sockets. Be careful not to burn the nerves just behind the heels, and never perform cauterization directly on bone: one on the fingerbone, another on the abdominal bone, and one on the liver.
bones on the wounds li grefont les coupons, and that cauterizes, pour ce ests; et ke prickled oustiés auet lou cautere la maintes: ount le ces vains de les veut. Ce que cauteries;
Of inflammation
When inflammation appears in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, but it is not healed, then you should make cauterizations on the limb according to its size; the cauterization should be a little transparent at first. Then treat with ointments until it is healthy. Sometimes cauterizations are made on the hand, foot, and back, where the nerve causes movement in the limb, and thus bone becomes inflamed; however, do not interfebrate unless you know the limbs and paths of moving nerves within the body.
Of silvering
When the disease called "silvering" is old and medical remedies are ineffective, then cauterize with a small caustic piece according to the amount of flesh affected until blanching occurs and color changes; then apply flour paste and lentil mixture with rose oil and plantain leaf, and blood of hare and stork (each one part); melt everything together, bind with cloth, and keep warm until it is healed.
The treatment of ulcers by cautery
When ulcers begin to appear and you see them need to be stopped, cauterize the area with a circular cautery that surrounds the entire ulcer. Nevertheless, healthy people say they also make cauteries at the center of the ulcer; however, this does not seem good to me, as I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted this outcome before; moreover, a more suitable method is to cauterize around it with a circular cautery known as "circule", as we have said in many other cauteries.
For the inflammation that cannot be killed
When someone has an illness called "adubelati," and it delays dying due to excess discharge or because of the patient's weak condition when they are very old (that is, too aged) with little blood; and you see them hastening to die: then cauterize around many small caustic burns by poking; after that leave it as such. For it will delay dying.
And if you see the entire cautery pierced, then heat the cautery of which there is a form:
And place your hand in the midst of the disease called "adubebalati" until the caustic burns have penetrated to the bone, and make the caustic burns such that the patient feels them behind in a manner so that the course of the putrefaction is alleviated. Afterward, cure it until it is perfectly healthy.
The treatment of fire with iron
Another way of disease called "corrodens," and it is nothing but a swelling of the limbs, for it consumes the limbs just like fire dries out hay straws. If you see this disease in its location where the patient can endure cauterization along with heat, then apply small and large hot branding irons as required by the location or condition of the disease; after cauterizing all parts until you have treated the entire corruption, leaving nothing remaining so that all corrupted tissue is removed. Then let it rest for three days, and put ointment with oil on the heated burns until they are scabbed over from the fire burns, and all the corruption is gone. After this treatment of salve: And if after three days a scar does not form, it is good; but if not, restart cauterizing where the corrupted tissue remains. This swelling is never once treated with ague medicine at the location of fire cauterization; however, fire cauter
This refers to the practice of using a particular type of bandage known as "porrells" that comes with spikes. These would be applied along with other medical treatments, possibly for specific conditions requiring such specialized dressings. The text is an excerpt from a medieval medical manuscript discussing various treatments and procedures used during the time period.
Often it happens that in the feet from behind a disease arises called "closed" according to our understanding, and is a large lump that swells the foot. And the fire cautery for this disease has two methods: firstly, fire cautery; secondly, water cautery hot. Fire cautery is one where you heat a tool like an awl made of good iron to the size it can pierce through all parts and that it has subtle edges; after heating it red-hot, turn your hand completely around the nail until it reaches the top part of the nail, leaving so for three days until it starts oozing pus; then make a poultice of finely ground malves with seal, leave the poult지스 on throughout the night, and the nail will loosen and be pulled out along its roots. Then treat the place with anointing oil until it is healthy again.
And if they are infected from behind the body, and many times it happens in hands and feet; then you must apply water cautery hot; and is done thus: take a grain of iron or bronze, or an awl made of wood, place it over the nail and its edge (that is to say for warts); put the grain around so that it encompasses entirely, then put a bit of warm water on it, hold your hand firmly, and press while turning so that the margin of the grain reaches the root of the nail, allowing hot water to find its deep path to the root; and let the patient endure the stinging of the hot water for an hour; then leave as such, and it will loosen all roots. Do this several times until you have reached all those in the body, then treat them with ointments that soothe.
de heal: ells on, et chere:
When anyone shivers from coldness of the limbs or fever quartan or another, it is necessary to make them four or four fire cauteries on the spine of the back, one between each vertebra; and one at a vein, and one over the stomach with an olive oil cautery; this will stop the shivering, and restore their health from the cold illness.
Of pus-filled sores
Never visible from below the body or pus-filled sores that originate from large corrupt materials. If they first appear such that one performs cauterization at each head of the pustule: a fine cauterization made with wood of myrtle, whose tip is held in fire, or long root of aristolochia, or lenticular cautery. And never should it be cauterized on the first appearance according to this manner, and they cannot grow further ahead, but its superfluity from which it originates is broken up, and become healthy; however, it must be done after blood evacuation.
When the artery is cut Many times it occurs that great bleeding from an artery cut at the wound near the edge of a garment or through an incision on an abscess, or while cauterizing a limb, and similar things; and it is most grave to spill blood.
And in any case, if this happens to you, quickly place your index finger on the wound of the vein and strain it very hard until blood flow stops from under your finger; then apply oil-olive cauldrons, large or small as needed until they are all red-hot; then take [them] with your hand according to the size and location of the wound and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep it there until blood flow stops.
And if it leaps back when you lift your arm above the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are in the fire.
And continue to do the one after the other until the blood is stopped; and be careful not to burn the nerve near it, and that no further harm comes upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from the artery, you cannot completely stop it by yourself unless it's large, except through one of the four methods we have mentioned: by cautery or extraction if it is not treated yet, or by a strong twist of thread, or by medicines applied to which have the power to stop blood; and be bound and strained at once.
Who will render the tightly binding with cloth or putting burning substances on it, or other similar things; if it does not help much.
If this occurs with anyone and they do not have a mirror or present medicine, then their finger should be placed on the wound of the vein as we have said, stretching out until it is rested above the wound and vein; and it should not move, but its moist cold often is very cold until the blood is congealed and engorged and rested; then make incisions where needed for cauterization and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter all diseases that require fire cauterization or burning medicines, and poultices; and I have placed those chapters up to the fingers, and now I will go into this chapter by the same method for it is found more easily than before.
In this treatise too, you shall learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than with the first of cauterizations, and therefore greater caution is required.
For in this chapter's work, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incision upon an abscess, as well as treating wounds, extracting arrows, cutting into stones, and similar matters; where doubt and fear arise, many succumb.
And I advise you not to act rashly. For there are many ways of people who come in this way. If they came from those who suffered so greatly with their illness that they died easily due to the severity of their disease and its magnitude, then one must have fear for them. And of these wounds where there is loss of sensation, and they say: "Wait, I am guarded"; the patient becomes despairing. It does not suffice for you to consent to those who come seeking your help with this manner, but place greater trust in your honor than in your desire, and do not act hastily from what you are certain of and can obtain; and use prognostication and indication in treating your ill patients so that health may be restored; and this will aid you to achieve good reputation, glory, and remembrance among the people.
Three noble sons, Our Lords grant you good understanding and righteousness; and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Or I have ordered this treatise by sections as I discussed in the chapters on cautery, which I instructed from head to toe, so that you may more easily find what you need.
When the head is full of water
This illness often arises in children during birth, and when the womb is too tightly strained, it affects the child's head; there has never been a case where this was caused by something other than that.
And I have never seen this illness occur in anything but children, and all those that I have seen it afflicted with had a swift death; therefore, it seems to me more prudent to focus the treatise on partial care of such diseases.
by
If the moisture is more severe, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions shaped like a cross according to this form:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone and the signs you see are exposed commissures atop each part, and they spring up strongly when pressed by your hand inside, and it has not been repositioned; then it is necessary to make three incisions according to this manner:
And after the incision, remove all moisture thoroughly. After opening the cuts and applying powders, put in wine and oil, and leave it like this until the fifth day; then release it, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, allowing the head to be balanced evenly, and give dry meat without much moisture to the patient as long as the limb is comforted and healed.
And another method of incision is to examine the size and moisture of the abscess, for it is never before; never behind; never right; nor ever left.
So size the abscess opening and measure of moisture, and perform according to your ability; but beware not to sever an artery; ensure a flow of blood, so that the patient does not die from excessive bleeding or lack of humidity.
To restore
When a disease called "catarrh" occurs in the eyes or groin and is longstanding, and medical treatment proves unhelpful, then the subsequent remedy is with cautery where two arteries are cut.
Then when you are performing the cautery, have the patient raise their head; then rub their forehead with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, and extract them from all one cloth; then observe where they bleed, and both eyes should be after each ear, and few are returned; then mark the eyebrows, then cut out of both an acute piece of two parts as long as the chin reaches to the bone, and it is through the wide forehead.
And if you see, remove the acute piece from under the artery and cut it above, as two pieces across.
And when the vein is opened, he bleeds continuously without stopping.
And if the artery does not open up when touched, then you must measure the quantity of the space of three fingers, and cut around until reaching the bone; and what is needed to put out blood should be five shillings (or approximately 12 pence), with perhaps a bit more or less depending on what the patient can endure, and the congestion of the artery; then examine the wound: if it does not leave any spine above the bone and no abscess is present, cleanse it carefully and bandage the wound until healed.
From a swelling of veins
When an early swelling of veins comes with a sore throat due to moisture from tears and heat in temples and old headache with dizziness and similar things, and there is no improvement through the methods of common medicine, then one must extract the arteries from the temples and perform cauterization as we have discussed.
The manner of extracting them is such that the patient must let the hairs of his temples grow back, and listen to the artery which opens up in the temple as it pulses strongly, for it opens well with its beating. It's not much refilled like in some men who are very cold; if it refills, then strain the collar on the patient with a piece of cloth, then rub the area with an abrasive linen cloth and apply warm water until the artery is clearly visible again; then take this spatula as shown below:
Then lightly scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then tie it above the punctures, and separate well with towels from each part; if the artery is fine, twist it with a hook's point, then cover that area according to the amount of two veins. For if it is not covered, the wound will not heal at all.
And tie the blood from the five veins up to three (jars), and if the artery is large, it must be tied with two strong threads of silk filament so that decay does not come before the bandage's placement, and there is no bleeding during healing; then cover the excess between the two ligaments at the same time, and then, if you see it, cauterize with a caustic cautery up to the bone as long as the veins are tied; this is the mending work, if the patient does not have fever and is of hot complexion.
For caustics are aid in finishing moisture: this is why they are more useful for moisture. For the extraction of arteries, ensure the area is filled with old cotton and properly bandaged; after detaching them, treat with dry medicines that induce char formation, and bandages until healthy; if there's swelling from the artery as much as you work on it, promptly apply a hot caustic poultice or fill the area with vitriol and strain using your hand to make it shrinked; if not immediately available, place cold water over the area until the swelling subsides, then stretch it as required; for easier artery extraction, cauterize the vein with a sharp caustic from two parts but ensure its edge is well spread to endure longer heat. When inflammation is too persistent, it retains less warmth. And it should have between two blades, and when you've obtained the two holes, and make the wound with a hot iron until it reaches the bone; and remove any remaining tissue in both sockets because it should not be used of this caustic at all times; and here is the form of cautery:
From tears
When the tears from the eyes descend into veins located at the top of the forehead, and there is no benefit in applying medicinal remedies; and you observe the patient's face turning red as if frightened, with their brow moving like thunder; and the hair on the parchment becomes soaked and damp, becoming wrinkled, scorched by the heat of tears, then this treatment is needed.
And they called the ancient treatment "contused cure," and you should do this for a patient who has this disease with hair on their forehead: make three cuts or equal in length to the width of the forehead; one cut goes upward until it reaches the nose, while the other two are made at the level of .ii. costal cartilages above the parchment (skin), and be cautious not to incise any arteries that lie under these .ij. costal cartilages; place your hand away from the continuation of the .ij. mandibules, and each wound should measure .iij. ounces in length.
From the first cut reaching to the second incision; and scrape all the core that is between the two openings completely through the sack which is over the bone, then make a new opening from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then remove this sterculius plaster.
If you place the instrument called "cultellier" in the first opening, and it is very sharp on one side, while on the other side it is not cutting but soothing, that is its form. Apply the splint angled toward the chest at its root, and support the ribs towards the bone, and continue until it reaches the midline tear. Cover all vessels that branch off from the head to the eyelets as long as the incision remains continuous up to the one opening the eye, and then again with the other outflow; and then extract the blood equally, and express at the location where the blood is taken; then place in each fissure a tent of old cotton, and cover with cloths moistened in wine and oil and ointment, ensuring no abscesses form; and after three days remove the ligature, and apply great quantities of clean water paste, then treat with basilisk-based ointment mixed with rose oil, as well as other remedies for wounds until healed.
Of the eyes' pupils
When the patient frequently experiences blurred vision and sees the pupils becoming smaller and dimmed, with burning eyes; and hairs fall out, and the scalp afflictions painful itching, and the headaches; thus from these causes arise that those maladies and wounds often come, and the cure so keep him that they heal.
Instruct the patient to raise his head again, then make a large incision between his eyes and another wider one. From the incision at the left temple to the right temple, cut up to the bone; keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples when they move during eating. When the bone is exposed, squeeze out all blood onto a sponge, then place cotton wool between the two sides of the incision and cover it with bandages soaked in wine and oil; be vigilant against inflammation becoming severe. Once osteomyelitis occurs, you must rub the bone until new growth begins, then treat with astringent substances to promote healing.
In this manner: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of myrrh resin, and make an ointment with them; apply to these wounds to promote healing throughout.
For ear blocking or impaction.
All that comes out of the ears is one of these four things: grains or beast matter, pieces of mineral or similar substances like as if melted; seeds such as pine cones, peas, beans; or fluid-like discharge resembling water and easily flowing.
When it comes out of the ear in a form other than normal substances not adjacent to the ear and does not grow within the ear, put the ear to sunlight. If you see stones, then apply a few drops of violet oil or chamomile oil for extraction; and if there is sneezing due to this condition, plug up the nostrils when sneezes occur, and place cloth pieces or wool around the ear; keep the ear elevated. This often brings relief by this treatment; but if it does not improve, apply delicate tweezeback extraction as follows:
If it comes out with tweezers, that is good; if not, apply extraction using delicate single-threaded needles; and if it does not come out this way, make a wax cone or small hole in the ear canal, and plug up any substance around the cone so that nothing can enter when the cone is inserted. Then treat as previously described, as often relief comes by this method, as we have said; but if there is no such outcome, take some of the grit used for birds, and apply it to the area with something pointed enough to perform the task, inserting a small amount of cotton around it; then press the grit on the stone or whatever it may be, and treat accordingly. If it does not arise from all the things we have said, quickly incise an abscess as soon as one appears and swelling occurs, and spasms; the manner of making the incision is that you first reassure the patient with a cephalic application, drain any blood according to its measure, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear near fat or underlying tissue; keep the wound shaped like a crescent until you finish treating it, then suture as well as possible with your skill; continue treatment until healed. If it is a stone that exists and swells, perform an extraction; if it cannot be removed, create a delicate suture according to this method:
But do not perform this incision if you believe the stone is moist due to earwax, until you have made several attempts; then extract with delicate tweezebits and suction, as we have said before, so that the extractions be successful.
In the water then it comes that the patient should first use sneezing to clear his ear, and stuff the ear with old cotton. He lies on the same side where the water is. If it flies out forcefully, it's good. If not, take several small pieces according to the length of a mustard seed and lightly roast them; then put them in a piece or two through his ear, and blow them out. From another part, place an arrowhead on the hole where the water entered, and strike with another arrow against the one inside the ear until all the water is expelled, thus it flies forcefully out; and if you see this, take a stick, and put one end in the ear, and roast the other end over fire until the stick becomes less pliable. Then replace with others until all the water is gone as we have explained for stones.
In the removal of an object, if it is as small as a flea and such like things, treat it as we have described in division; but if it is of large size that you can feel it, then prepare for extraction with pincers; and it's easier to remove anything found inside the ear.
In the extraction. Et li oste l’oreille et li trait lou curez tu estroide a soient covint les pintees ou irement enl’extraction d’estre le miege. C. Si tu ountequid, si la mabeu cure ce qui estraite:
And it is narrow behind and wide in front. Then insert the thinner end into the ear according to the amount of suffering experienced by the patient; do this frequently until all are gone. If they do not come out as instructed, stuff around the canal with cotton as I have mentioned for stones; if they still don't emerge as we have said, apply distillations that elders have tested in snakebite treatments, and you will find them or deal with distillations; then distill oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument, of which its form is as you see:
It is made of silver or brass, narrow behind and wide in front for distillation; and to press the distillation with a well-made copper instrument, so you take a strainer and wrap it around the opening quickly with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and what you see from your medicines into the canal, ensuring it enters the ear; then fill all the cotton with the strainer, and press with a warm hand until the oil is distilled or condensation occurs in the ear; so the patient feels relief inside, and the distillations are like this: they are gently heated by fire as one would distill them in the ear; and ensure it's not too cold, for otherwise the medicine would not be as good.
In the treatment of hearing loss from old age or noise-induced hearing loss:
No child is born without any earlobes or ears; and this same thing happens in adults by the outpouching of a wound, or from dirt inside the ear, and these outpouchings come at times fully into the ear, such that one cannot see them; and sometimes there may be a slight loss of vision.
Therefore, if it comes to the full extent and cannot be seen, it is of serious healing in various ways, and in those cases where you see that one must put the pained ear under the sun; and look inside: if you see any apparent swelling on this area of flesh which has the form.
And be sure and use scraping before and behind all over the plainly; if it does not bleed from the ear; if the swelling is of wax or body of the ear, then take subtle pincers and scrape gently until all that wax is removed.
If the swelling is in full within the ear, take a fine subtil raser and heat it slightly over fire, then place it on the body of the ear. If you feel the swelling causing the patient great fear when heard, puncture lightly, but be careful not to sever the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the width of the opening, and grease with Egyptian ointment.
Do not let any day pass until the wound is healed, then take a tent and grease with rosewater, and powder with sublimed mercury; if you see the ear swelling, it's appropriate to replace the tent and move another moistened tent made of rosette oil and wax as long as the inflammeburst is removed; then care for it until it becomes healthy.
And if bleeding occurs, soak a sponge and wrap in cold water, place it on the ear, and apply other treatments to remove the blood that are used for distillations.
From the collection of papers
This paper that is brought by the eyes when they are wet and dry, it must be stretched with tongs and forceps, then treated with a poultice of its root paste; next apply lime water paste to the place.
And if it comes off, the fine lenticular cautery is used and the wound is sutured afterwards; many times repairs are needed because nothing stays on its roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, their roots become burnt and do not return.
.
Many times come from the limbs things that appear like frost in its form and hardness, and therefore this illness is called "grandine," consisting of a large amount of moisture above and below; treatments include: carefully observe if grandine moves on one side or another, as it's an easy thing to know; then make the incision wide, then superficially scrape each part, then grasp with forceps, and suture. If you do not pierce the paper without causing harm to the patient, nothing will worsen for the patient; if there is a large fissure, bring together at a stitch, and treat until it is healed; if small, do not apply any pressure, as the ointment will restore quickly on its own.
And if the grandine is descending into the depth of the ear toward the upper part, reverse the paper and grasp with forceps, then suture and press from one side to another; if the paper is pulled away by the incision, it does not cause harm; and when grandine has been coped, let the oil soak in dirty water, and treat the area that generates stench until the patient is healed.
Let the grease be washed with wine; and treat the wound from the time it smells bad.
It is an ointment, made with cloths in paper sheets laid over it, which often happens to children but not to adults, causing great discomfort to their eyes, and they get catarra at mornings, and cannot look into the sunlight because tears rush to their eyes; thus they lie on their faces downwards, sleeping, with moist paper sheets under their eyelids which swell from the ointment spread in oil. And when you press its location with your thumbs and feel it exude.
The manner of the treatment is that the patient puts their head in a basin; then takes a linen cloth and makes an enclosure in a circular shape according to the quantity contained by each ointment part, placing it on top; and presses with your thumbs from one side to another so that the o
Extract the entire piece of cloth and press it between your fingers until it spreads; then turn your hand to the right and left as much as it scrapes; and keep that you do not reach near the incision site, so it does not go all the way up to the oil.
If the wound does not open at the beginning of the cut, gently stretch the incision until it opens; then extract as we have said, moisten with cloths and water, and place on the wound, and bandage securely.
And for such patients who rub and apply something to corrupt the moisture that remains. Then treat it until it heals completely. And if an abscess comes at the site, then soothe with plasters until it is fully healed.
Of hair papers
When hairs appear in papers misplaced from their natural position and are aged, they harm the eyes, bringing about ways of diseases such as accustomed tears, softening of the papers, and milky discharge until it causes destruction to the eyes; there is treatment according to four methods: by fire cautery alone, or by medicinal ague following this chapter on cautery, and it may be done by incision and suturing or by blisters, as I will explain.
It is necessary that you place the patient's head in your hand, then turn the paper of oil into your left hand; if it turns easily, that is good; if not, pierce with a needle all one thread at its end; and let this be near the margin of the paper or where hair grows nearby, and pull through the entire paper with the thread, twisting it tightly. Then cut off the part underne grooved edge of the paper, away from misplaced hairs, throughout the entire affected area from the large to small rim; then draw out one thread, place a small gauze made of cotton and linen fabric beneath the paper, then press with an indentation as in a goose's bellows, making sure that the indentation is according to the amount you see lifting the edge of the paper from all sides.
Iliet tu ses sante ce, puis les i.iiij. Si cauquiz.i.nements deso la fuit l'oe il qui a le pereil seign deme con le chastis ces tirez li eue tote .ij.
And if in another way: and it is that you stretch the paper to a shape like the willow's quill as we have shown, at three angles separated according to the form here:
Then cover those which rise with small forces equally according to the form here.
And if you cannot hold the tongs and the pieces are not equal, then take a needle with one thread, and tie it around the figure; then take another thread next to the large edge, and the second thread next to the small, and join between your two threads evenly; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin over which you have stretched as we have shown, then unite the two edges of the wound by stitching, and cure until it is healthy; if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar ointment.
And at no time does the hair of the paper change color: if it needs to be treated with what we have said about incising; but the cautery on both sides is more artifice.
The treatment of ulcers is as follows: and it requires that you convert the paper and fold it inside according to what I have said, then make two cauteries with subtle threads long like the paper and wide like the spatula; and tie the heads of both ends so they are held by filaments. Then carefully connect the two sides as indicated above the paper's oil spot, and strain the two ulcers from each part separately; leave them thus for several days, and the strained skin will heal and harden until it grows back on its own.
If it delays, if the ulcer requires stronger treatment, then heal as long as possible; and when the wound is swoln upwards, and the paper cannot be seen or felt, and thus no hair can touch it; and this is how you will make both cauteries according to this figure, and with this length and width:
Instructions for this work involve taking a fine needle, and then threading it with very soft silk filament; next fasten the heads together as delicately as possible, ensuring the length of the threads is about an inch long; then arrange in the hole another short piece of thin silk thread quickly, and wrap both ends tightly around it. Then place the patient's head under a sunny spot so that this subtle work can be clearly seen, because these are very fine and small operations; insert the needle all the way to the root where hair is attached, and carefully cut the hair into paper strips as you go over the natural hair with it. Then extract the hair down to its roots, inserting a new hair there if there is one or several or more; then continue extracting until only smooth skin remains on the paper.
And if the hole is treated and hair does not grow back with it, shave the area completely following all of the threads you have arranged so that the bare skin can be seen; then once done, shave off the thread and leave the oil to rest for two or three days until the hair grows back in its place and a scab forms over it; and if the hairs are short, match them with longer natural eyebrows and keep them raised together until they become separated and can be removed.
And as long tails are smoothly, then wool of the oil in any tail clipped to shave when the hairs to short again is still grow hair sown them up; si tear after three days for them until all of beard with it.
When this disease called "aleacrati" or infection of the oil occurs, there are two ways: natural and unnatural. It happens through severe wounds, surgery, or cauterization, among similar causes.
And the method of treatment is to split that seal, and separate its lips, and insert linen threads inside, and clean it until it's healed; do not use anything drying or constricting in its care. For if you do this, the illness may return worse than before; but using things with softening properties, like fenugreek; and rose water of high or low quality, and linseed oil infused ointments, applied to any of the oils, wrap it in a cloth, and treat with that.
And the secret of your treatment is to ensure it does not heal following its previous form; and the treatments we have mentioned are exclusively directed towards this disease so that it does not return in its original form.
From a dislocation caused by movement in the joint
This disease known as axacrati is truly both natural and accidental. The accidental cause comes from wounds, cuts, cauterization, and similar matters; and the method of treatment in this case is that you must take an awl, which has a double thread, insert its point into the joint, piercing it with your left hand towards the right so that both threads reach the ends of the joint; then stretch the joint upwards with all your strength to the full length of the awl, and tie it off with a ligature about a finger's width wide.
And if the contour of the joint returns as it should be, that is good; if not, take a rasor and insert it into the incision you made earlier, then rotate the joint to create two cuts inside the joint itself; thus both ends of the incision are at the angles of either fissure, so when they come together, the contour should be as that of the letter 'Z'. Then remove the ligature in accordance with its thickness and position relative to how much it has caused the joint to change, then approximate the two separated parts using a thread made of linen; thereafter treat as we have previously mentioned with mollifying medicines and tents until it is healthy again.
If the illness comes from a fracture or stitching or cautery, it is necessary to make an incision cleanly above the hairs of the paper, and according to what has been said before; then between the two leaves of a tent, as I have stated; and the treatment should be done according to the form of the disease, for its forms are very diverse, and wise masters arrange all means possible to restore the figure to its natural shape; and likewise with the sickly ones, according to what it requires in terms of treatment and applications in various dispositions.
In regard to the bandaging of the paper (or wound)
When this bandaging occurs on the hands in such a way that the paper (or wound) above is sealed with the white of the oil, and cannot move or perform its natural actions, therefore it is necessary to place the tip of a razor beneath the paper, and lift it up; and spread out the paste, until you peel off what is adhered in the subtil paste, which is neither too hard nor too sharp so that the patient does not suffer from the paste being too hard or softening the oil; and make your incision where you scrape away that gathered one, gently, allowing the paper to return to its natural form; and it is cleaned, all of those gatherings, and do not be done any time in dirty water but with freshwater, then rinse it off with colander. Then place a linen tent between the paper and oil wool fleece abundant as much that it should be cleansed.
From the claw of the toe
Claws have two kinds: one that is nervous and similar to a hard syphilis, and another which is not nervous but resembles frozen pus moisture; when touched with iron and cooked on pincers, it does not burn out. Both appearances begin at the great rim and grow gradually until they cover the entire view, light, and movement of the toe.
The method of incision is such that the patient puts their head between their knees, then you work with your fingers. Lift the paper to your hand, then clip the claw at pincers of double thickness, and extend it upwards; then take a needle, and insert a hair from a horse or deer or oxen, along with a strong thread. Double the tip of the neede
And ensure that the spatula does not touch or tear the skin flap and is perforated; and after the incision, pour some sealing wax into it with a lead collarlet, and leave until the next day; then treat as necessary for healing to occur.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert a needle, and the claws do not fit in, this type of fake nail has been treated with many medicines; they grow as I described in the division, and if you see it covered, work on the patient's side, and apply a light spatula according to this method:
And gently pull out the nail, and if you see that it does not shrink or hurry afterward, distill from your mouth into the lead collarlet with the red collarette and sealing wax, and stuff the oil until the next day; then resume the other procedure according to this same work, until it is fully healed.
If nothing is against you in this regard as with a hot abscess, then wash the area and treat the abscess first until it heals, then resume the work as before, until it is healthy again.
And if the appearance of flesh at the elbow bothers in the area with great harm, then stop using the sling and cover only a part but not all, so that tears do not come; then it will drain into the oil-like red fluid which is made from lead sulfide.
of the pus that forms on the eyelid
Some men have red marks that appear occasionally, covering the prickle and held near paper and torne until due, resembling a rose of balustrade; the operations are such that the patient places his head in the santoin, then works on the hairs, curing all those with cunning appropriate to it, supporting them with strength; then clip the first, shave completely down to the end, ensuring no blood flows during the operation; and make an incision similar to the one we described for cutting nails and small forces of which you remove the sebum, as shown by the shape after this treatment.
Once the incision is completed and all hair is removed, apply oil of seal or distill it with red wormwood tincture and similar corrosive medicines, then put cotton soaked in egg white to ensure no inflammation; if nothing remains after some time, and there are signs of heat, treat the aposteme accordingly. If you suspect a hot aposteme, leave the oil and treat it with cooling remed cuisine appetite and digestion disorders; then return to your work as long as it is safe, where this type of inflammation will arise in the treated area.
But always ensure the natural treatment of every weakness from illness; and for this type of accident, in these procedures: until you are free. And don't suffer that is this sort of procedure.
From veins of eyes
Then there are red veins that cover the eyeball and impair vision and weaken the eye all days. Therefore, in the first instance when you look into the eye, wherein this is located, it also feels loose; then examine it thusly: instruct the patient to place his head on your shoulder, then suspend those veins along the entire circumference according to your wisdom, and be subtle twice as follows:
And let there be two veins tied off at degrees in one part following this manner:
; the bene flet is: a s... ousstlement bynecoliud an parle pletur;<brto c's, on: (gr
If you cannot grasp it all in that hour, make a poultice of soothing substances to alleviate the pain of the eyes, and leave it for several days until the pain is eased and confident of an abscess, then resume according to this manner which has been explained before until they are healed; and this is the form of strength.
For the fistula of the eye
The mires also known as 'arissati' fistules: when you treat it with cautery and by hot ague medicine according to what I have previously said, if it is not healed, then create an incision over the abscess where it should die off, and draw out all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed.
When the bone is uncovered and you see decay and darkness throughout the instrument of which this form consists; it is called "sharp head," made entirely from iron, and pointed like a file in its current shape.
And place it on the location of the decayed bone, then turn it between your thumbs and apply slight pressure until you know that the decay has been removed; do this once only, then restore its position with healing remedies.
If the bone is soft and moist, and the body of the bow remains soft, and it lasts thus for 40 days without renewing or being abscessed, and no malaise occurs, know that it is healed; if not, there is no other method than to bring back the fistula to the nostril according to this form: and it is to uncover the bone a second time with iron, and with acid medicines, and when it has been uncovered, take an instrument as in this shape, and let the iron bechief have 3 angles, and the rod being attenuated until you see so:
Then place it on the bone near the temple, and keep your hand away a little, then turn around completely as long as it pierces the bone until the patient feels pain if they hold their hand against their neck; and then restore its original position with dry medicines as I have shown you, and when pus forms and hardens in the eyes, the matter goes to the neck; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
To remove from the eye issue
When the eyebrows are completely separated and do not cause distress to the forehead or thinness, it is proper that you tie up the hair; then cleanse, then apply suction cups or hatterels without iron to draw out blood, then place oil made of aloe vera and myrrh and frankincense and catechu; then strain the oil, and warm a piece of linen and cloths. The way to prepare the cloths is that you gather soft enough cloths so each one is doubled four times over, and then place one on top of the other according to how much oil there is needed; then stretch it by placing it over a hardened board, and repeat suction cups without iron to draw out blood. Then remove the suction cups and let the strained oil be left in for day and night, and if the ointment softens greatly, then you must remove it; then remove the poultice after the day and night, and if you see the oil returning, that's good; otherwise, repeat the cloths, linen, poultice and suction cups until it is healthy.
The breaking of a sown cloth
When disruptions come to the sown cloth, then opened and comes with particles as a grain of resins, and is unstable to see; then you must look at it closely, for its operations are such that you insert a needle into the root of the part below up to those above, then insert another needle or there be a double thread from the part of the rim; and pierce it, leaving the first needle according to the arrangement; then cut off the place with a double thread, tie one part of the sown cloth around it, and hold it tightly, then remove the needle and put on the edge smoothed in abundance of wool; and let it be until the threads tear from the sown cloth, then treat the edge with comforting things as long as the wound is healed; and never again should the wound remain constrained by the sown cloth any part of a circle of fabric, until it is healed.
And if the eyes give a great appearance, then pierce to the subtle point that comes out from the edge of the wound and dries up the white moisture and descends into the eye socket, and enters quickly; then extract it until it is healed.
from the bow of the elbow
This disease called "alcunnati" is not just a bow that is assembled in the elbow, appearing as water draining, and it is not water; the appearance of its treatment is such that you make the patient sit on a custom-made chair with arms, then take their head between your hands, one hand at a time, and wait until you see the bow coming above your fingers; then gently place it, let the light be separated and observe the patient's symptoms as they usually would; if it does not drain below, know that it is water, and if the contours of the bow are not properly arranged as we have said. If you make them sit between your hands again, then take a delicate spatula and gently apply pressure on the horny part of the cornea with the continuation of the conjunctiva to the cornea and crown until the bow is released; when it is released, let warm honeyed water drain into their elbow, or boiled water mixed with fenugreek or honey, then continue treatment until they are healed.
from the waters of the elbow
We have observed the resemblances in the division of waters; and what is necessary for healing according to health. It is important that you seat the patient between your crossed hands in dim light away from the sunlight, and rub the oil vigorously until it's well mixed; then place a piece of paper over the container with his left hand if his eyes are on the right side, or vice versnse with his right hand. Then take the instrument called "almagda" in your right hand if his eyes are on the left, or with your left hand if they're on the right; then place the tip of the instrument near the crown by a small line drawn from one corner to the other end of the paper over the smaller outer rim. Carefully insert the "almagda" and twist your hand until it pierces through the paper, feeling that the vacuum is created in the space; the width of the almagda's path should be equivalent to the fullest measurement from where the plumb bob reaches just up to the end of the notch. This is the crown of the eye. If you see the bone on the paper due to its translucent cloth, then place the instrument close to it and press down with another method afterward if the liquid flows out now; he will see in front of him both his condition and the instrument within his eye.
After resting a bit and his eye rises on the second path, put more force with the instrument, and when it is firmly inserted and does not move upward, gently rotate your hand slightly; then return some of the gemstone oil into the eye and mix it well inside. Then place poultices or soft cloth soaked in oil rosin-rich and abundant with egg yolk, and bind it with the pure oil. We, along with those from our time, apply comfrey ointment generously filled with eggs.
by.
Then pierce the conjunctiva only slightly, not too deeply, but make a very fine incision and then apply medicinal plaster as we have said; at the completion of this procedure prepare for the patient an appropriate bed where he can sleep on his back in a dimly lit place; allow all movements to be gentle, feed him light foods, and keep his head still without turning left or right, following his natural position until after three days; then remove it from that same dark room and let him see various things, and then reconnect the ligament until on the seventh day; do not attempt this during or immediately after surgery but wait because the fluid accumulates quickly.
If abscesses arise, remove the bandage on the seventh day, and apply to the affected area that soothes the abscess; and when it is calmed, remove the cover from his face with a veil for several days, and let him remain in that same dark room. And then gradually leave the house, allowing him to resume his activities as usual; and know that no apprentices should interfebrate in this case.
It is not known to our lands nor can be found in our books; and never it does such things.
And these are forms similar to elephantiasis, because those who do not know them mistake their appearance; and they are properly of the rain.
And these include a subtlety in its head, with three sharp corners on it.
from the chin to the nose.
the following the oure so fard. If you and sc*t, but by a liud; "et some. The tous this; J; (with all;
If there is anything left that cannot be covered, work over all the subtle veins lightly, ensuring nothing remains; and if they become inflamed or an abscess forms, treat as it should; and if malignant abscesses occur, quickly cauterize until the area becomes firm and the bones are laid bare, then pour oil, milk, water, or wine.
If nothing works and moisture reaches the palate, ensure it is sane; and if moisture does not reach as needed, know that there are voids in the bones above, so veins do not come to cut them. Then it must be tied with a piece of linen thread slightly thickened by our hands, leaving space between each one about half an inch or less; place the patient's head on the end of the filament as best possible and stretch until it enters gently into the mouth; this is often done with children at school, and it is a simple task for those who know how to do it; then hold the first part that comes out through the nostril in one hand, and the second part coming from the mouth in the other hand, alternating between us as we are with the filament. Do this until you realize that we have cleaned away that bone piece, then remove the thread, drain any blood, and moisten the thread with Egyptian ointment, then put it back in the nostril as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments dissolve all residues of bone; then place a bandage on the nose for several days until sane, and if drying medicines are needed, use them; this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, through which oils and medicines are distilled into the nostrs.
Et le sire du mout se vous doit si lesme:
Of the cartilage from under the neck
Many times there arises at the top of the neck a disease called "telul," which grows and becomes large until it is visible to the eye; therefore, it must be excised from the beginning, with the bone cut out completely, then place the caustic or burning medicine on it. And if one delays in cutting before it becomes large, observe if it is hard, of a strange color, and has poor sensation: do not touch it with iron as it is an infected abscess that worsens each time; when it is cut once, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is from soft tissue, without strange coloring, and you can see all of it can be covered, then take away the fear in the patient, cure the area with dry and constricting things.
When the neck is cut and closed
When the continuation of a treatment occurs in one of these cartilage injuries, it benefits little in some people. Therefore, as with any occurrence to anyone, you should check if the wound is fresh and bleeding throughout; then sew up the two edges together, and treat until healed; and if the edges are detached on both sides, trim all parts of their flesh so they can heal, then sew the two edges together, hold fast, powder with dragon's blood powder, and burn frankincense; place a piece of lead or another metal over it until it draws out, then treat with ointment until healed.
The way to sew is that you assemble the stitches: with needles, as we have said in suturing the abd <stomach>; or with thread, as I have instructed you before.
For abscesses of the lips
On the hand's surface, hard pus-filled abscesses appear like grains of wheat, both smaller and larger; then you must turn the lips, cut above each one, take it with tweezebrushes and apply to each part; then place the ointment after vitriol incisions so that the wound is cleansed; and finally, ease the pain, and treat the area dry until healed.
From teeth decay
Lei.
Of strains
Of strains are never gathered at the heads of teeth, deep in the mouth between the gums, which are unpleasant and rough scales; nor are they ever black or citrine or worms until corruption comes to the gum, and they become foul breathing. It is necessary that you make the patient sit with his head between your hands, and his teeth in your holy hand, and remove any teeth or scales found, as long as nothing remains; then do so with darkness and greenness, and yellowness and other pains until they are removed; and if something has been taken out due to the first reason, it is good; if not, resume on the second day and afterward, until you have everything extracted. Be aware that teeth require various forms of estrangement for relief according to what the work shows, because the razors from which teeth fail are different in form than those between them. These shapes and others must be prepared with you.
It is necessary when you treat teeth pain to delay the drawing out as long as possible, because it should not be done hastily; for this matter has great difficulty until there is no excuse to extract. Then when the patient is constrained by threading, it must be certain regarding the bone to be extracted. Often the pain causes the patient distress and they think there are still stones or roots; so they extract the wrong tooth; however, the pain does not leave due to this, until the underlying cause is removed, as we have already done with such cases. And when you are well certain of the bone to be extracted, it must be scraped all around the tooth to a great extent in order to protect the gum on all sides; then move it slightly or tease it with fine pliers and tap lightly until it is properly positioned, then firmly secure the teeth. The head of the jaw should be placed into its correct position between your fingers, enscuing that it does not move.
After the tooth is extracted correctly without breaking, and if it does not come out fully, take one of these substances and fill inside each part gently, then move as you did initially. And if the bone is pierced and mingled, it must be filled with rags where the roots are; and if pulled subtly by pliers, do not break while extracting; it requires working diligently around the gums to protect the tooth.
And as veut li aie estrimes ou les d’o ieut. Et se monet de venir les bris s’il qui n'est:
The shapes of the tendons to which one moves first have long points and large thicknesses, not double when you pull on the thread; and these are the forms:
And they should be large limbs such that they do not bend while pulling, and made of well-crafted iron with teeth to grip hold.
from the root of tendons by ç.
And if the roots do not come out with all these pincers, it is necessary to uncover the entire flesh around the root and use the instrument called "althali," which is a pair of forceps. This is how it looks like.
And if it is thick and large enough so that it does not break, and the root slips through this, then it's good. If not, use all instruments, as these forms come here afterwards:
And if you help with this instrument that has two tines, then it is like the form shown here:
And of other instruments to be used on teeth, and this device which appears as large pincers, here is the form:
And these instruments must be forged so that they cannot break; and there are many tooth instruments; likewise other instruments which are not counted as such. The wise masters skillfully discover by themselves their instrument according to the works and diseases shown to them, for some illnesses do not have a specific instrument taught by old masters due to the diversity of areas and bones that may break or deteriorate; so it seeks those instruments which are needed as I mentioned before, along with guiding gestures, here is their form: And let them be large and well-fitting to hold the bone without slipping but able to grip and extract; then restore it with medicines suitable for that, and if there is deterioration in the bones, and it is small, he has all this instrument.
When teeth appear not in their natural place within the body and are unsightly, especially in maidens, it is necessary to ascertain whether the roots of the teeth are above or below the bone, and if they are not where they should be, and cannot be filed down or smoothed: then scrape them; and if accompanied by a cyst with the tooth, take this instrument whose shape is shown here, similar to a small beak, made of iron with an acute point at one end.
And gently and gradually bend the tooth over several days due to its hardness, and because you should not move the others, and if it is possible to see that it can be filed, then grind with an instrument shaped as shown here.
And it is also like the grinding of needles; and gently file the tooth over time until it comes loose; then smooth it out completely with a rasp at the end, and if the root is too sharp and cuts the tongue, it is necessary to grind the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
When the teeth are loose
When the teeth are loose due to being shaken or knocked out, and the patient cannot bite down on anything without feeling pain, and you have treated them with constricting medicines which do not work; if they require restraint, use a gold wire because silver wires turn green and rot, but gold does not change. The wire should be of medium thickness depending on the space between the teeth; and if you see the teeth leaning towards eachcu, take the wire and wrap it twice around both healthy teeth, then place the hairs between the two healthy teeth. If there are one or more missing teeth in that area, continue until you securely reach the adjacent healthy tooth on either side; then resume covering up to the part where you started pulling from, and extract your hand gently and skillfully, as long as they don't move. Be careful at the root of the loose tooth so it doesn't escape. Then cut off the hairs with pliers, rejoin them, and place them between the healthy teeth; then position it so that it does not touch the tongue. Leave it tightly bound as long as possible, and if it comes undone or breaks, tie it again with another wire; this will stay in place for its full duration, and restores both the shape of the teeth and the alignment when using two healthy teeth as guides, just as you see:
And when the tooth falls out, if you put it back in its place freshly as we have said; and do not attempt this with anyone who is not skilled and patient, and never shape it like a dog's bone, but place it where it was missing, and restrain it as previously mentioned, and it serves for long periods of time.
Of the cautery of the ligament of the tongue
At no time is there this ligament that arises from the tongue or nature, such as created in this manner; or by accident of quickly healed wound; and its workings are such that you treat the mouth with the patient's head held straight, and lift the tongue; then cauterize the nerve ligament on both sides, until the tongue is dislodged from its place, and if there is hardness or swelling, it is of quickly healed wound, so apply liniment and cauterize generously; and ensure that the incision is not too deep near the artery undernehem; and when you have done this, raise a pillow of rose water and ease for cold water, then place a cloth made of flax beneath the tongue; and every night apply an ointment to the patient's eyes so they cannot close. And if there is bleeding from reactions, apply vitriol paste; and if it does not stop, cauterize with slow-burning caustic which is good for this purpose; then continue healing until well.
And if you see that it is colored or black or hardened, so the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, because this is cancer; and if it recedes toward a blister, and there is moisture, apply liniment generously, then extract with a delicate syringe; and remove from all sides. And if it has been healed at your treatment site, apply vitriol paste until dry, then return to the original work until you have finished everything; then raise the head on pillows of rose water and cold water, and continue with other treatments until well-healed.
Of abscesses of the throat
Not once come to the throat bumps which are called "godath," and they properly call them two almonds. And when you treat them as we have said in the division, if they do not heal well, take care: if it is a small abscess with thin skin color, do not touch it with iron. If it is red and has thick roots, also avoid using iron; but let it drain until it's dead, then you can cut it off as it might burst on its own. And if it has a pale hue and the roots are fine, make sure to prepare your instrument carefully, but first ensure that the abscess is resting and calm. Then seat the patient in front of the sun with their head raised; they should open their mouth, and you operate by pressing between their hands with the prepuce over it, as shown here: (the translation for this part ends)
Can you press the tongue against this instrument entirely so that you see the abscess and take its edge with your fingernail to insert it into one almond, and draw as much blood above what you can; then do not touch anything else. Then cover the instrument (with something), which has the form shown here: (the translation for this part ends)
And if you do not have this instrument with tongs, use a spatula of which here is the form:
And take the incision with a sharp tool from one side and another name; and when you have cut out one of the almonds, do so on the other in the same manner, then after the incision rinse the patient's throat with hot water, vinegar, saltwater, and if blood flow occurs, again rinse with warm water or boiled pomegranate peels, or mistletoe leaves; continue until bleeding stops. Then treat them until they are healed; and ensure no other abscesses form in the throat except for the two almonds, which should be dealt with as such.
And I treated a woman for an abscess inside her throat, which was of small extent; and it had completely sealed off the entire throat, so that the woman could not exhale through the duct because it was clogged, and she could not eat or drink, and she would have died if she remained like this. And the abscesses were too high due to their opening, and li rains by the two holes of the nostrils; then I did quickly therefore immediately, so inserted a needle, then punctured a little through therein, and pulled it out part. Then took out much blood; and thus again as in parts of the abscesses, and let'redement that washed by, then cleaned, and then with minted to openings for the sties so much as soon I.
Of the eye
When the moisture descends to the eye and it is swollen and elongated, be called "perpendicular"; if it is small and round, call it an eyeball. If it has been treated as I have described in the division, but the treatment does not help, and you see that the abscess seems healed, and it is subtle, then cut (the growth); and the one which is rounded without being long should be excised; if it is red or of flesh color or black, cutting must be done. There is great danger to the patient in this matter. Therefore, when you see it as I have described regarding its size and elongation, seat the sick person in front of the sunlight, press their tongue with the instrument we have remembered earlier; then insert a needle into the eyeball, pull downward, and cut at .i. of the two points that I have said about cutting the two almonds. And it must be ensured not to cut beyond the natural end, for if you cut too much, it grieves the voice and speech; after the incision, apply what we have described in the section on cutting the two almondcups. And treat until they are healed. If the sick person is afraid of being cauterized, then use a device to protect their sense of fear during the procedure. The manner of this caustic (treatment) is with clear water. It should be that the patient places his head in your lap, and then presses their tongue with the instrument we have said about the scalpel for cauterization; confine it with clear lively spices so they are not too thick or too thin; and use this paste:
Li salve de le renie ceste li a lue ne puet euste li ou tu les ceutem qui ceu en la chastre le cotte à cottirent maintant, et li moust que ce tu ce li vus.ieme et l’arestem entor de ce que est sem. Quelle est toutsesle la medicine toutes fois est ce nues. Lesse ceu de ces trois ou quatre le chaunds lesquiz d’a cire m, siet ce emen li quinz tous les ct, et lise lest enlors.
This treatment is better with incision than with the cautery; if it is treated with fumigation in this manner, take calamine and hyssop and origanum (oregano) and rue and camomile and avronne (possibly aromatic water from aron tree bark) and similar herbs, and put them all or some of these into a pot. Let it simmer; the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and within the pot have an instrument inserted in this way: And it should be of silver or copper, and one end inserted into the mouth of the patient as long as the vapors rise to the eyes through the canal, until the eyes are suffused; resume often, until the eyes dry out, and ensure not to do this at the onset of a hot abscess because many things happen; and do not perform this with a cold abscess. If this instrument is not present, take a canula and place inside its head a swab soaked in warm water, ensuring that the patient's mouth does not become too hot; for the swab in warm water does not hinder the vapor from affecting the mouth, and it is a good cure with great benefit.
Pour lou murs qui ont estropnent alerse la pois par les espinette a le cuit en la gorge et estomac. Et tu li uve luemarez; ne toustant, si qu’il nient ceu que tu p'espointe de l’aise se poil supra veue, eusse .i ceste espinee par le murs coure ou cuit la gorge dure.
Et so that the ends are bent towards the top such that they may more easily enter the throat, and raise the head high; and watch that you do not touch the epiglote, lest it be obstructed or have any movement within the bone; and move in a way that the patient places the instrument, because it should be placed where things are easier to remove; then push out the obstruction either towards the front or guide it evenly throughout all parts of the instrument until it is expelled.
And for obstructions in the throat
And never is there an obstruction that cannot be cleared with medicine as I have described in the division of remedies; and if it does not help, then look inside the throat at the patient under sunlight, after you press their tongue against the instrument that I told you about. And if you see the obstruction, try to remove it using a small pin or delicate pincers as is suitable for this purpose. If neither of these work, take an oiled string and push it into the throat of the patient; then tie off one end with a hot iron rod, and do this often. And if the patient'annoys all day, then fill a glass vessel with cold water, have them hold it to their mouth, and wait until they swallow, moving it in their hand frequently; and as soon as you feel the obstruction giving way, remove it.
If it does not come out as we have said, then smoke the patient with vinegar using the instrument mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will take some time to work properly. The method of fumigate is such that you must fill a pot or jug with charcoal from the fire, and cover it with a cloth pierced at its center, allowing the head of the instrument to protrude through the hole; then pour your fumigation, and have the patient place their head in their mouth, sealing it so that no smoke escapes but travels upwards. The smoke will now rise into the sinus; if it does not come out, restart the fumigation many times again; during this time, allow the patient to experience thirst, and consume dirty food and sour things, without drinking any water; then at that point, there will be a need for them to release through this method.
The form of the instrument used to treat the sinus looks like pincers bent for insertion into the throat; it resembles a surgeon's spoon, and has roughness from limestone so that whatever is inserted cannot be removed. This is its shape:
The form of the instrument used to treat the sinuses looks like pincers for removal as this.
There are many kinds of abscesses, as remembrance comes after each in this book, and they differ by perforation and excision; and there are two ways to do it, one being the same kind itself, and because it holds moisture. And the second way is for open wounds on the body. For the abscess of the head is different from that at the base, and the abscess in the shoulder blades differs from those occurring in joints, and each has its judgment in practice.
If one must not pierce an abscess until it is completely healed according to its completion; and if in such cases wherein piercing is needed when they are ripe, and do not die as per their completion, like those occurring near joints. For when abscesses occur near jointcuations, and one leaves them until they become rotten around, sometimes the ligament and nerve of the joint may be corrupted, causing contraction in that limb. Or if an abscess is near the main body part, then delaying piercing until it has completely healed will harm the main body; or if it is near the base, one should not pierce as long as they are not fully healed; and one must not pierce those ripe before digestion is complete, except for those near the base which do not become rotten from all sides, but extend inside them, and a fistula appears.
Insolé; et semblant meurt les oirent li ajoindre est l'aposteme qui apelan les autres et cestement doumesme apotmecs leaument, et asainte la percernec andre. 9n eur.
In those cases where joints are painful, proceed with the affected limb. And when abscesses are present in their proper place, it is best to leave the perforation until digestion is complete, as we have said. For if you pierce too soon, this may spread poison throughout his body and be full of much filth; and sometimes they harden the lips and deep cavities within him. And with any abscess that are perceived in accordance with the width of the body, according to what the member requires. It is proper to treat small abscesses with small openings; and large abscessebe with large openings, along with many fissures depending on the size of the abscess; and where it is necessary to reach the heart or cover it, when it becomes as soft as a piece of cloth and dries out, it should be treated in the same manner as one would treat blisters: and for those which are split into three angles, or covered like a reed's sheath, like thorn abscesses; and others that require circular cutting, other cuts and similar methods.
For those who have no heads, as in superficial abscesses, it is proper to pierce them openly; and if the abscesses are large with a wide swelling, and you pierce it, do not drain all of the swelling at once, but leave some part untouched; then apply bandages up until the next day, after which you may remove any bandaging directly. Do this repeatedly from greater to lesser intervals as long as the swelling is completely drained; especially if the patient is weak or a pregnant woman, a small child, or an old decrepit man. For the pus sometimes bursts out when the swelling subsides, which may result in death of the patient, and do not fear this. Thus, avoid using this method without great caution, and once you have identified your abscess, expose the wound and check if it is small; and if it is a simple tear, then apply linen or old cotton bandages; and if there are large abscesses with many openings, ensure that each opening has its own bandage so they touch one another; and if you have pierced part of the skin in the abscess and tightly wrapped around it, make sure to fill it with old cotton or linen thread without any moisture, and tie until the next day; then remove the dressing and apply a healing ointment as long as necessary.
les questud in ancis a plemort;s polementt la bonze;m!
And it is necessary to understand universally in the treatment of abscesses; now I have told you how one should go about treating abscesses before and this chapter.
Of boils.
Boils often come in small abscesses and are managed similarly to the buttocks of an animal; there are many such types. Some are fatty with moisture like hairs, others are hard and pus-like at the base, without any doubt causing harm if left untrenanted. The treatment of these boils involves using instruments called "entromissor," from which they derive their formation, containing whatever substance is within them. If there is moisture present, it will seep out through the long hairs. And when all moisture has been drained, trim off the hair without leaving anything behind in the area that contained the moisture, as it returns if left alone; then apply a wool compress soaked in Egyptian ointment if available; if not, use water and salted fat, dip the compress in this mixture, and leave it on until the next day. Then renew the compress according to what was done before; do this for several days until you are sure that no further drainage occurs by nighttime; then treat the wound with appropriate ointment as long as needed until healed. If there is a fatty nodule present, follow these steps exactly: shave around it; pour snake gall on all sides and remove any scabs completely, then apply your usual treatment to ensure thorough cleaning of the area where the boil exists; if the drainage persists despite this, do as I have instructed afterwards.
And the abscess at its base and moist, is easier, for there is less blood. And if any of these abscesses or heads have no moisture, and from those come ones like the head of an old woman; and I found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and scaly, and could not break it; and had one struck it, they would have made a wound just like that of a stone. In other abscesses coming or heads at roots, so that those coming from children's heads and root bases of ears, the opening should be done every day as high up as possible to allow drainage; and treat them as necessary.
Of scrofula
Scrofula (scrofulosis) often occurs in the neck, and under the nodes, and at times arise from other parts of the body or limbs; they are large and closely connected with each other. And each scrofula is properly within its coat, as it is outside the head and abscess, as we have said. There are various appearances of these scrofulas that contain moisture, and there are evil ones that do not wish to heal healthily. In which thus you see with good appearance on the skin and color of body, and neither arteries nor veins or glands. The one wherein; it is shallow not deep; and so let be cut in such a fester, as we have said abscesses head: - so do so little and well-so that you are often heal the scrofulas. And them they of your face will out at all day or two times as many as ones. And I have much as I should not be cut to dry. And ones on, And so it shallow so that you may blee. As such is so done - time ailments; and dose in such as we them-such the your wound heal as well-so: so come one so by will they are of times with I’s.
When you puncture a vein or an artery and it does not allow you to work, apply the wound salve that contains pus-causing powders which stay in the bloodstream, and tighten the wound; then leave it until the abscess is calmed down, softened, and begins to decay. And when the pus has been expelled, return to your task as long as you have completed it; then inspect for small skin fissures if they remain, cleanse and bandage them. If there are large veins at the root of a cyst, do not puncture the cyst in its root but tie it off with a strong double thread and let it hang without harm; then treat the wound by soaking gauze plunged in Egyptian ointment, followed by care.
If you puncture the entire cyst, it is necessary that you sew the two edges of the wound together and keep them closed, ensuring there is no excessive swelling due to the size of the caster; if needed, proceed as we have instructed for puncturing its root. Cysts with excess fluid, pierce where they are most prominent; then treat similarly to what has been mentioned before, using ointment and similar substances so that any decaying matter is removed from those affected by it; and once the wound is well-cleaned, cure it with fragrant balm until healed.
If you clean them, then apply anointment as soon after treatment done; ightly.
The ancients spoke and wrote of the treatment for throat swelling; however, I have never seen such a practice in our land, and this is according to their writings.
For those with swollen throats, it is necessary to remove the fissure in the throat known as "epiglute;" and this is not done by doing so because all veins and the main cause of severe heat in the mouth, or in the throat, or in two almonds. When the disease is in the channel of the main artery, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid the impending danger from choking.
When we wish to split the epiglottis, we should cut it from three or four circles or one small slit across, between the two circles or by the quantity of the slit in the sliver.
And those eyes that are close to the cutting of the epiglottis have no vein, and the vessels are long thereon.
And if the master is fearful, he should extend the skin of the throat to the full extent, then cut the flesh as far as reaching the cartilage; and avoid the vessels of blood, unless you see something, and then remove the abscess, as we have said.
It is demonstrated by the dissection of the pharynx's vein which jumps out through the location that is torn, and due to the failure of voice.
And leaves the open wound exposed for a period.
And when the time of doubt about strangulation has passed, bring together the two lips of the wound at its base, and stitch the entire edge close to the underlying cartilage; then apply medicines that promote healing until it is sound.
 Then seal the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe through it, and they breathe through the wound, thus preventing death.
And therefore it is commanded that the patient leave the open wound until the illness has passed, which takes 3 or 4 days. Then they command to sew up and treat the wound until it is healed.
s (t de t; Y;t. And thein ca: I saw a maiden take a knife and thrust it into her throat, cutting part of the windpipe near the Adam's apple.
and I hastened to call for help, finding her as still as death.
I examined the wound and found blood flowing from it, but she had not bled through veins or arteries, only by the throat where the cut was made, causing a heavy bleed.
once: M so n's : you:
And it did not happen to the lady unless she was red of voice, and returned afterwards to her condition.
Thus I say in the treatment of the epiglottis there is no fear.
Of the large throat
the m.
There are two ways: natural and accidental; wherein nature has no remedy.
Il existe deux façons dont les événements peuvent se produire : la première ressemble à un gonflement dans notre corps, tandis que l'autre semble être une abcès provenant de nos artères. And there is fear, and it does not matter to work on severe cases but rather on the smaller ones, and test and examine everything thoroughly. If you find it to be the same as us in eating and not bleeding into any vein, then bandage like we do for ourselves, with all of our hair, and tie at the top, if there is any. And examine thoroughly, and treat it as is fitting, until it is perfectly healed.
From us
There are many ways of us, all the similarities I will tell you;
by:s in an so that as, and they come à de a l'un peu de li :
I say that the fever and heat persist as long as the boiling over is not passed, and the putrefaction is completed; then rests the fever and heat.
With this wound there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and contains a sore, which is its own pouch and follows the color of the body, and begins just like glassware, and becomes larger.
And there are two similarities, or griefs, or moisture, and so much of the colors as I have said in the classification.
When you approach the treatment of this wound, first examine and question all the instrument called "intermissor", according to its form or chapter that follows.
And the method of inquiring about abscesses in us is that you grasp or find it more moist where you think in the abscess, and turn your two fingers slowly, until you know that the pus has reached its peak, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then remove the "intermissor", and be careful not to harm it severely.
If there is running moisture under the skin, such as its color, then treat it similarly to how I have described for other abscesses.
And if after the entrometamorphosis there is no moisture present, know that it is fatty, then treat accordingly by making cross-shaped incisions and using pincers, lightly scraping each part, and covering with a coat where it lies to make it healthy with this.
And if you cannot treat it healthily, then cut it into pieces so that nothing remains.
If it remains displaced for a while, it dislocates again many times.
If it remains for a while and the wound is not grieved by heat, then apply powders with corrosive agents to the wound, strain the ward, and place soothing substances on the abscesses, and treat other diseases until they are healthy.
And if it is large, cut both edges of the wound, and heal what is causing infection.
And if the poultice is contrary or ineffective and you hastily mix it with white vitriol paste, leave it for two to three days until the wound heals, allowing blood effervescence; then return to its original place whatever remains.
See these forms of entwined swellings, and they come in three sizes: large, medium, and small; and there are four quarters called "albaret," and one called "breb," and there are again three ways to handle them for treating abscesses from fistulas.
And they are alike to the needles used for sorcery, and made of copper, iron, or silver, with movement valued like those that are yellow, and more tried in searching black spots indicative of an anal fistula.
And they come in three ways: large, medium, and small, depending on the quantity of the width of the perforation.
The forms of tumors are mostly similar to what you see here: large, medium, and small; and those with two abscesses also in three ways as mentioned above: grans, moiens, et petis;
And if they are hunchbacks with three curves, and there are in three ways; and if they are hunchbacks with two curves only, and one curve solely, and also in three ways; all these must be addressed at their place.
The head of these tools that cut are sharp, and some have only one edge from which the skin is scratched, so that neither vein nor nerve is severed.
And these instruments for incisions are held by strings so that the patient does not touch them at the start of abscesses.
There are three ways to do it: large, small, and medium as you see.
And it is not to be used except for limbs such as legs, arms, hands, elbows, and similar ones.
and never should you use any other instrument small, similar to sharpened thorns, as in this shape, where one would stop blood flow.
and you should never put it at the place that bleeds veins and arteries, and never go according to this great form:
At no time do men's breasts become inflamed when they begin to be corrupted, until they resemble women's breasts.
and remain ugly and swolebacks, and whoever wishes to heal them should be done according to this form of these lines b. jusque à g: then scrape the fatty tissue, and dress the wound with clean medicinal herbs, then sew the two edges of the wound together, and care for it until healed.
by Ch*:ckbober lesse (C, for them prud turo and then they have. This is because one must hold the greater line up to the smaller at the end of both, so that the larger contains the smaller according to this form, from this line b through g. Then scrape the leather between the two lips, remove the fat, and prepare as we have said with stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary for the treatment, until it becomes clean.
And if it is not clean, or the incision has not been fully made because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood flow, then it is necessary that you fill the wound with cotton swabs soaked in a corroding ointment. And leave it so that it can reshape itself and accumulate fat, then heal until it is sound again.
From abscesses of the elbows
These abscesses that come from the elbows are types of hard goiters or lumps, and some contain moisture.
bon; they should le t. And when all the bowels that are in an abscess have been emptied, fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment as needed until healed.
And if the abscess resembles hard swellings, treat as we have described in cutting open of scrofulous sores, and if the wound fills with bowels, perform a cautery as we have said before.
Of the treatment for arteries
When the artery is laid open, and the skin over it congeals, many times abscesses form, just as with the vein that bleeds and becomes infected.
And if you cut into it for the artery, then there are large abscesses from afar; And when you touch it with your feet, you feel an extreme pain; and for the vein, there is an immediate foul smell present;
the bo: a dur that it the igne; Mani and they also: ftous; (1 tige It is necessary to remove the iron bandage, and for those at the head it must also be removed, and in those with a swollen artery above the long skin.
It is necessary to remove the iron bandage, and for those at the head it must also be removed, and in those with a swollen artery above the long skin. Then work the sutures like knots, and gently release the arteries from bandages, until they are fully exposed.
Then insert a needle underneath it and pull until the opposite side is reached, and secure the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have shown you in extracting the two arteries that are on the temples.
Then stabilize the joint that lies between the two tendons of an intramuscular vein until blood flow ceases from where it is, and then cut open the abscess.
Then treat the wound created by a bowshot, as long as the sinew bleeds. Then apply an ointment to this, until it is healed.
the ben:faire: Mitho; It; Then insert the needle below the joint that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce, and have a double thread so that you pull from the opposite side. Then tie the abscess as I have told you, or link it from one of two parts with two threads tied together.
And if you doubt whether the threads are strong enough, then reinsert another needle through all of the thread of the abscess at the incision made by the first needebutterness and toughness." or "strength and resilience".
First treat the abscess until excess tissue subsides, then remove excess flesh and leave what remains attached.
Then apply a cloth soaked in wine and oil, then prepare wound dressings and ointments until it is healed.
Of abscesses of nerves
; ils ond do they reta a prt ome, and: If youre the de cor: anymentz. Do be e ga after heusso fun: m: it.
And this happens more often with shoulders and elbebits, and it is a grievous swelling, its color resembles the body's color, and it comes in various positions causing pain.
And when one is properly restrained, they feel pain as a malady, and it is not in the original body part, but beneath the skin.
And it stays motionless in all parts, and does not go forward or backward, above or below, and those with dislocations should not be treated with iron: perhaps they would become contracted.
And those who have pain at the top or forehead make use of the fire cautery. If abscesses are small, if you have tweezers, and cover them as they take root;
and if they are large, use the hook to lift them up, scrape off, then cut into bone, stitch the wound closed, and heal until it is completely healthy again.
also: Never does it occur anywhere other than in the belly, and it is a disease called "fungus" due to its resemblance, with subtle roots, and large stems; there are also small and very large ones.
And I saw homes where there were two bellies that resembled fungi more than anything else; they had no differences and were white in color, with fine roots, and were split open, and would remain moist.
I cut them open and found that in one it weighed eighteen ouncuos (an old unit of weight), and the other five ounces. When you make an incision, check if the patient is moist, and the color of the tissue is white and moist with a subtle root.
If the scab is too large, and be present with the fire cautery. For in cutting comes often great blood loss, and if it does not stop, then promptly use the cauterizing iron.
And if you see the patient eager and fearful of the incision with iron, take a well-made thread, and tie it as we have said, leaving it on for two days;
And then restrain the thread until it cuts off the vessel, and avoid causing him any trouble by it. And if the roots are thick, be wary of cutting his belly completely but well cover most of it.
Then cauterize so it does not reoccur; then treat the wound and ensure you do not cover the swelling which is of a sickly color, poor in sense, and lacking normal appearance.
For it is an advanced syphilitic sore, and I will come to its treatment afterward.
When the mouth becomes so full
the ph�s.
And if it is due to the rupture of the sphincter and by the opening of the bladder, then the color of the abscess resembles that of the body's skin, and it is an easy condition without pain, but with various exits. And if it is due to the opening of the intestine, then it becomes more varied, and when pressed on its sides, it bulges back and forth, and sometimes it may be flat, and greatly enlarges at the entry of the bath with strong work.
And if it is due to moisture, then it's a light condition and clearly noticeable when you press on your hand without constraint; and if it's due to blood, then the abscesses are large and hard, and protrude according to a quantity.
And if it is for swelling, then it is sensitive to touching, and the work should be such that you observe whether its appearance is due to arterial blood, vein, or swelling. If it is necessary to let the wound heal. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, for arteries and veins.
And if the appearance is due to the intestines or boils, then you must instruct the patient to wash his hands and extend them straight, and wrap everything around the bag. Then you command to lie on your back with hands between yours. Then go around the body where you have placed all the linens. Then extend half of the sore above everything along the large chain.
Then work on extending a portion of the abscess over the joint, and tie it with your thumb underneath, and pierce into the intestine. If you find a piece caught on the joint, detach it, and insert the intestine towards the direction of the abdomen.
the:
If the arrow makes an opposite turn or vein, then take it gently around, then return to your work and take two needles, and pour two drops of wax on them, and place the two needles around where you made a cross that you pierced through.
Then stretch the abscess in four places above the needles, and if you see them, remove the needle, and let it heal as long as it can, and extract the dead tissue from within. or cut away when it becomes thin and loose, then treat as necessary, and remove the abscess as we have said.
or cut away when it becomes thin and loose, then treat as necessary, and remove the abscess as we have said. And extract the blood or pus that you find, then treat the area as required, and bind it securely.
The ulcer
In the division of appearances of ulcers we have discussed how they should be treated with medicines and the procedure for bloodletting; now let us talk about the ulcer that arises in the joints, which requires great care during treatment, and according to ancient sources, if ulcers are present where they can be removed as easily as a sore on the breast or thigh, they should be entirely removed at the start. And when they become large and old, one should not approach them because I have never known any cure for them; nor has anyone ever been healed of them before me.
by a-b;t ain their ma the {; but;
Of dropsy We have already spoken about the categories of dropsy in the division, and how the assembly of water occurs, and the signs of each type, and the treatment administered by medicines, as well as that which is treated with iron; only these two types are exclusively concerned: namely tympanites and hyposarge, for they are mortal matters; therefore, when you treat this category of dropse called "eclite" using medicines, and the treatment does not help, check if the patient is weak or has another illness besides dropsy, such as loss of appetite and other similar symptoms; do not use iron for it, because there is doubt. And if you see a strong patient with only dropsy alone, who is neither too young nor too old, then proceed in this manner: Lift the patient's legs and have the assistants press the belly towards the lower part of the thigh, then take a spatula with these specifications: And it must be sharp at two parts. So that it cannot reach as far as the intestines when inserted.
Then look to see if the jaundice is related to the intestines: if so, you should make an incision above the elbow three fingers straight down from it; and if the jaundebce is due to liver disease, make your cut on the left side of the elbow three fingers straight up; and if it's caused by a stone, make the cut on the right side, ensuring that no excess flows towards the weakened area.
Then pierce all the skin with an instrument and remove it, then lift your hand to cover the entire area between the skin and fascia just as in skimming off a quantity of an eggshell or around; then pierce the fascia until you reach the level eight, which is the source of water, then proceed forward, and insert this instrument whose shape is:
On the upper part is the limb, and when the humors come to water, remove it now with the instrument; thus drain out half or one-third of it, for if you drain more than necessary at that hour, the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit by the weapon's approach, or he loses hand function, or nears death
However, depending on the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the disposition of the patient's temperament signifies, and his hair; then prepare the instrument and hold water, which is now retained by the key that opens the passageway above the armpit, as I have discussed, that you pierce in this manner; then resume the instrument on the following day if you see the patient suffering thus, and draw out a small quantity of water.
For a day, and be careful not to bleed too much until it stays but a little water. And if you doubt the patient, and leave out too much water, then cure with burial or hot sand, and through much sweat or bathing in the sun, and dye from drink; and the curing of dry medicines until he is healthy again, and causticate on the stomache and liver and spleen after the extraction of water, as I have said before.
For the stoppage of the member. At no time do children arise who lack foreskin on the penis, or if it is small, or not in its place. If necessary, it must be punctured immediately with a very fine needle according to this method: then insert a very thin plug of wood and tie it up as such for three or four days; when he needs to urinate, untie the closure and allow him to pass urine, and then replace it; however, sometimes there is no need, because the urine that comes out does not leave an opening. For those whose foreskin is small, if treated with the medicine of wood shavings as we have said, it will expand. Those who do not have a foreskin in its place are afflicted, because no one is born with a foreskin at the top of the penis, so they cannot urinate unless they lift their penis; and they cannot impregnate because the substance cannot reach the testicles, and it is an evil disease.
And the manner of this operation is that the patient lies on their back, and extends the head of the penis and wraps it with a cloth as if it were the size of a feather; and guard against excessive bleeding which often occurs, and if it happens, then apply a ligature to stop the blood flow, and care for the wound until it is healed.
Of pustules of the penis Many times these abscesses come in the penis, and there is an unsightly appearance of a wart; some are malignant and others not so; it is necessary that you pluck them with a small sharp needle, and scrape and clean all thoroughly, then apply cotton ball moistened with fine Egyptian ointment; cure the area with this delicate ointment until it heals. And if the wart is malignant, of putrid color and oozing, you must treat it with fire cautery. After scraping it off, and if the wart is both on the skin and inside the shaft of the penis, remove the wart that lies within; then when it heals over, cleanse the other part. For when you heal it all together, be not assured the integrity of the penis so that it is punctured, as darkness and corruption come to its root and vein; thus treat everything blackened and corrupted with a poultice made from ground pomegranate peels and dates, then apply other remedangs until it heals.
If bleeding progresses, arrange the lunar cautery as follows: The cauterization is of two dispositions together - that is, for bleeding and corruption. And if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it must be that you insert or guide a reed tube into the penis and urinate on the patient; and when hairs are found at the top of the penis in those who have not been circumcised, either for wound or for abscess, then indeed you should scrape with an instrument made of iron until ligatures are undone and freed is the head of the penis from all sides.
If this is indeed a serious matter to discuss about it, you should scrape with any spatula of iron from the top of the penis and hairs; then carefully separate between them, and put a fine linen cloth soaked in cold water that does not completely dry.
Of circumcision.
Circumcision is not necessarily a disruption of continuity like other wounds; nonethebo-thee, when we perform this work by our own will and properly in children, it is necessary that we make the best and easiest work for health.
I say the ancients did not mention child circumcision, for they do not use it in their laws either, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
For I have sought the greatest part of masters and sages who performed circumcision before a day, and in their strength, and at any new moon; it was customary because there were two veils, and sometimes they would cover one with another below.
Then it is regained and the pain doubles, and with the healing that may not be certain do not poke at the limb; and during the trimming of the nail, sometimes the metal escapes, causing swelling in the wound, and many times this occurs without needing further care.
From the healing done using force at every fiber of the ligament, I have found the benefit of experimentation, as the forces cut just as well above and below.
For when you press your hand, cut equally in .i. all the soft tissue; but ensure that the fibers are well stretched around the skin; and make the manner of the first operation such that you think like a child if he understands, that you do not forcefully tie the thread only within the scrotum, but let it expand in all manners possible. Then the head is placed between your hands straight, and it returns with force between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them or any of the straps; then place your hand on the rod and blow or cough, and guide it upwards until the head of the rod is aligned; then cleanse well of the filth assembled therein; then tie the joint securely with a double thread, then bind below.i. point to another point; and hold as two points by the second tied area near the pouchet and indicator, and cover between the two ties, then lift the rod gently and guide the head of the rod.
Then the head is placed between your hands straight, and it returns with force between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them or any of the straps; then place your hand on the rod and blow or cough, and guide it upwards until the head of the rod is aligned; then cleanse well of the filth assembled therein; then tie the joint securely with a double thread, then bind below.i. point to another point; and hold as two points by the second tied area near the pouchet and indicator, and cover between the two ties, then lift the rod gently and guide the head of the rod. Then let the blood clot little by little, for it is a woman's issue; and apply powder above and below the powder with a pledged cloth of an uncooked egg tempered with rose water, mixed with good quality fresh oil rosins, leaving until the following day, and cure as necessary until healthy.
The form of the strength for cleansing is this: both heads are held and sharpened, and they should be as large as a hazel alike.
The error of the inflammeblie if it is when the core inside escapes through the incision; therefore, it must be extended to your fingernail, so that the wound forms an opening; and cover equally, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then use pliers first, and afterwards bandage.
If it passes for three days, and the part underneath the rod is swollen, let it be until the opening has eased; gently scrape it off; bandage as you move, and guard against the area of the rod, which will not harm it at all.
Therefore heal the sudden wound with powders, as we have said or discussed in treatments for powders; if it is bandaged too much and goes above, it will not harm; heal as we have said until it is clean.
Holding back of urine
Holding back of urine is due to stone obstructions, or frozen blood, or bowels, or newly formed stones, which we have discussed in the section.
And if the urine is retained and you see that there is an obstruction due to a stone in the urethral passage or bladder neck, then it is necessary for the patient to be laid on their elbows, with legs raised; and put their feet up on the back, and stretch out his belly over the lower back part of the back, and hold tight as much as possible; and then constrain the urethral passage at the bladder neck is obstructed by a stone so that it does not pass.
If it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must provide extraction with an instrument called a "seringue": which is of thin silver wires, like the feathers of a bird; and the tube should be half a palm long.
The method of urine discharge is that you take a double thread and tie it at the top with some wool or cotton, then insert the end into the seringue; trim any excess wool and secure it up to the top of the seringue, then anoint the seringue with oil or butter and frankincense powder, and have the patient sit on a stool, wetting the bladder and penis with moistened oil from olives and water.
Then gently insert the seringue into the penis up to the root of the penis, then wrap the penis around it towards the scrotum; then insert the tube before reaching the bladader, and have the patient feel as if they are urinating on the object being emptied, and this is not done in this order for any other reason than because the direction of travel is twisted; then remove the thread from the wool little by little, and the urine follows the wool strand, and extract it.
And start draining with a siphon until the bladder is emptied, and be aligned properly for the patient.
Of bladder diseases
When leeches or when blood comes into the bladder, and it accumulates there, and you drain with waters and medicine, and called "catheter," and is known as the instrument:
It is closed, and if it has three openings: two on one side and one on the other as you see; and the joint above which the medicine cord is attached so that it thoroughly blocks the erection without addition, and if we can extract moisture and push when necessary.
And when you see the medicine in the bladder, place the head of the catheter into the moisture, and extract through the tube that is there; by extracting the moisture with the catheter, then firmly reinsert it back in; if the moisture enters now, it will come to the bladder, so the patient will feel it.
And this is the subtle form of enema used for the bladder; and thus:
And it is of silver or copper, and the head is higher up; and from one side of the neck where the ligaments tear. Then take a sheep bladder and put in the moisture you wish to use for an enema with the bladaderse. Tie the two breasts together with a strong double thread, then heat some of that moisture over fire; then insert the head into the enema nozzle, then stretch your hand around the bladder quickly so that all the moisture reaches it in good time, until the patient feels that the moisture has entered the bladder.
And if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle in it, then puncture around evenly; then insert a strong thread through these holes, assemble the circle as one would with leather straps, and put inside what oil, moisture, and water you wish to use, and tie it up in the instrument. And do as if you were using a bladder, squeeze with your hand until the moisture reaches the vessel.
Of the stone
We have already explained the ways of stone extraction and medicines together; and we said the difference between the stones before rain, and all signs, and in which stone one must work by cutting; and with bladder, and with penis; and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
I say that the stone which forms in the bladroids is more common in children, and it's a sign that the water leaps from the bladder resembling water in its subtlety; and there are many sand particles, and the patient feels graininess on their penis, and they urinate frequently, then become weakened; and most of these leaks affect foundations; and it is easier to treat children until they reach .iiij. (4) years old, and it's very severe in older men, and moderate for those who are between youth and age; and the cure is more straightforward for those with large stones than for those with small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, firstly it is necessary to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to clear all the feces that are within the intestines. For this can sometimes hinder seeking for the stone.
Then take the patient by the fingers, and make them stand up straight with their feet turned outward, so that the shoulder blade descends to the front of the bladder, and protrudes slightly at times from below; then have them sit between your hands properly positioned, and their hands should be under their thighs, so that the bladamo is completely angled forward; then grasp and touch it gently.
If you feel the shoulder blade in its place, hurry to cut into it now. And if it does not move with all your might, grease your left index finger with oil from your hand, and for young patients use your middle finger, or for adults, use your ring finger; then push it back into position, grasp the shoulder blade, and when you feel it at your finger, bring it to its place on the bladder's collar; then press under your finger, and guide it where you cut.
And command the assistant to press the bladder with their hand, and tell them to extend the cords upward with their right hand, and remove the skin that is below the cords on the part where you make an incision; then they apply a spatulum-like object for this purpose:
And it makes between those who are between the hips and the foundation, not in the middle but on the left side near the groin; and be straight above the stone, and twist your legs this way or that of the foundation, and let the waist also turn as wide as necessary to accommodate the size of the stone, without being too large.
Occasionally the pressure may be on those between the hips and the foundation, making them feel without strain; and know that there are stones with corners or edges: if they appear easy to remove; and those that seem smooth like a glinting surface, round in shape, from which removal is effortless.
For a stone that has corners and edges, make the waist larger; and if it does not come out, then you must use tongs like fine files to wrench the stone so that it cannot escape; or place the instrument of delicate hooked handle on top; and if you cannot maneuver it this way, broaden a small opening slightly and if it breaks, treat with vitriol.
If there is more than one stone, first place the largest at the bladder neck, then upwards, then the urethra, and after that the smaller ones if there are any. And if it is very large, it must be split, causing a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: either they die, or urine comes out as their opening cannot heal; but nonetheless strive with the draining or breaking apart using pincers until you remove it piece by piece.
And when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, bandage it up, and place a cloth soaked in oil and wine or oil and rosewater and cold water to cool the abscess; then reassure the patient on their neck and do not remove the ligature until after three days.
And when you remove it, soak the wound well with oil and water, then treat it with fine powders of daffodils and basil, until it heals properly.
When abscesses and infections come to the wound causing blood congealment in the bladder, and urine retention occurs as it is known without leap with urination: thus direct your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, corrosion of the bladwool will occur and cause inflammation.
Then lift the wound from water and bandages and dressing, treating it in every way you can until it is healed; and ensure that all aids used for treatment are tied around both thighs, and apply medications on the area.
And if the stone is small and it protrudes from the urethra, and becomes lodged, preventing urine flow; treat as I have instructed herein, by dilating multiple times for this procedure. This has been proven effective to me.
Take an iron hook of this form, with three points bent into one stake:
Then take a thread and wrap it around the shaft underneath the stone so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then gently insert the hook into the shaft until it reaches the stone; turn the hook slowly in your hand within the stone, as much as you can pierce through to the other side of the stone; urine will flow out soon after, and press with your hand on what remains lodged inside the shaft. It is quickly broken, jumps out forcefully with the urine, and the patient is relieved.
And if you cannot do so for any reason that prevents it, then take a thread from underneath the stone and another above, then join the shaft where the stone lies between the two threads, then extract it forcefully, remove the ligature, and cleanse the congealed blood in the wound; and treat it until it is healthy again.
From the stones of women
Occasionally stones are found inside women, and if it happens again, the treatment is difficult, and there are three reasons: firstly, in case the woman may be a virgin; secondly, one cannot find a skilled woman willing to undress before strangers, especially when she is chaste.
And the third manner is that perhaps one cannot find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone in the woman may be more embedded than in a man, so deeper excavation must be done, causing great fear.
the her.
And examine very well if the woman is a virgin: then it must place its weight or foundation and search for the stone; and if she finds it, she must constrain it from beneath her, and recommend to her that she places her weight or with the patient, and desires and presses her left hand firmly against the bladder.
If she finds it, then it must move the stone gradually from near the bladder to below, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then cut around the stone at the crest of the thigh against the muscle where there are visible roots, and feel the stone in that area; and do not move her finger above or below the stone, and be cautious with the first small incision.
Then insert the rod in her anus, and if you feel the stone, widen the cut until the stone can be removed; understand that there are many kinds of stones: they are small and large and sharp and smooth, long and round, and some have groovcks. Know these variations to know how it will exit.
If the blood does not stop flowing, then apply powdered lead oxide until it coagulates; then return to your work, until the stone is firmly in place, and use the leeches I have described for helping you with this task at home.
If the bleeding does not stop and it is from an artery that has been nicked, apply powder on the wound and use ties and bandages to compress, do not reopen unless necessary for the patient's death, then treat the wound.
And when the fever from blood is calmed and the limb becomes stable, return to your work until the stone is firmly in place.
of a painful swelling due to protruding tissues
It is nothing but a gathering of moisture or white pus, which originates from outside the edge of the joints that contain the sack; and it is called "sepsis," and never properly within the lining of the sack if one thinks this is another sac; and it is the leather between the white sepsis we have mentioned, and they do not occur without.
And the formation of this swelling is due to weakness that comes with the joints, and it spreads that matter.
byz that. This.
These are the signs of this assembly, for if it is whitish as we have said, then it is an abscess resembling, that is, long and thin like the figure of an egg, and does not open its mouth, for it is all moisture within.
And if there is moisture in the membrane itself, it is an abscess with part of the egg, and for this reason one thinks it is another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the mouth and the white flesh, it feels quite well; therefore when you want to know the color of the moisture, touch all around the inserted part, which forms as described before. According to what comes after the introduction, judge as it is within.
According to what comes after the introduction, judge as it is within. And when we treat it with iron, the patient should be made healthy as much as possible and their body filled; then they lie on their back, on something slightly raised, and many layers of cloth are placed underneath them.
then they lie on their left side, and command the assistant that they sit to the right, extending the rod to one of the two ribs near the hip bones;
by Carbo:
Then pierce the sac plain of water with one large puncture and extract all the fluid, then apply the onions, and stretch the skin upwards; do not touch the heart of the ribs, but only the skin - cut it or in pieces evenly along its edge, so that if you do not cut cleanly, the fluid will return.
And if the eve jumps away from your work, reset the joint in its place when you have completed the sac's treatment; then stitch together the two sides of the ribcage with a seam, and heal it as you would other wounds until it is healthy.
And if you find the eve corrupted by another disease, it is necessary to tie up any hanging vessels, suspecting the flow of blood; then cut out the rib and extract the eve, and heal as we have described.
And if the bone is joined in two parts together, know that they are like branches; separate one part just as you did with the first equally, then drain any blood, and apply a linen cloth soaked in rose oil to the wound.
and apply another linen cloth soaked in wine and oil, and place it on both sides, then cover with doubled sheets, and bind above all the affected area as per this method.
Then take two sheets and fill them with shredded cloth as per this pattern, sew them together around the waistline of the pants, and one side should be pulled up to the back until reaching the base, while the other is at the inner elbow. The remaining sheet wraps both arms, completely secured by a string on the belt loop;
and it is not the realm of medicine this branch of fire cautery for iron welding, so you should take a cultellare small cauterizing tool, and cover the leather of the bowstring, and heat it as we have said, so that the syphacic white substance containing water is exposed.
If you take the cauterizer according to this method and puncture that syphacic swelling with needles, and scrape it with this heated small cauterizer.
And cover it in all ways you can, as long as everything is scraped away; and be careful that the fire does not touch the skin; and understand that this work is healthier; and take care of stopping blood flow, and removing any remnants of welding.
If no other thing occurs causing an abscess or bleeding or anything else, treat what is causing the contrary according to what has been previously stated.
And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to wait for this procedure due to its horrifying nature, prepare a perforation as I have instructed you, provided that when we are certain based on the signs we have mentioned, bleeding may occur.
if the patient is seated on a raised seat; then make the incision below where it is swoln over all of its breadth, and place the perforation deep within the body; and let the openings be wide enough so that all blood flows freely.
Then apply cotton at the site, bind it, and leave to heal the remaining wound, then treat until the injury is healed.
If the gauze dressing does not allow the fluid to come out through the wound's opening, it is necessary to insert a pen or the instrument used in treating water retention from dropsy, as previously described; and make a small incision on the wound, ensuring that the fluid returns, and gathers after 6-7 months, then once gathered like before, this will pass away for the patient's future days.
For treating abscesses from boils:
It is said that in this section of this branch there are various positions due to fear, which seems best when left alone.
and I will tell you the procedure and similarities of the abscess.
I say therefore that many abscesses come from the body, mainly in the thighs; and this happens quite often.
le t do they ne: ougilt.
The color of an abscess follows the color of the body's flesh; there is no pain, but it is a serious abscess.
And sometimes it may be a large, frightening and painful abscess with a fiery color, never coming from our arteries or vein swelling.
When it is by our artery, it can be recognized through the heat of the abscess when you press with your thumbs. .
He who is affected by vein inflammation is known by his condition through the sensitivity of being touched on the joints.
and can do well with the cutting near this resemblance, and other areas as well. and that you remove the core of the tendons, then insert the awl into the top white flesh, and free the sinews completely from all parts of the flesh.
the on lesl:the maladvanced and so that he.
If it is air in the liver or that which is within the vessels, one must completely empty them and roundly drain them.
And if the birthmark is where it was previously located, then one must remove all of it and extract the bone, as we have said.
And when your treatments are complete, apply the linen wound with rose oil and wine, then continue with other remedies until it is healed.
if often they dont euch as lesse malhe harm ce en so as leu:
This is an abscess wrapped in a covering resembling a swelling with the softening of the tissues, and it moves violently when touched by the patient.
and its treatment is as dangerous as the disease described beforehand.
f; c; ecein-e:
It is necessary that you have the patient sit on a raised seat, then apply the suspensory to his arms at your sides. To all the vessels that are nearby near the groin, and the testicles, and extend them fully.
Then cut with a sharp scalpel on both sides of the vessels until they are uncovered,
s ; If they are not f:l's cures, tounte ben ne far and de la sentence by
Then insert a needle where there is one, with a double thread, and attach it at the first point where the vein has appeared, and securely tie to the other end. Then wrap with a bandage straight across, according to the length of the body, and treat the corrupted sores.
Then heal the wound as with others or use a bandage, and ensure that no sores leak out of either side.
est possible f in the tissibles que I's; If the bone loses its stability due to incision of veins, and becomes dry and cannot heal itself.
Of the treatment for snakebite The treatment of this snakebite is by the incision which comes when it bites or extends on the belly in the groin area, causing the intestines to protrude from that wound to one side.
line a that you can be ne:  themais not certain c thera t�. If they do not ceker
And when it is of muscle stretching pain, then it occurs little by little over a long time and does not come suddenly. And they are equal abscesses reaching up to the source, because the boil accelerates the intestines.
When the signs are from snakebite, it brings sudden pain at the beginning and various abscesses appearing close to the skin, due to issues with the intestines and organs affected by the snakebite.
And sometimes the intestines become blocked with a blockage, and they are retained inside, causing great pain for the patient, especially when pressed.
In these iron treatments where there is fear, it's necessary to be removed.
And the method of treatment is that you instruct the patient to reduce the intestines back into place with their hand internally in the wound, if it can be returned. Then gently place your fingers under its neck between your hands, and lift the buttocks.
Then apply warmth all over, and stay with heal them: Then insert into the thighs hooks according to what you need for opening the wound, and be such that the bones can come out.
Then scrape off the fascia that is outside of the skin of the calf, as long as all white fascia remains covered.
Then insert your index finger into that which tightens the calf, between the white fascia which is outside of the skin and between the second fascia.
. The form certain and it's the w by ben ether t; if this. And commands the minister to extend the elbow upwards, and unravel that which is behind the joint.
And if there are intestines wrapped or feculent and hard, and if you find anything, blow into the belly from above.
Then take a needle with a thick thread made of nine threads, and insert it into the rear part near the scapula, which is after the skin covering the collarbones; after shaping, then cut the hairs as they appear in strands until there are four strands. Then join them one on top of the other in a cross-shaped manner and tie the scapula, which we have said is below the skin covering the collarbones, with two strong ligatures. Then wrap the hair strands and tie them with two ties so that none of the small vessels feeding them can enter inside, to prevent an abscess from forming. And apply the ligature according to the first long line, and after these two lines let the sack be beneath the corner of the knee with a length of one finger.
and then the rest according to the size that the groove carries; then cut into the part that is below the hide of the knee, as long without correction, and the bow, as we have said before.
then prepare fine wool with oil, and apply it to the sores, and make the ligature that we have mentioned. And at no time is the white fester that we have mentioned cauterized after incision, due to concern for blood seepage.
For this often occurs, and leaves the bandage in place until it falls off on its own; and if it delays in healing, immerse it with hot water as we have said, until it heals.
then treat the wound with another curative process until it is completely well again.
of a groin hernia
In this branch, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the treatment with iron.
And the ancients said it is made as if there is a branch joined to the vein like fastening wires after cutting slightly above the bone.
they have heal and:
At no time do they come to the throat as we have said, and open up; and none of the intestines escape through the joints, and if any do escape, it is little, and quickly return within hours.
And in every case, if they remain too long at this spot, a hernia or tumor forms as the intestines escape.
And this happens due to the extension of the tumor which is in the throat, as we have said, because it extends, then becomes softened and inflated both at the eyes and open.
And the treatment is by fire as we have previously mentioned; and at times it is treated with iron in this manner:
And it involves the patient lying on their back between your hands, then wrap the inflated area with a width according to three handbreadths (doits);
and then remove the saphena vein that is under the skin, then take the thread and place it around the visible area of the saphena;
s. ça jeta:ce t; that the original-se (th em bovre que n's c;t s. The less by lei e te contes cont la se est est aura:
Then extract the skull from the jawbone and do not cover the sacking or extend any vein or other thing, as I have shown you in the treatment of inflamed intestines.
Then continue with wound care. And when you bandage the threads, if it becomes inflamed and heals the wound until it is healthy.
The sacking is constricted and has no appearance in the dressing, and the fire cautery works quickly here, and brings greater health benefits.
From softening of the skin at the joints
Many times the skin at the joints is softened in certain individuals because the flesh within becomes mollified and exudates; thus, when curing it, make the patient lie on their back with the affected area exposed, and cut the overly softened skin above the natural skin; then stitch together the two edges to be closed by three or four neat sutures firmly; next sew between the sutures as you would other wounds until they are healed, and extract any thread.
From mutilation
Dislocations occur in our law and for this reason I would prefer not to discuss it in this book; however, there are two reasons why we must: one, so that the master can respond with treatment when asked, and another, because we often need animal branding to aid us, such as goats, sheep, rabbits, and other beasts. Thus, I say brandings are done in two ways: by attraction or by piercing. In the case of branding by attraction, make the beast sit in warm water until its joints become soft and pliable; then grip it with your hand until you can set them rightly without feeling any movement. For animal tattooing: ensure that you hold the animal firmly, pressing the skin of its joints to your left hand, then tie a suspender, and pierce each hoof one at a time once they have been properly scorched; also leave no piece too small or intricate vein which is under the sole. This method of branding by attraction serves as proof that the other type made with tattooing does not leave anything behind from the joints, for in cases of attraction some material might remain causing lustful behavior in the animal; then treat the wound until it heals.
Hermaphroditism is a condition where an individual possesses both male and female reproductive structures or characteristics.
with the hire as:
From the tension of the tendons
The tendency is a swelling near the natural part, so much that it's unpleasant to look at; and women have it as large as one of their hands, and this is its remedy. It should be managed by reducing the excess of the tenderness in your hand or joints gently; and do not bite too deep, lest bleeding occur, then treat with another remedy until it's healed; and on another swelling near the mouth of a muscle, where there may also be an outpouching or protrusion like a cyst. This is called by ancient people as «maladie kowee». If you should cope with it, do so as we have said about tenderness, and treat until healed.
Erratique est une maladie qui avoit en son temps grant mortalité; et li cause fu la chaleur des fumieres que nus aportent à lor plaies par oultrage de sanc, et por ce qu’il se puet traverser dans les os. Et cest une douleureuse maladie, tant en le sang qui y est retenu, comme pour la chair d’une partie du membre; et a plusors il vient à la mort.
If the nature of woman is disordered in that she does not conceive because her womb is small; or it occurs naturally from birth, or by chance through illness; or due to a close proximity, or a very subtle disease or poison, and it happens throughout the groin area, thighs, buttocks, or wherever it may be; and it prevents conception, childbirth, and possibly future menstruation; then understanding of this comes from observing her body. If there is swelling resembling two eggs or a grape, apply heat to both sides or the affected area. If it is a very subtle disease affecting two wombs, act quickly, and position as follows: have the woman lie on her back with legs spread apart; then extend both hands fully until the obstruction is removed, and it overcomes the swelling; then apply woolen cloth soaked in oil to the area, and rub daily until they can join. And if the disease is hard and fast-growing, it requires using a leaf of myrtle for its shape resembling a cup. If this condition results from an external object or substance, suspend it with a string and use healing balms such as dragon's blood, incense, and copious amounts of frankincense; then prepare a wide cloth to prevent closure; and continue treatment until the wound is completely healed. When there are lesions in the groin area due to external causes, apply healing ointments containing ingredients like dragon'amoeba cervix, incense, with plenty of frankincense; then create a long-lasting linen cover and treat it as such until cured.
In the case of hemorrhoids: if caused by an external factor or substance, suspend it using a string, apply healing ointments containing ingredients like dragon's blood (hematoxylon campechianum), incense, and generous amounts of frankincense. Create a large cloth cover to prevent closure and continue treatment until the wound is completely healed.
bys: (s...d theizhe t ince + & iudermordulaient;sseme that ares approzeta, and cans. This. t'scomchiza t
From abscesses of the marrows
Various types of abscesses come in the bone marrow, such as canker and piercing abscesses, herpes, suppurations, fistulas, hemorrhoids, heating abscesscued, and other maladies I have mentioned in that division. Therefore, let me now tell you about this treatise on hot abscesses that occur in the bone marrow, which are not simply abscesses that swell up like a bump; And when you see its treatment with fire, pay attention to whether the abscess is sore and accompanied by fever and redness at first. Therefore, do not hasten to lance it immediately but let the pain subside before making the patient sit on some stool or pillows, so that they can rest their legs comfortably; Then spread out their thighs, place their arms below their hips, tie them well with a good ligature; then turn the instrument used for working in the mouth of the bone marrow toward it; and when you see this instrument being turned, insert its probe to determine how deep the bone marrow is so that nothing entering from the instrument penetrates further than necessary without hurting the patient. If there are larger abscesses, they should be covered with gauze during probing, ensuring no harm comes to the patient; and place the cone of the instrument above it. And when the abscess has opened, if you feel a lump after touching it with your hand, cover that area on the head with a cloth or bandage; and when the bump is deflated, apply tents soaked in oil to the wound.
Various types of abscesses come en la marrows; And when you see your hands are inflamed swollen it with gauze, detergent.
Firstly, one must know the natural shape of childbirth and its signs when a woman hastens to urinate and desires fragrance; then quickly understand that such births follow the natural figure with the head coming first followed by the second baby; thus, if you see these signs, gently press her belly so the baby is born soon as both come out at once because during this process sometimes there's a good expulsion of superfluous bones; and those that occur otherwise are not natural. Because it can happen on their feet or strong labor from the body or head, hands coming down to the belly or chest, turned by chance around the neck, and in other malicious ways; therefore at birth one must be wise and subtle about these things, guarding against errors and deceptions, and I will show you all the figures of how they should be helped.
If the baby comes out head first naturally and the mother labors greatly with weak vitality, let her sit on a stool or be held by women; then take its natural ointment of oil or fenugreek cooked, and afterwards insert the little spatula-shaped tool between her thighs to aid in birth. de bonge d luir l'est. Then, la peur le tient, se, and the istile; and re, que puit ei si femme li queste cise s;
From the dislocation of a child on its feet When the child comes to their feet, you must lift them up. and then turn him slightly and slightly, until they are even.
the of seslhe to them to. If you may we cans dont 20
If it falls just to the hips, as commanded, cause the patient to sneeze due to its condition. If it were possible, if God wills so.
And if it's not as we have said, turn a little bit and a little bit, until according to its natural shape. When then you lightly do so.
And if it does not occur as we have said, then take musk essence, and linseed oil, and melted resin, and grind all in a pestle within a bowl. And apply this salve generously inside the woman's vagina and vulva, Then have him sit upright in water until below the ribs.
And when it is softened beneath, place a small mirror on it, and position underneath, leaving for an hour. Then have him sit on a chair, then induce sneezing and press his mouth and nose, and gently rub the belly, as the child now has bowel movements. doze 1 tes d (t; When a child comes to this condition, put your hands on him gently but firmly.
of the issue from the child who comes out freely with a hand while stretching . If one cannot bring it back, lift the woman and go.
If she cannot walk, make her lie down on a bed, and straighten her legs out.
Then treat the inflammation as I have described;
also: and cannot m; And you place the child according to its natural shape, and it gurgles, and you command that it coughs until the baby falls asleep.
At the dislocation of the child's neck and extend its hands, turning its face towards its mother's back. I command that you dip your hand in herbs, then turn it slightly and slightly again; gently rub it lightly.
.
And when you have done this, make it sit on a chair, and command that she coughs; then let her sneeze. In the same manner, perform for all subsequent instances.
In the same manner, perform for all subsequent instances. When it comes in this way for all following instances, cover the wound with your fingertip until the moisture is removed.
as muche:fier. Do sofa. Tromble the n:.
Then push the child inside until you have positioned it correctly as needed, and instruct the woman not to strain at all times.
from the issue of the doublets (gemels) - likely referring to twins or a condition related to them in a medical context. there:czard de the m (do; car’:njestic as well as he said lesse if they so 30 que la. And when is nott's. They are s ils and that it the t. Theophistes until a d; c�st; Two are strange things, and do not live at all if they have no name.
I know that these may multiply, and are destroyed by the evil spirit who devises them, which is linked to idleness.
and no time come out as naturally like any other part underneebox; just as we have said.
the ou les m (1 ce deme: And make it so that when moved, it brings healing. of many children
of many children In no instance are they formed in the marris: i.e., either one or two or three or four or five or six or seven or more up to fifteen, and all shaped into a child by the measurement with the most splendid needle.
was f as it is not that heal: If done as required by these instructions.
of a child who has died
When treating a woman of a dead child or ruptured belly as I have described in the section, and there is no flux, and you are compelled to perform manual work. if it is necessary that you determine whether the woman is of sound mind, and has not had an accident or fears death.
If it is necessary for the woman to lie on her back, with her head facing downward and legs raised.
and the minister applies a twine to two parts, so that she may lie on the bed for treatment following childbirth without issue.
then rub the mouth of the marriage with oil mixed with muskwood and fennel seeds and flaxseed, then anoint his hands with these oils and substances. they:t some t;s (et lz by line f.
And take care if a child is prematurely born, so it does not descend on its head; If the lumps are in its eyes or neck or mouth or under the palate or from the beard or near the throat or beside the groin.
And if the swelling is on the feet, or fingers and middle ribs;
And it is proper to tie the sling on his right hand, and place the harness between his thumbs of the left hand, and gently push with all his hand, inserting the sling into any of these places we have mentioned until they are empty.
Then place it against another sling or as much strap you have need for, so that the removals are equal;
And then extend equally by moving both parts and sides, so that they come out, and let the joints be tightly held to move, as in their form.
And if a part remains dislocated, then grease some of its joints with oil, and insert it into that part, and treat the other part.
And if none remains dislocated, then place this joint or higher, and press until it slips out completely.
e; s:a:michard; a la douce so ext is. If it is necessary, wrap around a cloth so completely that it covers entirely.
Then bind in the joint of the foot or ankle, and so it is necessary to do the same for the other hand, with two feet.
; nde losse of c If it is necessary to put the splint between your two thumbs, and make the head of the dislocation and extract the water. Or you place it on the instrument called "almadol," from which the shape comes with tools or paste that follows this.
And in the same way, make the child have a natural large head. theta les marse est laissime que heus; Theoph; EST SARtrete aret ou de le: (in their n'ce
When the head of the shoulder leaps upward and is held firmly, it may be split, until the moisture that caused its displacement has gone.
And if it cannot emerge, cut into sections as you can move them;
And if it is swollen on the belly or below the ribs, you must puncture until the moisture runs out.
And if the child is over his feet, there is a slight attraction, and the direction to the mouth of the joints is light.
If it is painful on the belly or breast, let it be eased by wrapping with a cloth around the hand; And if there is distension of the belly or breast, as long as the moisture present is correct.
If it is the member has and other sores, let them be healed; curoient. If the surgeon places his hand on the end of the arrow shaft, he draws it up to the opening of the armpit. Then he places one or two cotton buds, and pulls tightly.
If the souches ou cestros: a bones que you maye traite it is and such asd espoem or le coure paroles its bles. Then you must also administer moist and fatty substances. and apply ointments of marble dust, and wrap in wet and softening bandages.
And if the child is on his side, you can place him as described in our treatise for a live child.
that: he: or lesque the t and:
And when you have accomplished this, if there are abscesses as we have mentioned coming in the muscles, then.
and if bleeding occurs, it should be stopped with a tight bandage, and other treatments applied.
And I saw a woman who had given birth to a dead child, then she conceived another one above that, and the other was reborn alive. le t, so: don'ile ce c, and do not; lest they s the  isn ils ond as heulso :pfe de a, to bon:
I was called to treat it, and pondered for long time, and could not heal the wound.
I placed under strong attraction, and brought out one bone, and after some days another. I pondered much because it has no bones in that part.
If I thought it was bones of a dead child.
I examined the wound and found broken bone until the woman's condition improved. and saw that she was in such a state for many times, but then there was some improvement from her original place.
is the w s and:
To reset the shoulder blade to its place
Afterward comes the form of pressure, where one finds books; and at two corners are two heads of two chains. Nevertheless, the horn should be more delicate with regard to restriction, and it should be made of marble or wood;
they so that as son: And among the two limbs are shoulder dislocations of this same type, which should be firmly fixed in both, half a palm long or slightly more.
And these two dislocations are situated in the mouth of the clavicle to open when turning both corners.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in appearance, made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of pliers. . zonts: s.
When you see that the muscles are open throughout the instrument, make the woman sit on a bed with her feet apart and legs exposed. Then insert both supports together into the vagina, and hold the head of the instrument away from between her thighs; Then work your hand along the instrument entirely, just as you have adjusted with the tweezeback to match, according to the amount that you see open the mouth of the vagina, until she does what she wishes.
the ac (et p les.
If do not neglect the instrument which you have prepared, for its necessity is by no means excusable.
When the testicles are retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to keep his foreskin pulled back, and then force him to sneeze in condition, and strain his hands against his mouth and nose. and if this fails, it is well understood.
s:
All these herbs, whether some or all of them, are cooked or boiled in water over the fire; then put a pestle or spoon into the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the mortar.
And cover it so that the steam rises into the mortar; then make them sneeze, as we have said. If he falls a second time due to hastefulness. by so;
And for the second dislocation; and when it has been found, gently pull and extend slightly straight so that the muscle does not contract during extraction. but it must be moved gently to the right and left, and then stretched out; it will come back and realign itself.
byt lignes sont lesuinment the le bles.
If it is not of everything we have said, ensure you do not injure while treating.
But it must be ensured that which is at the mouth of the arrow, you tie to the thigh of the woman, then cleanse with ointment quadrapharmacist.
l’s s then the oure quele so tougte la les ben le.t.
If it is necessary, therefore, fumigations with covenaulbs: none of the old ones have tried the fumigation of dried thistle and figs.
The shape of the instrument with which one performs fumigations to retain semen in women is as follows:
And it seems similar to an iron box, with the sharp end finely crafted and the ears wide near the fire.
by thems et se: If you do so that (turme; Ocul'segn ce cont en the t. I will cupulx but they also de m les.
To pierce the foundation deeply
However, some children are born who do not have pierced foundations but rather delicate spines: Therefore it is fitting for the midwife to pierce that delicate spine at its correct place and not of the sacrum's edge, and she must be careful not to touch any part.
: 60. I*; the t vouldf their leme :
If you suspect that it does not stay put, then place a piece of cloth around and leave it on for days, and have the bone examined when the child wants to move freely again.
And these instances of wound or abscess dressing do not occur; if it is necessary to cover that dressing: apply a cloth as we have mentioned before.
from the fistula at the foundation (or base) t*[l'k; and the:  (e m the esttous tiled ; by this un Ca; they.
If there is an abscess or several; and if the inflammation has been long-standing, then work on it, using either coarse pus or subtle mucous.
And sometimes these abscesses are persistent; and known by what is discharged from it or expulsion when the patient defecates, and occasionally vomiting up some material.
And if there are abscesses that extend up to the bladder, and up to the middle of the penis; and reach up to the hip joint, and towards our groin area.
And thus one finds the persistent fistula at the base, not bleeding. And it is that you tie your index finger or base, and insert a fine needle of silver or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if there is twisting, you insert a small fine tent (tentacle), or that of horse hair, until you feel the tent or hair on your finger;
If you do not feel it, and there is no clear excrement or swelling or heat as we have said: Say that it is not pierced, but quickly cut the vein.
And be it iste cauterie the cite: quat nos esprovez and le pistresse, but dissection of experience. For in our est expere, puisque issoie nostre escomestriousse les et espren de ctesme the ou.
If it is pierced up to the hip joint, then comes the tendon near its place. If there is no twisting and the pain persists, it will remain so, without remedy or relief through ointments.
And in these persistent abscesses there is no strong cure but hard work, and the foolishness of men who try to meddle with them.
J. 5 it does not; they s: the acsturd:
And it is so that the patient lies between your hands on their back; and you lift their legs up to their buttocks, with their buttocks inclined towards their belly. Then apply a tent of wool or linen if there is any twisting until you know where the tent lies.
If the patient feels weak at the base, it is necessary that you insert your index finger in.
by the are not;ing. If one does not treat it properly, they cannot heal it.
Throughout all means, if one can heal anything well, but this happens rarely;
and the remedy is to use the fire cautery skillfully according to the size of the fistula, as previously mentioned; the fact but n's en la marfs.
And then the treatment of bruised joints with oil, until those swellings subside, then apply ointment soothing and binding them together.
If it is thus healed, that's good. Otherwise, it cannot be healed in any other way;
and if it is torn between them, do not pierce all the way to where the foundation lies, but place an abundant covering of wax or silk between your fingers and the tear, then observe for pus under the coverage that changes color; If the opening of the beginning of the abscess occurs, and it is closed quickly before the tent forms, then apply the fire cautery until it reaches the end of the abscess.
And thus the abscess will be emptied and healed; then shape those crooked chairs to resemble a bird's feather, leaving nothing behind.
And if the wound still persists, and is located between you and your work (patient), then apply fire or medicinal cautery as needed.
The fire cautery gathers two things: that is to say, the burning of nearby hairs and the stopping of blood and drying up of moisture.
Then treat muddy wounds by pouring or chopping off, as long as the hairs soak in blood, and let the burned hairs be cut into pieces.
Then treat wounds from sudden injuries with a hard stick, and they are dry medicines.
; by the bentre in the first. If so f. The same. They are:
When a fistula comes up to the root of the foundation, and is far from the body, check with your doctor or the affected area, and inquire further.
If you feel the tenting, and between one or two is the towel or syphilis or chancre, which is near to be pierced, it should only have trust and hope as treatment through the management of one of the three methods:
or you cauterize it as we have said, or cover it up to the base, or if you see it tenting and healing as before.
And do not go too far with it, that you do not cover the support holding the foundation, and come to evacuations as they wish freely. And then apply care as we have said;
And then apply care as we have said; By chance it may be safe, or you remove that covering and clean it after it is cut near the foundation, or by hand or with another instrument sharpened. then mend the torn flesh which is in the wound as much as you can.
next study to restore the wound and keep the fistula in the part below the foundation; if that were an easier thing for the patient.
; If you take a piece of parchment pierced at the top according to this form: And insert a twisted thread in two places, and place the parchment on all threads along the hole up to the top.
If it is protruding at the edge of the foundation within, then remove the thread from that puncture and insert your own orifice.
et yt: the time they times; the de soff;
And it is never held firm while the children come together between two points, until they slip.
Then treat the wound until it is healed and cleansed.
and suffer pain de c. Then granit, then des iste dolé est the mort:
For it is not necessary to make a large incision for the removal, but then treat it as we have said, until it becomes healthy.
The shape of the pointed spatula used to make a fistula is blunt and sharp at both ends, with a cutting edge. And on the other hand, it does not cut like something that should not be cut; as you see here:
In various ways: some are within the foundation like resin dust, and there are small ones as well as large, with blood in their core. and there is one or several within the bone foundation and atop it; but those that are displaced have little moisture.
herein, so liontide; aseu sont les plus, mais of the blood bles dont:
Et the care of those who have them within the foundation, so it is that you instruct the patient to strain themselves to go into chambers until their foundation becomes firm and their children are seen. If hasty, and you have set it with pincers or hold it at your fingernail, then cut it near its roots.
And if the nails cannot be held due to their moisture, they are taken with a cloth or cotton, or from a piece of chamois. And extract your toes, then wrap them, and apply hot powders where necessary for the purpose of cauterization. Or you may cauterize them as instructed in the chapter on cauterization, then treat with other remedebefore they are healed.
And if the foundation cannot be expelled, then enema-cleanse the patient with an acrid and bitter enema to cleanse what is at or near the foundation; so it can come out openly.
. I, tes que la viet. Don'ziens faire de f: (c. And it is that you grasp them with your fingernail or pliers, and bandage them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, so that they fear the incision by iron.
If it is necessary to stitch according to this method: take a twisted thread and put it on a needle, then draw the thread upwards and pierce the needle from another side, and turn both ends of the double thread away from the needle. and make the stitch wide; then tighten the thread firmly, then knot the thread, remove the needle, and do so with all others, leaving one for tying off any excess blood.
Then place on the base a pillow of woolen cloth in rose oil or wax, and place it under the base, and instruct the patient to rest.
And then let it remain until they fall asleep, and when they awaken, provide them with ointment and other treatments until they are healed.
Also immediately the seat or base of fire. ;
If it is necessary to dress the tip of a digit or an unglove the skin above, which does not allow for moistening. then treat as needed until it hardens as required;
and if it cannot harden, resume the scraping more vigoramemt than before until healed, then skinning again; Then treat until it is properly aligned.
The tremor It is a small appearance requires much attention in front of the body, and must be handled carefully
And at no time is there a cooling of the flesh, feeling it just as if dead from shivering, and it comes to all the body, more in the hands than elsewhere.
And the treatment is to take a quill from a goose feather or a strong chicken's wing, and place that quill on the shivering area until it completely covers the redness. Then turn your hand to all sides with the quill until you cover it completely around the redness and insert it deep, extracting the redness from its roots.
If you see this, make a sling of flax or iron according to this form, and be subtle in removing it from underneath and stretching over.
And do not feel it, keep them held together and pressed close; and if you see this, cauterize the sore, as when it is before or a burn from cautery.
according to the form of an enema. At no time is one made into an enema with silver or lead pipes, or melted arsenic or molten metal; and at no time are any of these small and large suppositories administered according to the manner in which they have been prepared.
Those that are thus prepared for the treatment of children and who are weak and sorrowful are small.
The shape of both the small and large enema is as follows, or according to this method when the abdomen is bound:
And it has an abnormal protrusion or the belly is bound, as you see, and the head is pierced within; and have two holes on one side, and three on the other.
And either the belly or an animal's bladder or a piece of parchment be placed on it, and pierce all around through the small holes.
And between each hole, there should be a space of one finger's breadth, then insert through these holes a strong thread or twisted linen in the shape of an 'X', and fasten the belly as it is on a goat. When the medication is inside, fasten it to the instrument with strong thread, then enema; and it forms the circle.
And let the medication not be too hot or too cold, and grease the head of the enema with oil or lamb's butter, or similar substance, then gently insert it.
then the minister grabs the enema with both hands until it is fully inserted, and afterwards extracts the enema, lifting the patient's legs apart.
que; lespri; (and:
And if you administer the enema due to a bowel disorder, and the patient's condition worsens rapidly, so it recurs until they are well again.
And if hemorrhoids or an abscess exist, administer the enema as subtly as for a child.
and this is the form of the subtle enema which the tube should be strained with:
s.  (d but he's; and, or transit line est text by m.
We have said in the section on wound care; now you will say about hand and medical treatments, according to their completion.
I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and by what or where the cuts occur, and why they are made.
The things by which wounds are made include piercing with a stone, and cutting with a sword or knife, or by lance or staff or arrow, or similar things.
by the p li Sfoot: in the (s c
And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, beginning with simple head injuries, for recollection shall come to its scholar.
tu lise-t ilues lesmandi. And you gently probe for an abscess: if the heat from the head region is present almost immediately, and there is blood from the wound, and it cools on the contrary side of the affected area.
And apply a purgative to relieve the patient's distress with wine and fatty meats.
And if he does not want to purge, then lighten his meat intake, and do not drink wine or eat any flesh.
marcus * ca; the d.
If there is no abscess present, apply to the wound if it is fresh with all its blood and not moved by air or dust, as I will say a little later.
And if the arrow has been moved, apply some ointments until it is healthy again.
And if the wound is large like a sword cut and of similar nature, where the edges cannot be brought together by stitches, then join them with sutures, as I will say for abdominal wounds, by stitching.
If the wound reveals bone and is sharp, and holds only slightly, then bandage it with cloth; then treat the wound with medicines, and restore hardened leather in its place. Command the patient to eat large meats as you have tested, also cooked wheat and similar things like hairs.
And if you find or the skin is rotten, and it does not reach to the bone, cover it entirely with bandages, then wash it;
And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, without a cord, and it cannot be tied off with medicines, you must find the artery, and when you discover it dislocated, tie it down with a thread. And if this does not help, then cauterize it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: and it is that you put this powder which will bind like asphalt so the patient can move.
And the manner of the powder is as follows: take incense one part; blood of dragon two parts; quicksilver three parts, and grind finely. And apply the powder to the wound, and form it into a paste, until it dries well and reconnects with all its blood.
And then cover it well, and let it stick together if it does not swell; for the medicine is not removed until it is healed.
-D; est n's and: (prhet, they way; butt the following.
And if the arrow has moved from its wound, especially at this time, do not put any other powder on it.
But apply some soaked poultices or barley flour made with water and honey, until it oozes boils. Then continue the treatment of other treatments until he is well again.
line t; c and they ne: igne les s to bon the same. Ifle de a.
And I will tell you hereafter about fractures of the head.
Of the wound of the neck
If the wound is on or near the neck and it is uncomplicated, there is no difference between it and that of the head, but if any vessels or arteries in the neck are severed.
they is not oumet: And do not place anything cold on the wound, for the essence of nerves is cold, and their continuation with the brain, which is the highest member.
But use medicinal poultices, as if washed in gentle water and mixed with rose oil, and boiled similarly in gentle water. And apply other mineral remedeboiling them in this manner, and applying wet salves.
by the line:
If wounds are deep and filled with pus, puncture or insert it lower.
If an artery is cut, and bleeding occurs, open it, tie it off, and where necessary, cauterize.
When the spines of the throat are cut or pierced, and the windpipe is held, so that tissue can heal. If it cuts above the root of the throat, and does not harm the throat itself but resets according to its natural form. And then let it heal properly, and leave for some days, then treat with cleansing ointments until it is sound.
the: . (and they : c ons the in its not so s. And if there are bone fragments, trim all the protruding ones you can, and those that cannot be removed, leave them so that the wound may heal. And ensure they are cleaned and aligned properly;
And if the wound is fresh, apply powder as I have instructed. ; that he ben;
From the wound of a spear or knife
If it is a wound from a spear or knife and the wound is deep, then look to see if there are symptoms of infection as indicated by the patient's pain: know that the wound is fatal.
and if it is not deep, and the wound is fresh throughout its blood supply, do not apply powders or bindings in the first hour that would restrict the flow of blood. healudft; If you may be. He will s le t. But apply attractive ointment, and let it rest for two days.
And if you do not have an ointment, then place a piece of cotton into the wound to absorb moisture.
And make the patient lie on the sore for three or four days, or more if needed. if there will not come a spasm, nor malicious tremors or convulsions of the body. and when you see the proper healing signs, know that the wound is saved. Treat with ointments and other remedies until it is well again;
ougdust, to m e les so are they the t patientlye est mort byt the hark (p.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife cut, and it's simple or more severe on the back, then treat that which is before.
And if it is large, sew it up; and if it's small, use powder, and if it's embedded in the bone with broken off pieces, then treat both the wound and remove any protruding arrows if they are exposed. And if they are not exposed, let the wound heal itself, as long as it is lightly infected.
And for other injuries to other limbs, there is judgment as we have said.
And for the rupture of the abdomen,
, dont pe:
From a great wound come at no time the intestines or the veins of the intestines, which allow for intrusion.
and the cautery is easier to perform, and a small wound never becomes worse than a large one.
for this is why you must regularly reset the intestines in place, if not done repeatedly at high temperatures; la b'his.
And so it requires moving the injured flesh, for that is how one returns the intestines to their place like the other two.
And know that there are four ways of treating stomach wounds.
The first two common types occur in the abdominal suturing:
do so f;z t’t.
And indeed they are more properly treated with a stitch on the abdomen, and I will explain each one and declare.
I say that when the wound is small, and nothing of the intestines is pierced, And here are some things about putting back on, which is by one of the two ways: For the smallness of the wound, as we have said Or because the intestines have swelled due to cold
But when it is cold, do not remove them; and you must keep: A soft sponge or cloth soaked in fresh water is solely, Or place it in boiling water and add salt and pepper. And raise the intestine until it is sufficiently swoln.
by:  luge et all so not heu li se lais f, and s;
And when you see the swelling separated, as gently cooked intestines with water or salt. because thus it is attached by little things;
and if he cannot enter, make a small wound with the instrument used to pare corns;
do soi; That none should cut without great necessity or need.
And it is the inflammation to be divided:
Pour that Icourbent la main ou verset il ne doit li maillet soiement toeset l’eschine tu tenebe les bon and the oste.
When the wound is expanded, and the internal organs burst forth. if the arrowhead is removed and returned to its natural form back to its proper place. then l'a of les os est heal esprouds armis d’os de c. And so it must be reset; et the leg la forme comme le traite at is poules you a li but to the warte ou: and reat en them pricked its, and place;
When the wound is wide, and it is located below the belly. if it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head, ardent; that and so that they by ious; If you;t-wise tres le combole tadu, but; the c
And so if the rotation of the belly is in one of the two parts, If you agree that the affected part should be higher than the other,
And thus one must treat as I have described for large wounds and smaller ones.
For small wounds use what has been prescribed.
Then have at your hands a faithful minister who covers you with all his clothing on him; And bring together the lips; And this is the common way of suturing:
And this is the common way of suturing: and it is that you should take a needle or several, according to the quantity of the width of the wound; Then leave at the head of the wound two spaces apart, and insert a needle where there is a thick strong thread. and pierce the two heads with the two heads of a thorn.
Then strain a double thread through both needle eyes; Then immediately assemble the two heads of the dislocated joint;
And then leave a space of two fingers, and insert another needle; Then lay the thread flat as you did with the first needle. and continue to do so according to how many needles you require. As long as all the wound is restricted;
and to have needles that are medium-sized, both subtle and thick. est se veines: Because this requires them to be bent slightly.
And it is not necessary to push the needles too far from the hair and skin.
But they should not irritate and work the wound before the suturing;
Then bind the heads of the arrows so they do not bend and hurt the patient while sleeping. And place tents or cloths on the arrowheads to hold them steady. then let it remain until the wound is healed.
And this manner of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds. For it needs one or two needles therein.
The second stitching method is common, the en, theirs and it s t When you have discerned these four things together,
When you have discerned these four things together, If you reset the arrowhead in the part where you began, like how they set clothes.
and place a space between each stitch as wide as the length of a small finger.
This suture concerns the patient.
And I sewed a wound that had been in his abdomen.
which was afflicted by a knife. by which may be soe. And it concerns two large intestinal folds,
And it is a wound within the abdomen. I brought back his intestines as he had been for twenty-four hours,
And it was a wound closed up to fifteen days, and he treated it, and became healthy.
And the monks believed that he would die, and it was a miracle.
and I did not treat him with ointments because I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicine; he ue:
Now you shall hear of the two proper ways of dressing.
Take the needle and thread until it reaches to that inner part.
when you feel the heart beating straight in front, if the head of this sinew or that part where you inserted the neede is stitched,
And make a hole on the other side up to the cavity within.
and the understanding of this suture is that you sew as a tailor does with hairs. les so as theye ust;
The second method of suturing, as Galien properly states
or as with any joining method where both parts are naturally brought together. 1.
Insert a needle or sharp point near the nearest artery, and make an incision there solely. and leave the two points of its surface; then turn the needle, and make an incision through to the inner part. *t d:e t (Opeir est bolez c
Then make a perforation through the part behind up to its inner depths, in two other joints of the shoulder blade that are opposite each other.
and this is the manner of sewing and it is common practice.
Galien says this word, but no one bears witness to it.
byt, so that s s lesse toun the l’s crogress. That isle Tumberme. 41 (and them: theta et in such as and if you say. Do not like themafe p leu and c line its.
And one must push a needle from one side, and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew belts.
and sails that when the rupture is within the abdomen, then the cautery is more painful than other wounds in the abdomen.
The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds.
And it should be understood when you find the wound fresh with its blood still flowing because the arrow has moved it. If you must reset the intestines and the bowel; then place it on a bed of bran flour,
If you must reset the intestines and the bowel; then place it on a bed of bran flour, If it has moved with an arrow, then apply any ointment that is available, until the wound heals. and crush the herb, and prepare a syrup, and balm. then treat the wound as usual, until it is healthy again.
if yout la culer t chir Jous de li can yout; And move it two times a day until healed.
For in most cases no other medicine is needed for simple wounds.
and if you doubt that the wound has spread to the major limbs, If it is necessary to bruise a light cloth with oil of tar or rose oil, and place it within the joints, and from under the elbows.
then if it causes swelling or bruising in the bone, and often happens, If wine black enema is applied to the rectum, especially when it reaches up to the intestine.
and piercing into cavities, take care that when it is the large intestines, then it is easier to heal than the small ones.
The intestines called "jeune" cannot heal when they are infected, And it is because of the planting of veins that they are there, and due to the subtlety of the entire body, and its proximity to one's nature of nerves.
And if the spleen falls from the wound, place it back just as with an intestine, while it is fresh.
and if it is old and turned or blackened, one must lay the area that is blackened so bleeding does not occur. stres.
Then wrap the area between the joints. And place two strips of linen hanging from the part above the wound to ease the removal when thorns come out, and the sore swells up.
From the dressing of the boil
let: ous: If it can be restored in some individuals,
because I see a man who was troubled or stabbed in the belly by an arrow;
and it was the wound to the right of the abdamaged area. And it was swollen and became a fistula, and from this there were discharges and breathings.
I gave treatment according to what seemed best, and did not stop subtly until it was healed, and the ulcers scabbed over.
And when I saw that they had scabbed over, I suspected that the patient might have pain in his belly; s the dirple. And, and thx f:
And some experimentalists say that when there is a small wound within the intestine, it must be bound in this manner: take fresh gauze and large bandages, then bring together the edges of the wound. and when the fresh gauze has dried up on the wound, place it over the two sides.
then place another support as before, until the wound is fully healed.
and cover the wound. :
And if it is possible to tie off a portion of the intestine with a thin thread cut from an animal's intestine.
The method is as follows: Take the head of this intestinal thread that is thoroughly cleaned, bye: Then thread the needle with a loop, and sew the intestine, and reset the dislocation in its place.
And this method of stitching wounds is not contrary to following the ways of faith and hope;
And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it involves one of the internal organs such as an intestine, there are no remedies or health solutions except for subtlety (or finesse).
t; When any wound or abscess becomes old, it is universally called "fistula". and especially when it starts to swell up and pus flows out.
And a fistula is the result of an improperly healed wound that becomes hard and pale, where there is no pain felt. in fact iste:
And at times clear like a bow shot, and at other times thick. At times faint, and at other times sufficient.
And I have spoken in the section on wounds, that any wound not cleaned, and there is no healing. sentence s; do f;
This means to say, by examining the slightness of blood or body. Or because of its malignity; Or because there is hardness within it and on the lips, do not let any sores form.  When the bone is fractured, and the material is of poor quality; or when the medication used in the treatment is not good. or because corruption takes on a form of pestilence; heal Jum c ecrit. Do not l’m (or n’s it will te ben tret that they dose so: the d, and the ou a le se; The main que la crotiard. When there are veins or bones:
And I have already shown all these causes, signs, and medical treatments in the division.
Or it is necessary that I make you aware of the treatment for fistula which is done by handwork.
no, then in any teus. For there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves. or to the scrotum, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to the spine of the back, or any joint of hands or feet;
All abscesses of this kind are difficult to heal, with only labor and ignorance as causes.
And if there are no abscesses that reach the level I have mentioned, and you trust in its healing. And if you see it known, then take a lin or iron tent, if the abscess is straight and as desired.
When the abscess is twisted, carefully probe with a delicate instrument. because the vein bulges and bends due to twisting.
When it is well cleaned and then the abscesses of hairs. If clysterized through one of the passages,
because the moisture moves from one passage to another, and cleanses it.
then gently press with your power, to know if there are bones or nerves present, and it is inflamed.
And ask the patient about the pain he feels when pressed by your hand, and where it is located.
And when you truly know the location of it, and if it's far from a joint, nerve, artery, or vein. or in any of the locations I have mentioned to you, follow the procedure as I have told you.
or in any of the locations I have mentioned to you, follow the procedure as I have told you. by de la: and then the treatment until it is healed
and if the fistula is well located on the right side, one must cut out fully as much as possible. then apply bandages soaked in medicinal mud, and tie them up to the top of the faster.
then apply bandages soaked in medicinal mud, and tie them up to the top of the faster. but they aret et les trache and d s uropaustead:
And then you apply healing ointments to the affected area until it is healthy.
And if they are not healthy with that, then you must causticate as we have said,
When the bone is corrupted by a fistula, if it becomes loose. If veins or principal limbs are involved, as we have said;
And if the bone is exposed with decay and blackness, remove until all of the decayed bone has been cleared. line:
If it is not settled properly, and returns bent as before, say that you must not go near the stream.
if he exposes or digs until you reach the bottom, the est lest and don's:
If it heals thus, well done. And if not, know that decay is too far advanced, you cannot approach it. If there is no other remedy but for the leech to do its work naturally.
And if there is a small decayed bone, and you pull it out with pincers. If you extract with an instrument suitable for this,
assi que lice est pars: oughe and des ce est de qui bien pastry is the venu ;
If moisture behaves oppositely, there is no error or fear, If bone fragments, moisture, and flesh are separated, they deliver the bones.
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place something unpleasant in the wound to prevent putrefaction. And let it remain until it is reattached around the bones,
And then they will have their bones more easily;
And if it is a large bone, such as of the thigh or hip, If you often seek relief until the blackness is completely bone. Then restore the wound.
and if there is a large part affected by putrefaction, leading to bone exposure; If it needs to be sewn up and covered all the way until decay, then treat until it is healed.
And I will tell you of a case involving an abscess in his leg, so that you may take example and help with your practice.
in the la s, or; it est not be to se t a so they m c;
As long as the materials came to the leg, and there was an escape from a large abscess, and it had no reason not to open.
but due to their madness they worked so much that they opened up the abscesses. and they consumed a lot of materials, which became a fistula, and there was much discharge that everyone directed away from the body's heat and moisture.
t. Don't they do a; if heu;
As long as I have been called to him, and saw his leg and the remedies with which he was treated. and whatever relieved by pressing at a large body. and the body would become red from youthful vigor, and had an orange hue.
;d. That they s.
And I found that one came against the other from all parts of the leg.
Therefore, I hurried and probed into one of the wounds until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it to be rotten and smelling, and the decay reached right up to the inner part of the bone;
Here are that he quel le Jichey les tre t Soldier, and the con i :l’s. They times byt la ou a se est; (they bele croits they said il s
And I began to heal the wound with alkaline remedies for long periods of time, but could not sew.
and then I resumed, and discovered the bone as before,
and found continuous decay in the bone, and its marrow, and then I removed it, and tried to sew it back together.
so you may be ti; Then you shall reset it with remedies; and he was made whole and firm quickly.
And this operation should not be repeated unless due to the weakness of the patient, who cannot endure it. and because of my fear of his impending death. For often there is bloody evacuation, but it was completely healed.
For often there is bloody evacuation, but it was completely healed. And in place of the bone grew a hard callus, which was well-formed and had no harm or drawback throughout, neither at night nor day.
ong, et les te: And uncover the flesh over the joint where you see it swell, ensuring the skin does not tear. and insert a splinter or small piece of wood under the bone to facilitate moving the corrupted cartilage. And it should be treated as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and revisited even further.
 If it reveals the joint completely; then place a cauterizing iron beneath,
and then remove from one part to the other the corruption, and let it be wider than the length of the corruption by a little bit, as we have said;
and if the corruption is in the joint, cut out the corrupted joint, and let it be wider on the bone where it contains from the other side;
And if there is a disruption in the connection of the two joints, there is no other remedy than with cupping.
And if there is a disruption at the tip of the hand or foot, it is very strong. s, et li bon one ces ; la ou le p vennert fle un celement ne crote de: S's, and by nus est erllis. And cleanse it in all ways you can, but let the vein or nerve not oppose you.
and you say that the incisions and sutures to repair these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and appearance of flesh. et ons: Tut d’et and his it comes the body ; 1 li dee to ce quis, and you. And for this reason, it is necessary to equip each type of work with its instrument.
and scales that the work will show you the instrument you need, according to your knowledge of this art. and it shall demonstrate the ways of diseases; que il; that he s; et ne:d, so c gader lesse feust by theyn: if you can not; they's (1 and the 50 of them in:
By fire The head swells or because of humors, or due to insufficiency.
and when you have administered the remedy for that corruption through medical treatment, but it does not help, ici medication. If by this cause of death or evil (witchcraft), which is greater, due to the impairment of the limb, the patient escapes.
If by this cause of death or evil (witchcraft), which is greater, due to the impairment of the limb, the patient escapes. and the signs are such that the member becomes black, as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackness, then goes that of eating away from member to member, .
And if it is due to the strike of any venomous beasts such as sea scorpions, snakes, and similar creatures.
And if the erosion is on the head near both eyes, cover with a cap and do not give any space for it to reach up to the hand.
he is peculiere est eues ce ete:
When it occurs on an arm, hold firm to the bone; and if it passes through the bone, that's death. And there is no remedy but in its quantity of virtue;
and do so when the rot or worm comes: if it comes to the first joint, then hold after the other joint.
as the, and ça Et f t, dont the emnaz peu laissent a l's they do so that, so he said er que. If there quill; line of time; If it rises up to the leg, touch at the knee joint.
If it descends from above the knee joint and there is no other remedy than for the patient to die;
And the condition of the limb is such that you must bind it above and below. And extend one minister of the lower joint downward, and another minister extends the other joint upward. And you disrupt the flesh that is between the two joints with a strip of cloth wide enough so that the bone is revealed.
Then you cover it or bandage it, and place on each side a strip of linen, ensuring that the bandage does not touch the healthy flesh. thing;lue de the ou li; Tum: so they n’s.
When there is a flow of blood as you work, if necessary, promptly cauterize the area. And apply binding powders; then return to your medication until it is completed.
Then bind the injured limb with a legally binding contract, and heal as long as it becomes healthy;
the they be commbofs and bn or.
One day a dark spot appeared as if burned by fire,
and that corrosion began first in his right toe, spreading to consume the entire foot.
and when the man saw the corrosion, he quickly cut off the foot with an axe, and was saved;
bytum:
And I placed it on things with reverberating effects after bodily purification, and could not stop the ulcers.
And I wrap him up with a cloth, and do not want anything that could reflect the matter back at me. And doubted as if I were to cut my hand, he would not die. for the power of his spirit was weakened; and he became despairing, returning to his own land. and had a splinter in his hand, but it healed;
byssi:
At no time does an abscess come to a head, and it remains so long that it forms a large mass of pus. Then they heal and burst, and the pus flows out, and the original wounds close up, like with vessels; And the skin that is above is as delicate as a torn piece of fabric, the old;
But if it is so elongated that it reaches to the bone at its core, then it is called "fistula";
and if the cure is such that you should cut out all of that flesh, especially when it is fine like a fabric. And it does not move due to its corruption.
And if you find that the skin is hardened, and the corruption is not in fullness, And if the skin is spotted with pus, then the treatment by cleansing is as follows:
Check if the breasts are large, and the bow which is part of it has a foul smell. Then use the Egyptian medicinal suppository that is made as follows: Take ease, and oil, and litharge (lead oxide), equally, and put to cook in one vessel over the fire, .
And then take as needed from your source, making it with water and honey. And in cleansing the sinew, and straining the tendon; And leave the medicine to act for two hours, then extract by pressing out;
t so: (doze thera ben  theynate est unus: they d: anue.
And sometimes they are enemaed with water of ashes, When this remedy is not present, and you must take ash from the wood of a vine, and pour water upon it.
Then let it cool, and enema with it, until you know that the insides are well cleansed;
If the patient cannot endure it, neither Egyptian medicine nor ash water can help. if the laxative made of water and honey with some powdered litmus is taken. or if you administer the honey and mead enema, where the honey has properties to cleanse and purify, When the wine causes one to breathe heavily;
And when this is done, ensuring that the wound is properly healed, If you have applied what causes the urge to defecate in him,
And it is where you grasp firmly at the dislocated area, and they do this with oil-soaked wool and wine. Or you enema the patient with certain medicines and salves, whose properties I have mentioned for treating salves;
And if the breast is too small, and the tube of the enema cannot enter, If you enlarge a wound slightly with iron, and apply an Egyptian ointment dressing to it. or basilisk ointment, until it is healed;
and if the wound is too large, then cut and leave so that a drain or enema can enter therein;
t*t mantl. The fact; When the bow is at full draw, do not leave it unstrung. and if you cannot cover the wound from which blood flows as you see, then it should be removed in such a way that the bow comes down to its lowest point where it is.
And if you cannot properly cover the wound without as shown by your sight, and thus prepare it in this way: let the bowstring come lightly forward, leaving nothing of the bow. and take solidifying remedies to apply on the wound,
so nott: Then carefully place fingers to locate the dislocation at the shoulder blade; slightly wider than the first. It is to be applied oil-based ointment on a piece of cloth according to the quantity of dislocation. And place it over the shoulder blade to alleviate tension, and do not remove the large cloth forcefully before many days have passed once.
que healz untxt by m. I want the they times; t. They should be a tost inct, for the bostrafe de la sont l’s; it;t, butntry, Oud ementd are not they dole ben'fait. And say what flows from the wound, whether it is venom or a small amount or sufficient, digestible, or indigestible.
and take care if the patient feels pain or numbness, and whether there is an abscess or not,
And when your medicine has been spread in such a way that you see what breaks through under the nipple, If you know that the nipple is hot again, and approach healing.
Then remove it in the morning or the next day, and when you dress the wound, If there is a change in another bandage, and renew the ointment.
that he les et: If subtle corruption arises after long periods, do not despair of health.
For the sick are nearing recovery. Because there are those who promptly apply medicine to their wounds and others who do the opposite.
And healing will come within many days as advised that you should not be neglected since it is best to seek medical attention; and the care:
If it is late to rise [heal], and is long-standing, apply the following remedies: dry herbs in substance and dry in virtue. If as an ointment finishes, for there is a significant portion of vitriol, this is the next medicine;
Take the finished ointment and make it with rose oil, and equal in substance to old wine essence;
by:  the.. When certain ointments are lacking,
Or take myrrh and aloe and incense, and grind them, and powder them with honey while it is over the fire; Then take a cloth and stretch it over the breast, and at no time apply an aristolochia long, And roots of heavenly herbs, which are also like flour from barley and millet.
And roots of heavenly herbs, which are also like flour from barley and millet. And in the use of simple or compound remedebroken down, ground into powder, and mixed with the honey as I have said, and used. And if the ailment is prolonged, and not healed by this treatment,
And if the ailment is prolonged, and not healed by this treatment, s p le t nottous; to-se the c. Ture mil. Infin tre ond, and and: 1 (prive de theirs in which are noce: the same thing. I don't ewe that so far le dit say they can li. If the treatment of an anorectal abscess, as we have said before.
Of treating an ulceration of the nail.
Pyorrhea is a boil that arises under the nail at the base of the hand, ong venter, and f, ce in.
And when it is weakened, and no care is taken, a swelling occurs And they run and pour bowels until they reach the root of the nail, and perhaps they will run through it entirely.
And until it reaches the bone, and is large, and its chest is plentiful, and is full.
When you treat it as we have said in the section, and the remedy does not prove effective. If it is necessary, remove with a knife all excess that remains from the nail. Then cauterize the wound afterward. also:
If one's fingernail presses on its nail bed, and it begins to throb, and bruises. If it is necessary to place the blade under the nail that throbs, And push down on the nail head, and remove that part subtly and lightly, And apply to the remaining area of medicine, burning and corrosive substances to remove everything.
And if the erosion is in the bone, thus cut into it; and there may heal, for it can be cured;
And if you see the knee becoming deformed, wrap it with one of ours as described above. then treat it until it is healed.
and if it is festering, and pus comes out, and it causes great pain, so you must first cleanse it; he sofferm pleuvrir a la peti; UCCC's un et le s; ougent; that yout; the li Singe qui quen:
And keep watch so the edge does not reach to the bone that is beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain.
and if it occurs, place something above which brings relief.
The dislocated joint found in some men's hands by chance is entirely flesh. and sometimes it has bones or none at all.
and none arise at the root of the joint or where birth occurs in some us is into the bones. Those who are born with any defect do not move their two hands. And those who are born with the joining of the two hands, may move them occasionally.
The stature of one who is plump is somewhat lighter in nature: as much they are many move il ou the iste cest par exemple lesion dele; and so que est quittert sont ong: ous to dose by that, which honside et eis it does not t like the
Those who are born at the root of the joint are more difficult to treat; hold it with your spoon-shaped instrument.
In those who are born or have just been formed, one must first shave the swelling up to the bone. and cut the bone smoothly as appropriate for this, then heal it until it is sound.
the so that t lesse la. And so et il.
If it is necessary to address the sweating, let them be repaired according to their natural shapes. Then place between two tents or cloths soaked in oil of roses, so they do not stick together. Or you put between two pieces of fine linen, until the eyes are healed, as it should be.
t;
Of evil
These are large swellings wrapped with excessive mournfulness that come upon various body members;
And more often occurs in those who walk on their feet and work, compared to others.
It is necessary to then provide him with a single purging of coal, and afterwards the sinew of the clavicle.
The treatment with iron is in two ways: one by binding them and drawing out the black blood. and the other way is to lift the vein and draw it all out.
a Then stabilize the leg of the patient from above the hip to the part below the groin. then close the vein at one, two or three places, with a wide incision.
Then draw and strain the black blood with your hand from one side to the other until it can endure as much as the patient's tolerance allows.
And then apply a poultice, and command that he bathe it with meats infusing black color.
And begin the evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full, without causing harm to the patient.
The actions of treatment for this condition follow in such manner: lift the affected leg gently if it has much hair. nus and so quet :
And if you have no bandage, warm it by the fire, then wrap the vein for a long distance from the head to the knee, or in the area below the ankle.
Then work with the thread at each point, and scrape the vein from both sides until it feels as much as when it is touched.
And when you see it red and black, and as it enters or leaves, it seems like a white thread.
Then blow out the blood from underneath until it is raised to the skin's surface, and then wrap with a light bandage.
Then cover it in one other place for three fingers; then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears. Then lift it with a thread as you have done before, and wrap with another light bandage, as you initially did.
;
Then follow the bone to its end; then remove the dislocation from one joint to another until it's all free, then bandage.
And if you cannot extract and lift it, insert a needle with a strong twisted thread throughout. Then bind and extract it, and insert the needle through a stitch, and turn your hand back and forth until it's released; d. If the bo:t is said the t. Do-by that prson 1
And when you have treated it all, put soft cloth in wine and oil rosins on the place of the wound; heal until it is sound again.
And if the vein is twisted and rolled together, not straight as we have said, And if it is necessary to split it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat as we have said before.
And if it is necessary to split it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat as we have said before. The shape of the iron used to scrape off hair is curved, and does not cut or tear, but removes the veins.
and it has a large gouge, because if it were subtle, it would cut the veins; but let it be thick as we have said, and this is its form.
From civil blood (blood flowing within vessels)
le (1:
And sometimes it occurs elsewhere than in legs, as happens from swelling coming out of the skin.
If this comes into the body as snakes and worms, between skin and bone.
And if it occurs in this manner of swelling, so that is on the body, and les plaies. Then the joint changes, and begins to bleed profusely, like a root of a plant being severed.
When the head is open, it must be wrapped with a piece of cloth three and a half to four fingers wide, and tightened.
and leave the bandage along the leg, and every time it becomes loose again, wrap around the bandage, and tighten. * If you manage to do so, it enters into the joint, causing abscess and festering where it is located, along with harmful illness.
Therefore, it must be treated little by little until the top, leaving nothing or any part of the body.
and this vein is never cut when treated with five long handfuls, or ten. it Tere ben:
If it swells completely; and the matter within is emptied, and remedies of putrefaction are applied for a certain period, then treat as one would an abscess.
And never strike the vein with hands raw; especially when it bursts at the joint of any limb or body part. and its coming is often violent, and from which one recoils; thus treat as we have said before.
by the ou setre entin; such a la:
This illness is known in our land as "ox disease," because it often occurs at the knees.
and it is a small worm that arises between skin and bone, traveling up and down throughout the body. and he feels very well moving from limb to limb until it pierces through the skin where it goes, jumping high;
; They should se pas. A: The s; ougt lesse the a ;Sud, so that they be; if none'ssp. If youn their to themplem (1.
And there is doubt about its efficacy, for when it passes through the body, it rises to the head and reaches the eye. Sometimes it returns, and destroys the eye; this often happens.
When you see it being bled or milked, one can't stop it when it flows:
c the l's; c'd untraw (prison se lesmal and such: in m ; be the same. The time.
Then wrap with a bandage and apply force to it, and if the bone is protruding into the wound, and you cannot locate it. If there are burns from fire underneath, wait until they heal.
and the greatest harm that it causes is that the wound may fester, as we have said.
time to prson line p c in. If the t w a laissumber que s.
And it is proper to use the patient of body remedies with dissolving medicines for the bad bodily fluids.
And let them consume rotten meats that are not fresh.
From the pain that comes from bloating. byt in and it iste: And then it moves from member to member, and I see what I am telling you.
I went to call a sick woman, and discovered some swelling in the veins of her arm;
and shortly after, I saw it rise like a worm on her shoulder. Sooner than any other thing, just as living silver when it jumps out of its place.
The pain departs from there and splits to the shoulder,
and then after some time runs through the entire body until it reaches the other arm.
by: a (1 li that they w.
I was much amazed by how it moved from member to member, for I had never before encountered this illness in such a manner. Nevertheless, I wish to maintain that moving pain from one place to another is beneficial. However, I do not have such knowledge, as I did not see it in the woman.
and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins were exposed, in whiche la:
And those who are delicate do not show it for this reason, and who have wet bodies and veins restored.
And when you see to treat this illness, and if the patient feels that pain as we have said. he ust year it the c. And cauterize the place; and if you cannot see it with your eyes,
If the treatment for those who have stench from their wounds, such as foul pills and serpentine pills, and similar things.
Arrowheads
the paind’s;
The various types are such that there are some with large points, small points, tufted, and stitched. those with two corners, and those that have tongues, and those that are broken into pieces. and there is one which leaks in no limb, it seeps according to two ways: or in a principal member as hair does.
e que li est les quill; they the sti;t et de t. Tort; ça; il pe C's (c. When it begins to bleed at any part of these limbs, and the sign of death that I will tell you about appears. If it is necessary to extract this arrowhead, for death approaches in various ways. and when this bad sign does not appear, and the arrowhead is not deeply embedded, then treat it, and heal the wound.
s. noblem. You may be MAT the cue:Ot;  are they **** When there is scotoma and squinting and straining of the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and mingling of understanding, and vomiting of bile. and sometimes it is without sense in the nostrils or ears; and perhaps there may be difficulty with speech and voice. and leap of the wound with moist white appearance like hairs, and at leaping as well as redness from iron.
they should. So the main, and there.
When the sign of a seizure as it begins or subsides is close to the left breast and feels as if it were lodged in something hard, not hollow. and occasionally the seizure moves as hair does, with black blood coming out in drops, followed by cold shivering, and pale sweat, leading to a loss of consciousness. thus they sense impending death.
by and; they (un comme the
If the arrow falls in the vicinity of the bladder, it is near the lower ribs; and brings great pain and sobbing; causing all movement of the shoulder blade members to cease.
If the arrow falls into the stomach, perhaps from a wound with no rotten flesh.
If the arrow falls into the abdabdominal cavity and does not pass through any part of the intestines, if there is no hope for treatment or extraction of the arrowhead.
If an arrow falls into the bladder and urine flows out with it while coming loose, causing the patient great pain: understand that the wound is fatal.
The other limbs - the neck, throat, shoulder, upper arm, spinal column, ribs, hip, thigh, and similar parts are safe according to various configurations. When an arrow is in the nerve or artery and it's not poisonous, as I will tell you what happened to me so that you can do likewise.
It happened to one man that an arrow struck him at the shoulder near its root. I attempted it, and betrayed from either side of the ear's fatty tissue, and became severely insensate.
And I was struck by an arrowhead that penetrated into the fat of the ear below the paper-thin skin.  And it was the large arrow of a Turkish bow, made entirely of light iron without ears; the joints were sound, and no misfortunes befell them.
And it pierced an arrow to the throat of a Christian, and it was the Arabic arrow with ears.
I engaged in deceit with the Barbarians, and cleverly tricked them as much as possible, and the Christian was unharmed.
And treat an arrowhead lodged within it, which was located near the belly, fearing that he would die.
and after passing through thirty-three days, his condition did not change. And I cut at the arrowhead, fashioned it cleverly, overcame it, and did not have any accidents.
And if you see a man who has an arrow fall upon his head or back, and the wound is sown above;
And the arrow remains lodged within him, and does not disturb his natural disposition. nor does it cause harm in any of his natural functions.
the t here.
And thus they endure great suffering; and many similar things.
And when an arrow pierces the region of one's buttocks near where it enters the backside. and is slightly inclined to the right side, and the arrow is fully protruding.
the les so they are:
The hairs of both sides are disfigured; one side has many more than the other. And he experienced ringing and pain from under his right ear. I thought it was due to the tip of an arrow.
the and m. The best to pasme d’s the patient: And I saw the ends of the arrowheads.
And I saw the ends of the arrowheads. And I placed the poultice on his arm, and stopped the deep wound from bleeding, and for a long time he lingered.
Until he felt the arrow - one day within his nose; and he told it to me. s; the tt, f for le Crost in the, then er;  (e que:JO ; but that I're et lontigirse.
And I tried it, feeling the head of the arrow returning to its place. Then I proceeded with the treatment of the wound using medicinal leeches until the head of the arrow became clearly visible.
and it passed through all its limits in nearly 2 months and a half.
Then straighten out the wound where I inserted the forceps, pressing from both sides, and it could not be removed.
Then I ceased to use subtle methods and engineered various ways of manipulation until on a day with well-made forceps, according to what the form will appear in the end of this chapter, I managed it and left the wound open.
 I will then restore it properly, and the wound is firmly closed, and the patient is completely healed.
Here are the guidelines for extracting certain arrows: If you apply your care to what I do not say, for the book cannot cover everything...
sentence igne by. True work, and nine instruments are required for dealing with extraordinary matters that occur in this art.
I say the arrows do not come from members unless they are lodged as follows by two methods. or by entering directly into them, or by another part;
ça andt ond they:
If it does not return now, let it rest until the joint is properly positioned again, and then release the dislocation.
And similarly, if it is stuck in the bone and cannot be removed, let it rest without movement for a few days, moving slightly each day.
And then if it returns, and if it does not return, puncture gently throughout with a very fine needle, until the eye is dilated, and then treat.
If the arrowhead is lodged deep in the body where it cannot be seen, then surround the entire area with bandages. And if you sense this, then try any suitable instrument;
And if you cannot for extending the wound, and penetrating the arrow shaft; And if there is no bone or nerve or vein, so that it bleeds as long as the wound is large. Et draw out the arrow if you may, and if there are ears on the shaft to which it holds.
Et draw out the arrow if you may, and if there are ears on the shaft to which it holds. If bone that is deeply embedded by two parts can be moved as you wish. and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as much as you can draw it out;
and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as much as you can draw it out; And subtly so you do not break the arrowhead, but rather extract it more easily.
And if you cannot on one occasion, let the vein swell near its opening, then extract it, for extraction would be easy. And if the blood flow is contrary to what we have said in this chapter's treatment, apply as previously mentioned.
And guard against incision of nerves and veins, and devise a method to extract the arrow without danger.
Soon or late, firmly or gently; and place the patient according to how they were positioned when the arrow fell upon them. For it is the greatest help that you can provide, and if you cannot do so, then place them as their signs indicate to you.
e; don'
Therefore cut above, so that the pincers can take hold, and then extract it: if the bone juts out now.
And if it is held in the bone, turn your round hand gently, until it enters into the bone, and widen the bone, then extract it.
And if it cannot be removed, leave it for now, and then resume extraction until it can be pulled out fully;
it no the w. Isle:  (e carizin they do so that'ile the final e-td.
If it is discharged, and you see fit to administer a blow, then give it an instrument made of iron. if the tip of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument; and then strike hard.
and if the arrow is stuck, then use an implement with a pointed end to facilitate extraction.
; dont Then treat the wound as necessary.
And if an arrow pierces or grazes the abdomen, bladder, or ribs, and it is near vital organs, then cover with a cup.
And be careful not to cover the veins and nerves, then extract it, and then close the wound if necessary. soes :z an and de f guet they pxtre in saut ors-be ne: I onge de irt est not nus tosece;
The form of the pincers used to extract arrows is similar to a bird's beak, here is its shape:
And they have many different sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrowhead.
of common body veins Veins that are bled from the body number .xxxv., which include head, sixteen.
est not and of text. The fact that to anyt la. Et the two arteries which are visible in both temples; And two veins which are in both temples' furrows, called "aurioles"; The veins that are within the forehead, and the veins at the temple. and the two jugulars which are behind the neck. and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these are called "augeherich". he said lis a:
The veins of which we commonly find five in each arm:
One is headlike and is on the left side ribs, and they call it "the vein of the head." The second is called "fast," and is composed from cranial and lumbar. And they call it "the vein of the body"; and its location is on the right side. And they call it "the vein of the belly"; and it is under the groin. By; c, son:s s, so ke la m un leur t.
And the vessel is the vein that lies between the little finger and ring finger, and if it has two branches.
And in the leg where three veins are: one is above the calf of the left thigh bone. and the second vein which is at the ankle of the right thigh bone; and the vein called "Nesse," that is in the ankle of the other leg.
t  le col: i; thee la cro pleu are the s, neither they ne the most
The cleaning of veins located after the ears helps with ancient catarrhs and migraines. And its quality as I tell you, it is to raise the head of the patient.
And its quality as I tell you, it is to raise the head of the patient. and rub the area where the veins are with an abrasive cloth; then tighten the neck of the patient with a twist. se t, et p l’s de la ramble; Ouzerlys s cequeme; The Lord Etre la ; thet; they sont ne :l'ga, and to le on that it is not so: Touch the joints with your finger, and where you feel hair below your elbow, take hold.
Then take the lancet, pierce just above the vein to the bone, and lift your hand along the entire vein upwards. And cut through the skin and flesh twice across, allowing blood to flow out as you see it.
so if they t c la ou; that, et oso ils. If he said le de bonduse est les que tu ne:d.t; the des. He p; d f 1; The wuis son l's :r noit’ll with se u ; it is not.
And I have already mentioned incision and cautery in the first book.
The purulence of the two arteries that are in both temples if it has been long-standing sores. and scars, chronic otitis, and watery eyes from the lashes;
by, and, also. The first they are not s so that is the paite : And it is so that the patient strains their neck until the two veins appear openly; And he feels pain below his ears, and then tightens the collar.
Then lift your chin towards the vein above your earlobe, and place the lancet beneath it. Lift up the vein, and cover it, as you did with two other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need.
Then lay down the patient, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, then put a cotton over it.
And then the bandage, and leave it until cleaned well; and we have spoken much about its care and extraction, as mentioned at the beginning of this book.
c
And its quality is such that the patient twists his neck until it appears. then take the instrument called "fossor", which is of this form:
And place the point on the vein, and pierce with your hand or other object, allowing the blood to flow out according to the quantity you observe. Then loosen the neck to the patient, and bind the vein until it is straightened and without any twisting of a wide wound.
Nevertheless, it should not be too tight with the bandage; and straight through, for the bone is near, and by chance it may break the bandage when it becomes thin.
The bandages of the two veins that are in the forearm soothe the eyes, and the gout, and jaundice, and inflammation in the ear, and diseases of the face;
By way.
Then suture it, and let the suture pass through both sides of the wound, slightly long and somewhat wide, as there is no cartilage.
And if the wound edges are fine, they may break; then make small stitches as needed, and tie them with thread well.
The suture of the vein should be cut close to it, and tied firmly, and not during illness or fever. 
The condition of illness is such that the patient tightens his neck, then strains his nose towards your left hand. and take a thin, long thread, and insert it through the space between the two nostrils. because the veins do not open easily, and the blood begins to flow now more freely;
.
The healing of the two glands helps with stretching the nerves, and at the onset of festerings, and many illnesses, and impetigo, and erosions, and herpes, and scabies.
And the qualities of healing are such that the patient turns his neck away from both sides, as we have said. And let the master stand above the patient's head, and the patient seize on a stool,
Then open the vein slightly wide, then draw out the blood promptly, or as much as needed.
Then make another cut in the other vein, then tie off the ligament, and gently compress the veins accordingly, and so they t rejet. Do yout; the doce as lesme: that he est de l've te. Tard ils ou;  asses, but also, t.
From the dislocation of joints The dislocation above affects both sides in the mouth and leads to gum decay, lip fissures, swelling and inflammation.
And the nature of this dislocation is for the patient to sit before you, and hold their neck as I have instructed; try: And they are recognized by being black, and because around them there are small black veins. Then both of them, and if you do not recognize them, and you have doubt about them,
Then both of them, and if you do not recognize them, and you have doubt about them, If the larger of each one is present, and in the same way do both veins that are above and below it, for they have a similar manner.
: The blood of the veins that are below the tongue helps after the bleeding from the head, and it is through stretching the throat, and for ailments of the eye, and ailments of the mouth.
And its quality lies in the bleeding so that the patient squeezes between your hands before sunlight, and lifts the tongue, and looks down each side for a black vein.
Thus bled one and the other, but do not go too deep, for from there are the arteries.
The veins of which we commonly cleanse are cleansed in two ways:
By gently puncturing with either a broad needle called "mirtin" or a fine one known as an "olivaire," which is like sharp scissors; They are both wide and fine according to the size and length of the veins. with a, e se:  s lignant thatt de lesse taint to youstoo;
It is necessary to open veins with clear blood that contains much blood and turbidity; And it takes the form of a green olive's flesh.
and is more subtly pointed, and meant for draining fine veins where there is subtle yellow blood.
the in which f (or ct ondroit that he may be scautte p. ict if they are: it ne sofla et don’s lown, and t iest que lese li Matter as a grand: ESTAubleset sirknot.
And it is proper for the physician to sanitize cleanly, and that he washes from the artery which is below. And if the physician cuts the artery, and a blood flow begins to come out, then it is proper to cauterize as I have said. and it must not be burned with flame, but trimmed as I have described.
And if the base does not open clearly, it must be extracted and replaced with another. Or when you want to remove any veins from it, or if they appear in its place within the arm: they open clearly. And in the area near the chest, as we have said.
And if you see the joint is dislocated, then similarly remove the arm, feeling for bones until you locate them. Then mark the dislocation site, and then bind the arm, cutting the vein at its base.
And be careful not to injure the artery when you see the dislocation swelling, for it is an artery; avoid this indeed.
by ca nerviz: Quickly move yourself, and place your arm lengthwise, then straighten your arm with no support, as it often happens.
Bind the arm and leave it so, and do not move it due to pain; and be in fear, and do not move until it is healed.
And if the arm is not properly supported and it gives way, and medicines are not prescribed to you, then protect your artery as they may rupture; because the head of the bone retracts, so support the limb.
and;llkle t: the flete; and; 1 poc n's. I'embase you should s no le se cise:
If the blood flow is stagnant, that's fine; if not, then treat it as we have said, with powders that coagulate blood.
And the stagnation is not due to various conditions related to the small location of the wound and the potential for the joint's movement in the arm.
The inflammeration in the vein helps by draining blood from above and below, within the body. the Jussi's c and tre contt:
And it is customary for the nurse to wash in order to locate the nerve that lies below, and if he searches too deeply, he may find the nerve. And it swells, causing the pain to intensify, and sometimes cannot be cured;
And this nerve can be opened many times, and if it cannot be located in any home due to its subtlety, then you must use the tool carefully; and avoid damaging the nerve as much as possible.
le c:
The brain of the head is helpful, drawing blood to it, and benefiting the eyes.
And it is necessary to anoint with olive oil or myrtle oil, for this is the most soothing of all treatments, as there are no nerves or vessels in that area.
Nevertheless, it is important to choose the lightest oil here, and avoid adding anything if you do so for the first time, then start again. they; the mostn:tir; You need  (and there: The quality of the wound is according to your consideration.
The first thing you must know about healing, it is that a wound is not treated solenly for the sake of health.
and to avoid future illnesses. it s et so : And one should begin treatment with prayers at the beginning of spring and autumn after eating, when signs of fullness appear.
And one must heal for the first day or two days after 2 or 3 hours.
The healing for illnesses does not have a fixed time, but when needed it is by day or night, at all hours and always.
; by linek. 1 the bon mainal Gaslum. The t� f:ler, and* et de la te severles est s cidezir en t they; J Md: ciles not the cont me: that; Do not let the elderly who have passed sixty years continue to suffer.
And when anyone wishes to treat themselves, in any way you see fit, it is necessary that they clear the intestines with a light clyster. if there are too many feces retained, so that the veins do not draw out the excess from the intestines to avoid harming the major limbs.
et t so:
Et si vous souffrez des hémorragies après une passion colique, vomissements, diarrhée, fréquentes éjaculations chez les femmes et hommes, veiller et unir, ainsi que toute la virilité, soit par chose de l’arme ou du corps;
Then subtly extract the humors, for it is thick without using meats and drinks or medicine, if you have such power;
Next, enter or bath, unless any thing prevents them from subtly extracting the blood.
And cleanse the vein area above the injury at its third part, as we have said;
And protect that day from work, pain, dislocation, and such things.
Be secured and bound up, let it be elevated higher than the one that is cleansed, and rub the arm two or three times:
First straighten out the ligament moderately, for if it is stretched too much or not enough, it cannot be corrected without pain.
And then rub the area with your hands until the veins swell and you feel them.
Then grease the sinew slightly with a bit of old oil and place your thumb from your left hand against that vein beneath the area to be bandaged for as long or short as you wish. That the vein does not break when struck with a blow. For there are veins that escape as if they were ropes in the hands of a fiddler, and some which are flat from thinness. such that when one places it over the flame, they retract with the flame and cannot open the vein, thus this is their condition.
the f: as t, and cure de m not s ne sontt; that mon fils the in the w un gloss et lest he umme.
If the vein works on the first attempt, it is good; if not, begin again a little below that spot where it was done hastily, unless the joint is swollen.
If the joint is swolculed, and the patient becomes hopeful, leave it for one or two days without binding the arm. Perhaps he will develop abscesses again; do not give him a bath, then resume treatment if he desires it;
t (ou that he f.
And handle it a bit hastily so that the wound swells; for this often happens when the injury is small.
If you see the wound swelling, do not resume irrigation again, and apply a bit of oil boiled in water, as it will soothe their body with blood loss, and is mixed into this place with the linen.
and thus administer the oil mixture in each vein you are treating to staunch the course of blood;
e:t make so; Cele that (that n'ck;
When it comes to large abscesses that occur often, especially when the vein opening is small at that time. If you hurry and place a wet sponge soaked in water and heat on the site for an hour.
And it is necessary that you do this afterwards when the blood has drained from the vein, and if there remains any blackness or greenish color at the site after several days, it does not harm. t
And often there is an abscess and appearance of the inflammation in the lower part of the church: therefore place your hand upon it, and if you find the spot tender to pressure from your hand, then that appearance is evil. Then make sure you do not place anything on the things we have said, for perhaps it is near an artery; but apply a dry plaster to harden the spot, then treat with another remedy until it heals.
And approach each wound according to its nature and the color of the blood.
If the blood is black, allow it to flow until it turns red; and if you see it swollen, let it be so until it becomes thinner; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for those who are pale and weak, and require blood extraction, where one makes them a larger wound, with wider fumes.
and for those who are weak, do the opposite, support them lightly but frequently, and it must be supported by cutting across rather than pricking.
This manner of healing prevents blood flow deterioration and nerve compression, it is beneficial whether the joint is long or wide.
And for those whose body needs the joint to be healed, one should give them millet porridge with pomegranate juice; if overheated, bleed 3 or 4 times.
And if of a cold disposition, have millet porridge before the healing with honey syrup or sweet syrup flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and well-scented syrup.
And if it is painful to the wound after the loss of much blood, then one must give him a brew of charcoal and fragrant subtle syrup.
And employ other remedies that we have mentioned in the section on fainting, for the evacuation of blood.
And if one wishes to open the veins and bleed again at another time, when they are greatly weakened by much blood loss, it should be done little and often according to the strength of their condition continuously.
s;
And if you wish to heal another part, do so on the second day or after the third.
For there is much blood within the body that has been cooled off, and it causes fever; so one must drain a great quantity of it and widen the opening until it flows freely. then you have tended to all healing matters and placed your hand over the affected area when it is healing, so that death does not come during this time. The problem: a 91's on its own ld; if they that s and t, she.
When dislocating does not require you to see a broken arm, and blood issuing the second time, and the wound is closed, then firmly press on it. If it is curved, extend the arm quickly, for that would be bad.
But let it heal the second time; or if you do not find the puncture with bleeding, as long as the vessel of blood freezes and the vein stops bleeding. And place on it a small piece of wet linen, and press gently.
And if the vein is bleeding, leave it and do not compress until the abscess has eased.
; t de t; f:ze oint; and the bon lesi a. If both. Tumbrad et that dges theyt; est liest la mar ;
The veins within the arm remain healthy near the head of the vein because they are composed thusly.
And the nature of its healing is such that patients wash their hands in warm water until the veins are red.
then it should be bound moderately so that the veins appear well, and now let them wash across, neither too widely nor too long.
And the punctures wide, and be neatly near the joint of the hand, so that it cannot come out. Place the hand in hot water, and let blood flow into it until you have enough.
And if this is so, do not reinsert the hand in hot water again, for it goes in more easily during winter than summer.
And the vein of this wound is saved from all others, with no artery or nerve present.
The condition of the salvatelle on the right hand is effective for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it's done:
Stretch the hand, and blow into hot water, as long as the veins are drawn out, if you can see it. And if the condition is twisted, and if you bind it completely all over, do not cause any harm;
by example at; line your. s :  (1 a certainly ce toun: C(d.
And then place the hand in hot water, if the blood is frozen in the wound, and it cannot come out.
And when you have treated the wound as much as necessary, apply oil and honey to bind it quickly, doing so for each cut.
The ointment of this in the left hand is good against leprosy, and do as I have told you for the right.
The pain of the testicle is applicable to all diseases originating from beneath the body. such as conditions of the testicles, and retention of fluids, and diseases of the kidneangs, and of thighs and old legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of such pain is that patients often pour out pus in warm water, and rub on the veins until they are gone. les que s; it ne: The t eie an :le de le Trot ils words they. Do not he
Cleanse the wound well or more wide open, or at the ankle, so it may move freely.
And if you cleanse the wound on the foot, protect it from any nerves that are exposed, and cleanse as deeply as possible with a spatula; let the slime remain inside.
And if the wound cannot heal, place the foot in cold water and ensure that the vein is well emptied.
s: Do not doubt of nerves, as we have said, and thus make a suspension for the other limb equally.
The left of the sciatic vein is at the ankle joint, and its swelling causes pain in the thigh when it's filled with blood.
And the quality of its swelling is such that the patient walks on tiptoe and extends it over the ankle by four fingers twisting.
:t c d 0ulde t And you must move so as to grasp it, for the head is loose, and it has been greatly moved by hands.
And you must move so as to grasp it, for the head is loose, and it has been greatly moved by hands. And if you cannot grasp it, then take any part of it that opens or has two sides like the back of a hand, and towards the small finger, while protecting yourselves.
And make as much of the blood you see, and then tie off the vessel, and place a cloth over it tightly; it is now healed.
c forme; Juda. The C that la f, soce:
Ventouses are made of horns, or ivory, or glass; and suction is done in two ways: either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
And this suction that does not involve piercing is done in two ways: either at high heat or with heat.
Two other places at two cheeks of the neck; and the pouch beneath the chin; And the pouch under both shoulders; and the pouch above the hips; And the pouch between each arm; and the pouch of each leg; the samem they can not to; thatt: c the in m.
And for this reason not everyone can do it like one does with veins. And it is not necessary that it be treated with fire or heat in any disease resulting from overindulgence, as long as all the body's vessels are emptied.
And if by necessity of diseases it must be bled, or for customary reasons, we shall perform the bleeding every hour at the beginning and end of the month, as well as in between each time.
ne:tie ond (p; if they say by is not d.
And for those who experience swelling and redness on their face, and in their head, and neck, causing darkness to the eyes.
And for those who experience a drop of blood in their mouth, have a swolled tongue, and bleed. And for those who are delirious, see through painful and deadly visions.
that n'ili9faire:
The surgery of the muscle helps strengthen the head ... that comes to them, and it must not be after evacuating all their body.
and this purging is in place of the muscle surgery for the head.
and it should not be used by those with cold complexions or who are prone to inflammation, as it causes them great harm.
And for this reason, it is not necessary to use them excessively, nor those who have cold head ailments.
And those who often do this become accustomed to it, and for this reason one should place the poultice slightly lower due to concern for obedience.
And s. 1: c (e tord que thet me; it ne lesd and fould so fait m arm<fro:mbet; And to the incision of the gullet with a knife, and everywhere, and swelling.
And it must be applied lightly, for if held too firmly, it may cause blockage or damage to the stomach and heart.
The ventilation of the two ribs near the neck if there are headaches, otitis and migraines, and strangulation, and pain in the roots of the teeth.
.
The inflammation from under the chin causes mouth disease, and gum decay, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and is located on the glands of the two lips.
Inflammation from the shoulders causes disease that comes from heat and filling.
Inflammation in the joints is as much as from the three veins of the arm. For it draws blood from these large veins;
And instructs the physician not to cut too deeply, for it is very near bone and has veins and arteries beneath.
The ventose that is above the buttocks is also useful for earaches and under-the-skull diseases, and it should be large and made of linen, requiring thorough suctioning; and if by chance, it were too thin, it would break; causing large wounds.
The blisters of the legs heal quickly because they attract blood from all over the body, and are effective for ancient headaches, and aches in joints and bladder, and promote flow; and are located at the two elbebows, and two ankles, and overall they weaken the body after long use, and bring about swelling in various conditions.
The way to apply the blister is that you place it on an empty area promptly and do so quickly, then put it hastily, and move equally, and not stop doing this until you see the redness and swelling appear, and look for the reddish color of fresh blood; then wait, remove the blisters, and take care in examining the body's condition because there are those who have sensitive skin and clear pores: it is necessary to prick only once, and make wide and slightly deep cuts, and suck lightly.
And if the blister is large, it is necessary to prick twice: the first time to make a path for the thick blood.
When blood is profuse, it must be done a third time; and when we wish to drain the blood little by little, we should only do so once.
And if we wish to drain much blood, let us begin often; and if the bleeding is copious, cut deeply into it, so that the vessels are swiftly severed.
And for those with thick and hard skin, who have such conditions, it is fitting to apply the suction of oil bags that are aperitive and dissolving. ; Now they et sont tusses, the bentre bon; if a
And if it is with ivy, oil of watercress, or lily, or chamomile, or similar substance.
And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of amarin or balm, or aniseed oil, and similar ones.
And for those whom you cleanse with gentle touch and wide pores, do not apply any oil,
by; The rnn f
And those with much moisture should rise easily, or from the juice of myrtle, and sumac, and similar substances.
And those with large excesses should rise from old wine, or water of sewage, or an infusion of anise or chamomile, or other similar things.
And it bath, but not to sleep after the hour or infection and do; and heur.
And it is necessary to warm him when he needs to vomit and when he has been purged by vomiting. And those who suffer from cold sickness should be warmed, especially if they are too thin and inflamed; and it is necessary that he consume cold things such as pomegranates, endive, lettuce, and similar items;
sofat:
And those with cold constitutions should prepare a syrup of honey and fragrant wine, which is neither too old nor new, along with a mixture of spices, small birds, and young pigeons.
And for the days that he will recover, he should drink more than eat.
and it is proper to give certain individuals triacle or muscat wine before or after bloodletting to strengthen the main limbs. the following.
The suction cups that are placed without causing pain are those put on the liver and feet, gout, podagra, abdomen, buttocks, groins, and hips, for these members cannot be pierced or hurt.
and it is done only to draw blood from one member to another. as we do on the breasts when they are unhealthy; to remove the swelling that is in the member, just as we apply suction cups on the abdebody and buttocks to reduce the size of the limb.
And it causes pain when there is an obstruction or stone, and sometimes by its attracting power removes the obstruction, or displaces the stone from its place.
And so it does when placed over the liver and spleen where there is retained windiness.
And these blisters are prepared in vessels to be squeezed as needed; and they are never filled with fire, nor plain water.
ve la: igne; and li est the o by them durs
The form of the suction cup administered by fire is thus:
And it has two fingers of width and half a palm in thickness, and around the middle there is a small hole, just like for pushing in a needle.
and it should be made of horn, smooth on the front so that it does not prick the patient when applied to the limb;
sat:
And they are large or small depending on the diseases and the temperament of those who take them.
For children's pustules are different from those of adults, and thin ones like fat ones.
And should this pustule be placed upon the limb thusly:
Take a taper of wax or some ointment, and place it in the middle of the pustule near the edge that is within the pustule, its is not: s d, as to the t ça est, in a (t. Remember, and sof* If:
And then place it under the limb, and twist your hands as we have mentioned above, so that when you want to, heat rises up and you apply a poultice.
And apply the lining as before, and repeat often, if necessary.
In the poultice that is used for the disease of pleurisy, without a rod or stitching, it should only be applied when it is filled with water, and placed on the limb lightly.
byt.
Without surgery are performed except in limbs where one cannot apply cups for their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar tissues. and in the veins of the heart, like arteries or nerves, and other similar structures;
and the quality of the tool is that when you find surgeries with soft gentle blades used for precision, take them.
le to: it comes eft s. And then cleanse of veins and bandages, then rub the limb until it is red, and place upon poultices.
And when they are flat and healed, if it is in place where one can apply a bandage, then do so, for this works greatly afterwards.
If not, raise the area gently and then wash well with water, very thoroughly, and then press it.
d. I. The othere benie line is tre but go prjer la + sude;
If the blood is multiplied, then apply crushed vitriol or gallnuts, and similar substances, until it stops flowing.
Or place on the affected area half a measure of scraped elder leaves, and let them rest until they dry out in place, then seal it now.
And if you need more, take additional substances.
; the most and so-next tot try n'isse peldto bo-like. And then place it back on top of itself, and as soon as they feel his blood, they swell up.
And when you see that they are bleeding, powder with a bit of alum and crushed soap or ash, so it will clot now.
Here begins the book on fractures.
by c p.
Learn well, you skilled physician, that the mad man is treated with this chapter, which was never seen in any of the ancient books, nor letters read.
and for this reason the knowledge is strange to our land, as I have never found any good one.
and I know nothing about it, unless through the knowledge of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I am familiar with the practice, and by experience, and from the habit of my life.
And I have described to you in this chapter what is contained within, and abbreviated at the end, and shown clearly the forms of the distempers that are brought on, as I did in these two previous chapters.
Therefore, we must say that in this book the sum of its words and chapters are where the wise man places his understanding and dwells on truth so that those who have been tried may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when any fracture or dislocation or twisting or sprain occurs to anyone, it is appropriate for you to stabilize the patient's affected part on one side and another, if nothing wholly supports them, as with a weak body, children, or old people;
If the tension is not too great or too cold; and consume fatty foods, that is to say cold soups, poultry, fish, and do not drink wine nor eat any greasy meats, and do not fill up too much with meat that fills the veins with blood, until you are free of fear of abscesses or discharge of matter in the limb; then the patient should return to their previous condition as they have previously used.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to feed the patient with foods that cause excess nourishment or viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, beets, and eggs, bacon, veal, poultry, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar things. Because excessive nourishment represents muscles and sooner the fracture.
And know that broken bones from old age and frailty cannot be well repaired or joined as per their nature to heal the limbs, nor those also who are too tender, like the bones of small children.
But take care and reset the broken bone with large tenons that are strong and join the limb together until it is as strong as before; and do not complete all of your work, and for this reason one must nourish on hearty meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures occur in various ways.
When the break of the head is different from the break of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. There are breaks that resemble an arrow's flight and others like sharpening a pen for writing.
There are breaks that resemble an arrow's flight and others like sharpening a pen for writing. And if there is a break with a wound, or a break as though all of it were just a small cut.
please onis.
And it is known for bone fractures that the joints are twisted and widely open due to force, and they are pressed by the palm.
And when there is no twisting or touching with it, and the patient does not feel much pain, unless there is a fracture.
But it may well have twisting, cracking, or small fractures. the surg.
And know that the fractures which are in flight, and the two separated parts, they must now be set evenly, so that abscesses may come forth.
And if abscesses arise therefrom, leave it undisturbed for a day, until the abscess is calmed. Then set it evenly and move it easily and gently, and know that the healing of this is easier than the healing of those with broken parts; then strain it, as needed afterwards.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, when extended by two parts, whether hands or feet, or to your hand if it is a small limb, or between two cords, or between one cord and your hand.
And place the limb according to its natural form, so that when the broken parts of the limb are separated, you may reset them using all means necessary, ensuring they return to their original position as much as possible, and in your work avoid causing injury or pain to the patient.
And properly align the two ends of the bones according to the best forms.
And he feels a lot in the hand if it seems to you that it is not well at all: so dress neatly, and do not bind too tightly or press as those who bring forth abscesses hot and constriction in the limb through their practice have many times observed.
And when the limb is at stake, so punish the patient well that he does not move it, neither while awake nor sleeping, nor turning, or in any other manner. and ensure that the limb is secured enough so that it feels no pain. When it feels no pain at all or very little, you must put it in such a position that it does not feel any pain.
When it feels no pain at all or very little, you must put it in such a position that it does not feel any pain. and ensure it is placed correctly, so there are no twists when restored.
and the quality of the injured member follows what I tell you.
Acknowledge that broken limbs vary in minor and major injuries and forms.
For there are small members such as arms and legs: it is fitting to wrap with soft fine linen cloths.
and those that are large, such as thighs and legs: it is fitting to wrap with a wide and sturdy bandage, for the broad bands encompass all the large member, and hold it evenly on all parts, leaving no part uneven.
and thereby the: <bons. ndrepolsc ca fart they mud Ce d.
And soften the joint bit by bit, until you grasp a large portion of the healthy place, then take another ligament and turn it back into position correctly at the broken spot.
Then return to the part above the break and restrain it moderately, neither too hard nor too softly, as we have said in the first letter above.
Then place between the ligaments rags of lin or cloth, making them all even, then bind it tightly above a bandage, and then put on well-made splints underneamoins, if there is no abscess or swelling.
If there is swelling or an abscess, apply soothing balm to the abscess and remove the swelling, leaving it as such for several days.
Then hold the edges of your sutures, and be of a width approximately that of an inch or more, or wood from which grooves are made, or palm fronds, following this pattern.
But it is necessary that the stitch you place over the tear be slightly thicker and wider than the others;
And thus long enough as is necessary for the member's minor or major injury;
Then restrained over the splints as you did with the first fracture, then bind it up with a bandage promptly, as in the initial break.
The tighter it is, less; and it's fitting that the bandage be of moderate size, not too thick nor too thin, and should be made of flax.
If the threads are too thick, as I have seen in the works of crazy people who twist their measurements with linen strings, it is a great error because the measure cannot be equal if it is too subtle, and it must not have less than two inches between each stone.
And if the patient is in pain from the edges of the stones after being reset into their proper places, place cotton or ragged cloth over them so they do not scrape.
When the wound is with broken skin and the flesh is torn, I will tell you its treatment hereafter.
And know that it is not necessary to strain all broken bones on the first day. Because when the limb is large, it does not require placing splints unless after 5 or 6 days, or more depending on the risk of a hot abscess occurring.
And here is the way of ancient splints to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists: you take flour that clings to the walls of the mill, and mix it with plenty of egg, and make this concoction which should not be too clear or too thick, and use it, as it is a common way of splints restoring fractures for various conditions, especially in women and children, because it's neither too hot nor too cold.
Another method of ointment for healing fractures and dislocations and twists: take Frankincense and laudanum and onion and asafoetida and gum arabic and myrrh, XI parts each; Aloes and aloevera, V parts each; Alembics VII parts each. And make a powder, with honeycomb wax mixed in. If the patient's constitution is warm, use this ointment because it has good composition and quickly heals broken bones, useful for many people.
Another ointment for twisting injuries: take myrrh and vismalve, XI parts each; aloes and aloevera, VII parts each; aconite VI parts each; bolus Armenicus, XI parts each. Grind well, mix with water or honey wax, and apply to the affected area.
Another method of applying an ointment for joints and bones that have lost their strength, and alleviates pain upon touching them, and where the patient is grinding teeth: take new wool, finely powdered and mixed with oil; apply it to the affected area. This salve does not heal but it is good to soothe swelling heat, and properly eases pains.
Another method to restore broken bones: take leaves of fig tree that are dried, and leaves of earthly poppy, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Another method to aid in the restoration of broken bones and to ease abscesses. Take root of wormwood, chamomile, flowers of violets, wheat flour from each part; grind it, mix with wine, and if the member is swollen, apply moist cilantro water or plain water as needed.
Another method of plaster that is more potent than the first for healing members with hardened abscesses. Take roots of wormwood, flax seeds, balsam, mallow, and lamb's lettuce, as well as flowers of violets and chamomile from each part; grind them, mix with salt water or fresh water (or wine), according to the warmth of the member and its state.
Ypocras says in his book that on a broken limb one should not apply any substance for restoration except wax and oil mixed together, and nothing else; he states it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
And according to Galen, on a broken limb one should apply somewhat warm and dry substances for restoration, such as myrrh, aloe, incense, and similar things, as we have mentioned.
Another method for treating injuries and pain: take the skin of dead animals (such as mugats - a type of fish) or bird feathers, waxcloth, and violet leaves; grind them equally, make a paste, and apply it to the affected area.
And then loosen it slightly afterwards, and be careful that the patient feels no pain, nor has moved the bone from its place; if not dislocated again by ordinary movement.
And if pain comes to the area, or itching, feeling of rest or swelling is present, then quickly loosen and reset it, and apply the splint now; take a light cloth, and use a damp sponge, and immerse in water, and lift up the limb until the itching ceases, and the pain is eased. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then wrap it with dry linen, moistened in water or rose oil, and bind it under a bandage until you are sure of heat from inflammation.
And the inflammatur of the limb rests, and may there be bone pain, then resume subtle movement, and a little bit of plaster, and do not strain it as strongly as before; delicately until it is sound.
And if you see that an abscess and redness and pain and swelling are spreading throughout the bone, and you need plaster and bandages, as you resume in the same manner.
And if nothing of what we have said comes to the limb, do not dislocate it except after 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 days; and never leave it for 20 days, as long as the fracture heals, and approach the setting of the joint above.
Then you must first reset it firmly and allow the flesh to swell as I have said before; and if you see that the place becomes drier than necessary, know that no new injuries can occur. It arises from hot water baths whenever you dislocate it, and do this every day, and slightly soak the area.
By this method you will avoid injuries to the limb, and quickly follow what the skilled doctors advise: they restore the member properly; it is bad if done wrongly, and such methods are fearsome, and I see no other option than proper care and diligent work.
Of various ways of fractures There are many ways of fractures, and various shapes, and the causes are different.
because there are fractures made by the impact of a sword, and the collarbones have separated from all the bone to just above the bone as is done with an axe or stick; therefore this type of fracture is called "hachure".
byttir ;
If there is a blow to the head, or a fracture, or stone fragments, or falling on stones, or similar injuries.
And if there is a persistent fracture that reaches the skin above or below the bone, and this wound is large or small.
And if there is a wound that has closed over the bone as subtly as hairs, and it is a small tear, thus this fracture is called "capillary".
1 c the m
And this occurs more often with those who have moist bones like children's.
And it happens in all these ways of fractures where small fragments are left untreated, as is the case; and I will speak about them specifically.
And let us know all ways of fractures by the traction upon them, and the investigation with probing, and by corroded cartilage that is present on it.
And let.  so dont; Thatn:s.
In the treatment of a break, beware of accidents to the patient, and if you see any bad accident, such as vomiting of blood, loss of understanding, extension, paleness, fever with chills, eyes protruding and turning red, and other similar conditions, he cannot cure without doubt.
And if you do not see a hopeful accident, and you expect healing, begin the treatment.
And when the sickness comes first to you, and it is winter, one must remove the bone by the fourteenth day at the time that you are able.
And if it is so, hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, otherwise the tissue beneath the bone may decay, and the accidents we have mentioned occur.
And if the bone fracture reaches the tissue that covers the brain, it is necessary to cut open the fractured part in this way: and take hold of the head injured by the patient, and expose the bone in all ways you can, and above the wound area as gently as possible.
and if bleeding occurs through the exposed bone or wound, use what is necessary for this purpose, and fill the cavity with woolen cloths soaked in oil rosso. And let the wound rest until the abscess is soothed and you are assured of blood flow; then begin to work around the bone for removal, and this is done in two ways of treatment: one way is that you cut at the narrow opening before it, which is the form.
And then make another incision larger than the first.
And the second way is to have various cuts of different lengths, some narrow and others wide, pointed and made with iron instruments; and work lightly, that you do not injure the head.
If the bone is protruded and hardened, it must be pierced around it so that you provide splints with tongs, not too far beyond the bone of the forehead, and there should be a margin or circle above the point, which does not allow the tip to go past the bone; and you need several of these, such that each goes into its proper place on the edge of the bone, so that tongs are available for all tests; and this is the form of the three ways of tongs:
The quality for piercing through the broken bone is that you place one tongs on the bnose, and turn it until you know the bone has been pierced; then move the tongs a little further, and do so around, then cut with scissors the space of the bone between the fragments, doing this more delicately as best you can, gently, as we have said, until you remove the bone from your hand or any of the instruments that you have like pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or spinal cord.
And when you have pierced and removed the bone, then it is appropriate to sharpen the sharpness that remains attached to the bone from any other instrument similar to scissors, but it must be finer and subtler than the other scissors.
If it remains any small bones or scales, gently insert them into the openings; then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have mentioned.
And another method of treatment is what the Greeks call it, which is more effective; and it requires a lot of strength, and that's my wording. Firstly, you must expose the bone where the fracture is open; once you have exposed that part, place it under the blade of this lens-shaped chisel, which looks like:
And do not cut too deeply on one side, and the affected part is in two edges, so that the cutting is toward the bone; then strike with a small mallet underneath, so that you lightly chop around the entire bone, taking care to avoid the cloth covering it.
If it is loose near the bone, gently strike it with the mallet, for we must not harm or damage the bone and cause fear.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate through to the cloth, and the bone is cut only from above, resulting in small fragments, you must address that roughness again, and use a fine razor with various sizes to remove scales at each spot, administering most effectively according to the operation and shape of the fracture.
If you go before with large scrapers, and after more subtle ones, continue this process until it is well done.
In each of the other haircutting and delicate breakages, you must apply it according to its specificity; and this is something that cannot be replaced in those who have put their study into this art.
And if the wound is exposed, it is necessary that you take a piece of linen cloth, according to the quantity of the wound, and spread oil roses on it, then place it over the wound. the ou; its a
Let it lie as such for a day or two until the abscess is calmed down, then release it, and administer medicines as one would with lily roots, barley flour, wheat bran, incense powder, and rhubarb, among other things; and from these things make a powder, and apply to the wound, and thereafter administer ordinary healing ointments without causing stinging.
And ensure that the wound remains clean, without leaving any ointment or bandages, for when sores gather around the thread of the brain's cloth, they throb and become inflamed, causing great harm to the patient; because if a stinging substance is applied over it, pain will ensue.
So be mindful, if anything unexpected happens to the patient, as we have mentioned, it is doubtful and uncertain.
And if darkness does not come from the medicine applied, then it is proper that you take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil mixed with woolen cloth, and apply it to the sore. Then perform various treatments as needed until healed.
Know that none of the two parts of the neck above are broken or one at a time, for they are bones; and that below is cartilage, which does not break but merely encloses or twists, and then heals.
If one of the two parts is broken, it must be that you push your small finger or thumb into its nail, and place the fracture equally in your index finger hole, and through the tube on the other side, until the nail returns to its natural shape. And do this gently, ensuring that the patient does not feel pain in your work.
And if the fracture is above the nail and cannot be brought to its place, you must make it even with a small piece of wood atop its head.
If the fracture is of two parts, repair it similarly, and hasten to restore on the first day if possible.
If not, after the seventh or eighth day, when the abscess has calmed, then bind to the neck with strips of linen cloth if the fracture is in one part.
Or you bind another on a different side, if the fracture is there; and let the strips be large enough to fill the neck openings.
the m.
On any occasion when you find goose feathers in the tent's place, and if one of them is torn at its edge, hold it steady until it heals, and blow gently upon the wound so the illness does not spread; do as you see fit.
And if an abscess comes to the eye while you work on it, then apply a poultice or cotton wool soaked in rose oil or some drops of quinine.
And if an abscess does not come to the eye, then apply plaster with wheat flour and powdered incense, mixed with egg yolk; afterwards place lightly on it. Do not tie any bandages around it.
If the fractures of the nose are small and broken into tiny pieces, extract them with appropriate forceps, then perform the incision, and treat the inwardly curved things, and sudden changes, as with plasters and ointments suitable for it.
If there is no dense fracture or wound in the nose, treat it with bandages and apply compresses until healed.
For jaw dislocations
When the jaw is dislocated downward and there is no resulting wound, the fractures are minimal, not broken into two pieces but with internal breaks, if one sees this lightly.
It is necessary, if the fracture is on the right side, to insert your index finger into the patient's mouth; and if the fracture is on the left mandible, insert your index finger from the right hand, gently push the break inside, and then slowly remove it with the other hand evenly.
And if the fracture of the mandible is deviated by two joints, it is necessary to adjust for equal expansion on both sides.
If movements of the teeth occur, or jostling, then restrain with a thread of gold or silver or silk; then place on the fractured mandible cerote, and place on it a double cloth; then place over the cloth a large well-made stone, or a piece of leather equal in length and width to the mandible, adjusted as needed for movement, and instruct the patient to rest and consume light meats.
And if you see that the figure changes, remove the tier jor and then reshape what has changed; place a poultice on top, with finely ground powder or wheat flour after removing the cerote; place a light cloth over the poult cuisine, and if the poultice heats up, adjust the patient's position so it does not change, leave until it is fully healed; many times it takes three weeks to be fully healed.
And if abscesses occur, then treat as we have said many times.
If there is a break and wound together, do not remove any piece of the bone that has been set free; subtly extracting from the ends to where it was.
And if the wound is narrowed, enlarge it with flame as needed.
And when you have set all these pieces of bone and it does not remain stuck, if the wound is wide, place over it one or two splints to support it until it heals.
et: The force breaks in many cases at the shoulder, and the fractures occur in three ways: where it is broken into two parts and detached, and with fragments, but is easier to restore; or there is a fracture with an injury.
And the operations are when the fracture has an injury, so have two assistants, that one washes the shoulder where the bone is broken; and the other stretches the neck towards the affected part; then place the break evenly with your thumbs, so that it forms correctly, without any appearance or misalignment.
And if you need to extend more, place under the shoulder on the patient a round rod of cloth or linen, and it should be thick according to your necessity; then stretch out and loosen the bone, hold the rod in your hand, so that you evenly align the break as needed.
If you cannot pull the head of the shoulder forward because it comes apart at the front, then the patient should lie on their sore side and place a medium arm splint behind the shoulder, with the hand placed above the elbow, moving the patients' shoulder back as long as the bone of the shoulder socket is raised.
And then attend to the broken bones of the legs, and if you find fragments, it is necessary that you split them; gently pull apart the pieces, and if the bone cannot be joined by any means, apply one of the cuts from the instrument you have, but place this tool behind the shoulder joint:
And it should resemble a spoon, and not too steeply inclined, and be as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and strength of the flesh; and have two edges, if you see fit, one edge being wider, and the other narrower, just like the contour of the wound you made when setting the bones:
And when you are sure of an abscess, measure the wound, and if it is small or you doubt its heat, cover the wound with cloths and bandages, according to the quantity needed.
And if abscesses come forth, apply a mixture of oil with rose and wax, wine, and place it on top.
The setting of the bone, when it is placid and not broken, is to place plaster powder made from finely ground molasses and egg white on the bone, along with light cotton swabs, and if needed, wrap a stick around the splint. Then take a very wide band of palm width, then place a doubled cloth over the dislocation, and stabilize it; then take a slender rod three fingers in width and length, wrap it around the band such that the head of the band is suspended. And place the rod over the dislocation, turn the band around the neck, and below both the healthy and injured shoulders; examine each part of the arm. When you see that the ligament holds the dislocated bone properly, and it is clearly not moving above the broken bone, reward it daily; when the tissues are healed, release it.
And lay the injured person on their back, and when they sleep place a small pillow under the shoulder to elevate it; this will relieve the dislocated bone through balancing of the shoulder, where you tie the arm to the neck, as long as no bad accident occurs, for twenty days.
Then resume the splinting if necessary, and tighten it so that it is as such, until it is restored; and it may be restored in at most twenty-eight days, and less for some people.
The break of the shoulder
Sometimes the shoulder break occurs in a location not far from its normal position, and it should be supported by nothing but touch; then fit it according to the pattern of the fracture, and bandage it in all ways that you can see; then put powdered flour with plenty of egg on the area, and light cotton wool; then place a wide and fine strip slightly wider than the shoulder over it, making sure the edges are evenly cut; and then tighten a large binding firmly so that the strip does not move from its place, and inspect the sutures each day; and whenever you feel movement, retighten and adjust the strip if necessary, and lay the patient on their side; and the shoulder is healed in twenty or twenty-five days. And when these numbers are completed, remove the binding carefully, as bones do not regain strength quickly.
When a fragment of bone juts out without breaking the skin, treat it by cutting below and then addressing the swelling as we have described in treating broken fractures.
Regarding the breakage of the foot.
The foot is never broken in the middle but it does happen rarely; however, it often breaks at the end. When it is broken in the middle, it tends to shift downwards, causing great pain to the patient, and loss of movement, swelling, and sometimes vomiting blood, with the joints visible in the broken bone feeling very well.
The method of healing is that the patient should lie with their head supported, and place a pillow between their shoulders, then press the shoulder blades and bring together the two ribs using your hands, and subtly adjust all body positions as best you can until the bone structure appears correctly; then apply plasters and bandages over the injury subtly with salt or another light substance, wrap it in a cloth so that the area does not move. Return the ligament to its round shape on the back, and stretch it gently, and release at regular intervals as it relaxes; if it becomes softened again, keep restraining it. If it needs to be loosened due to corrosion or itching at that spot, pain, or an abscess, do so promptly, remove the plasters, cleanse the wound properly, and then reset the bone as follows: gently align the shoulder blades.
For fractured ribs
The fractures from the shoulders and are caused by the patient, do to be cauterized by anesthesia, les os de la maints ou leus par dessebrising with fire on the fairosion; et ne pains les plaies of which should not be.
And the resettings are such that you make the break even as it should be. Then place the splint, and strain with a stake if needed.
And if the fracture of the ribs is descending into the chest, causing the patient great pain and swelling, as from pleurisy, for the bone lacks tissue; they have points, and blowouts, and vomit a large amount of blood, and it's serious illness, and those before have put in great remedies.
And if some say it is necessary to administer meats that inflame the stomach, to push the fracture back into place.
We do not perform such things unless pus has come if it hasn't arrived. And if it has come, cleanse the wound.
And some say that applying cups to the area is beneficial to draw out humors, and it seems reasonable; however, there's doubt whether the cups attract excess fluids due to weakness in positioning.
And some say that you should cover the torn flesh with hot oil, and place bandages between the ribs to keep it level around it, then treat it for pleurisy, fat tissue, and medication.
And if the patient feels great pain that they cannot bear because of the protruding bone, and doubt arises in them, then it is fitting to cut into the torn rib area, and one must place an instrument to protect the liver; and thereafter you must sever the bone, gently pull it slightly, and then stitch the two edges of the wound, if they are large, and cure with plasters until healed. And if pus comes out, put moistened cloths in rosy oil on it, and place them over the area; and treat while you can see through that which needs to be cleansed, and let it rest gently against the ribcage or wherever it should, until healed.
For the fractured collarbone: take .iiij. pouldres d’orpiers et metes en un potet qui contient oil chaut; et set ceu dans le luisin du malaide sus lou coste, et si tu voys que il est poignant a la toile ou point trop lonc, alors curez par les .iiij. cois de peceyres qui sont sur la brisure; et adonques doit on trenchier li os et traire legierement, et puis coudre les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanee.
At no time does there come a fracture of the bone of the neck, and rarely it happens that it bends; likewise in the spine of the back. And when this happens to anyone, and you want to know if it will be healthy or not, watch carefully if you see his hands becoming softened, swollen, and dead, and cannot move them or extend them, and when you prick the fingertips with a needle, they do not feel. Know that in some cases it is fatal, but if he moves them and feels well when they are restrained without pain, know that the bone joints are safe, and the patient will be cured if proper care is taken.
And when this happens to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it will be healthy or not, watch carefully if the fingers are softened, and if there is swelling in certain places on them, and under his back he jumps with windiness and egestion without volition; and when one has sucked air out of his stomach, he jumps with egestion without volition. And when it is suctioned on the back and he wants to stand up, he cannot. Know that in this case it is fatal: do not bother taking care of him.
And if this accident does not occur, it is a much lighter matter.
And the treatment is to apply oil of roses or olive oil if there's an abscess, on the spine until it's eased; then place a warming and drying plaster on one of them, bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; they should not sleep on the part where they feel pain until healed. And if any bone is dislocated, cover the area with a bandage; then straighten the bone and bring together the two edges of the wound if they are large, with stitches, then treat it with an herbal ointment until healed; and if the joint of the broken bone, called "joint of the cow", is fractured, put a poultice from your left hand into your right hand, place it next to where you can exert pressure, then apply a plaster and bandage as needed; then bind, and if there's a bone dislocation, perform reduction, then straighten it, and treat the wound until healed.
Of the breaking of the bone of the hip joint
Often the bone of the hip joint is broken, and if it occurs, there isn't a slight shortening at the top; it becomes long, slopes towards the pelvis, causes pain in that place, deformity, and swelling where it breaks.
The restoration is to extend your hand over it until you are above the fracture; and assess what kind of fracture and its shape; and if the fracture is solely in the head, align that fracture so it's back to its natural form.
the; efte con dur And when you have set it evenly, then place on the splint, next place on a wooden or metal pillar, and hold the breakage so it does not move; and return to its original position beneath the ribs until they are aligned.
And instruct the patient to sleep on a healthy side or their back.
And if an abscess arises, do not touch it until the abscess has subsided; and then apply what we have previously mentioned; and then proceed to restoration, and hold (the area) as necessary, unless there is some additional harm; this is the method.
Of a break in the shoulder
The shoulder is what lies between the collarbone and the head of the shoulder; if it is broken, then it should be repaired according to one of the two ways mentioned: where you take a piece of clean bone of appropriate size in this manner.
And place two chips of bone on it and ties them together, then hold the patient above one of these; then pour hot water over the broken bone until it cools enough to touch gently, and have a piece of wood midway through, then hang it from any weight or extension that the servant provides; then apply the pressure so that the break is equal on both hands together until it mends as required.
after by; the J’s them le cEtin e t; You's (also serme ou bon; and it; and so; they is the scmilement ce; that s
And if you see that the extraction is more severe, strain a ligament under and above the fracture, extending each member to its place. If the fracture is close to the shoulder blade head, it is necessary to place one ligature below the collarbone, and another towards the hip, beneath the fracture; likewise if the fracture is towards the hip, it is necessary to apply a light ligature without too much effort until the fracture is even on both sides, then align the fracture as needed, and secure it, unless an abscess forms.
And if an abscess forms, do not secure it until after six days, and place a linen bandage soaked in oil of roses to calm the abscess; then secure it, and the method for doing so is that you place the plaster over the fracture, assemble the arm against the shoulder blade, and put your hand on the shoulder or chest; then wrap with a cloth and secure above the shoulder blade, and along the arm, ensuring the arm is properly aligned unless something prevents it or if the bone is not moving.
And if you doubt the bone is not moving, use splints, and put a bigger and stronger than others, and each splint with two parts of it has .i days, and should be larger than that spaniel; then secure it above the next chapter as I said at first on the briser.
If you see the setting of fractures and strains, as we have said, when you restore the broken limb, and doubt that the abscess is hot, let it be bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine each of the next three days to ensure no swelling or sores develop at the site because the member is too weak. If so, as we have said.
If no such incidents occur, do not unbind the fracture until after three days or more, and let the patient rest on their back with hands placed over their stomach; then place an evenly made pillow of wool under the shoulder, and watch each hour of day or night to ensure that the appearance of the broken limb does not change or become softened by the ligaments; if so, due to the power of medicine, give them the flesh we have previously mentioned in a certain manner such that the meat is first subtle; and when it begins to regain strength, make it thicker. And it is customary for the shoulder and leg to be reset within forty days in total; then you should unbind and administer baths and ointment medicines at the site. If the dislocation is ugly and out of shape, delay unbinding for one day or two months.
For a broken arm fracture, use this treatment: Apply an iron bracelet around the area to prevent movement; make it fastened with wire at night, but loosen in the morning. Then let it rest on a pillow for seven days or more, as we have said before; then bind and heal it according to our medicinal practices.
The arm is made of two bones, which are called the "foscile," one small and supporting the elbow, and the other large, located above the little joint; sometimes only the large foscile is broken, or just the small one, or both together.
When the small bone is broken, its restoration is easy, and healing; but when the large one is broken, it's a bad sanitation, and more difficult than if both are broken together. If only the small bone is broken, it should be slightly extended and aligned.
And if it's the large bone that is broken, then you must extend it more forcefully; straighten it using a splint, and raise the elbow of the hand higher than the others, while lowering the small joint compared to the others, and cross the sinews at the same spot as itself, placing another splint above. Then extend both sides of the arm towards the area below the hand or near a ligament, and adjust the bones according to their original shape.
And if in the broken pieces, place each one back to its original location, and if any are out of position that catch on the bone, do not attempt to restore it there; instead make a cut near the bone as we have previously said.
And if in the wound from a fracture, I spoke to each physician individually; they should provide treatment.
And if in the beginning of the healing process inflammation occurs from abscesses, take a bandage made of oil-based cerate and white wax; ensure it is neither too hard nor too soft; wrap each affected area delicately until the abscesses are eased. Then remove the bandage, and place the plaster powder with abundant egg whites wherever there are splinters, making them stronger and wider than the others; know that there must be seven or more splints depending on how many bones are affected: whether it'amoeba protein to form a protective cyst. If any accident occurs to the limb, as itching that comes upon a limb; then you must wash the limb with warm water until the itch is soothed; and let the limb not rest too tightly. And then resume straining, and if the bandages are softened and the bone freed, proceed accordingly.
If the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tight; then you must soften it a little and let it be so for some days until the swelling subsides, and then resume straining.
And if none of these things that we have said comes to the patient; then do not loosen it until xx days or so. Then bind his hands above his neck, and make sure his collars are even, and guard against movement and relapse, and let him sleep on his back; and know that this dislocation is restored in xxx days or xxxv., and by chance in xx days, according to the compositions and complexions of the substances.
Of a hand fracture
Such that at the back of the hand and in our fingers, there are few fractures, but it is often a bending.
And when the sole of the hand is fractured or bent, it behooves that the patient be seated straight before him equally; then place his hand on an extended table, and extend the broken bones, and align them with a mold, until they are well joined; and apply plaster and poultices, unless abscesses occur, then he applies a splint according to the quantity thereof, and it is wrapped in .i. linen cloth.
When the fracture is near the eardrum within the belly of the cheek, make a bandage from linen and instruct the patient to press it against the broken area; then tighten with a long strip of cloth, and let the bite be as large as the palm's print, and apply pressure appropriately.
And if the fracture is at the jaw, it is necessary to place a splint above and another below in the palm, so that the hand remains open and straight; then wrap around the entire hand, securing the joint with a clamp between the two.
And if the fracture comes at any of our joints (the fingers), whether it is a dislocation, place it straight; then secure with a palm-print clamp and ensure that you do not move it. If there is a small splint to lift the dislocation, keep it in place without movement. And if the fracture is at other joints (such as the index finger or others), position them equally and bind using the healthy joint behind; then bind all together with one bandage that allows for slight movement, or above a splint as needed; and take care during healing and in placing of sutures if there is bleeding.
Of a broken hip
The bone of the hip is often broken in two places, and when it heals, one can see that it has turned both forward and backward; and its restoration involves joining a ligament above the fracture, and another below. And the patient lies on their face, then extends each member equally in line with their body; this is when the fracture occurs within the bone.
When the fracture is near the base of the thigh, one ligament goes toward the hand and the other below the breakage. Similarly, if it's close to the groin, then the ligaments should be placed next to the groin, with extension upward; place the cast so that both hands are equal in their natural position, and then apply the plaster, ensuring no abscesses form.
If there is a hot abscess, allow it to be soothed and return to your work and care; the treatment is done in part this way. You must wrap around the break with a doubled cloth bandage of two or three layers; leave excess material at the edges, then turn the leg until the heel reaches the base of the thigh, and tie a long thread between the hip and the leg near the groin underneath it; let the top end of the thread hang upwards. Then wrap again around the leg and the hip with the cloth bandage to make the tension equal, then place an olive (splint) on the bone of the leg; then insert a wick between the leg and the hip using soft linens to balance the pressure; begin binding three or four turns (tied) above the break; as you move away from the fracture, and less tension; then tie back the two heels of the thread that you tied between the leg and the hip, until you reach below the foot; stop the binds there are on top, so that it does not move from its place.
If it occurs and is dislocated, address as described above; if there are bone fragments that move, one should extract them if possible; if not, one must split the place open, pull out the pieces, and treat as we have said, until healed.
And in no case is the thigh broken as when it is placed and fitted with splints, like in the shoulder or arm; however, after such restoration, this does not cause harm to the patient.
And understand that the thigh is restored in one day or less or more, depending on individual differences.
Of the groove of the knee cap
It is said that in the groove of the knee cap there are few breaks but many bends. And if it breaks, it is only a small crack or puncture, and leads to all wounds, causing pain and feeling quite ill.
And the restoration is that you put equal things on both sides where it was broken so that they can move as one may; then place the cast, and if needed, a round splint, and strain it as required, then heal all the dispositions we have said about other breaks like abscesses or similar conditions; for each accident you apply what is necessary until well.
tt’s
That in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called by right "mustelz", and the other is called "foscile"; and both break as they do in the arm, and therefore the restoration is just like that of the arm similarly, and the treatments are all alike.
And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns from every part.
And if the small bone is fractured, it will turn forward.
If the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and can be clearly seen; then reset it. Then make an extension, set it evenly, and secure the splints equally; however, it must be done in accordance with its beauty, if there are multiple pieces, so that the extensions are smaller and lighter; adjust accordingly to your skill.
And when you have completed your work, take two strips of waxed wood that encircle the leg on both sides, and are as long as the leg from the knee to below; then wrap them twice - one band above and one below, and tie them evenly, so that the leg will not lean to either side, which is good. No one administers a wooden splint along the entire length of the leg if it's made of wood, placing it there to prevent movement, properly applying this in the place of the break or where there is an injury; and move the leg every day to see if there are any pus discharges or other accidents; treat until healed.
In cases where the bone fracture affects the foot, it requires similar treatment as mentioned earlier. If the broken bones protrude through the skin (compound fracture), wash them with wine and vinegamoile; then dry with a cloth and tie up to prevent further injury.
At the ankle there is no breakage, but at the bone of the foot sometimes there is a fracture and in the tendons slightly, without any risk to other positions.
And if the foot bone is fractured, and you see these bones protruding one above another, place it so that the feet are on the ground as though they were walking, then put your own foot under theirs, where the bones are raised, then press until they return to their places; then apply a poultice and bandage over it, then tuck two flat chips of wood under the belly of the fractured leg, then straighten the leg quickly, then wrap with cloth around, and other things as needed.
And when three or four days have passed, you will be able to move the limb again, for you will find the bones equal, either fractured, or dislocated.
If there are any broken bones, they should be restored as we have said for the bones of the hand; then place a splint on the broken bone according to its length and width, and position a table under it as I have described, and support immediately; and if there are 2 or 3 or more, break each one with a splint according to its size, wrapped in a linen cloth, and secure the table beneath the foot of the bed so that they extend above the stomach.
And it is necessary not to forget the other things I have said about other fractures, as we have mentioned; and treat each injury as needed.
concerning the break of the bone in the finger
When the bone of a woman's anatomy is fractured, have her sit in a chair, then tilt her towards the softer part of her back and be supported from behind; then fill her nature (vagina) with cotton wool, adding as much as one straw; then stand the woman up, and gradually lift her buttocks little by little until the cotton drops into the entrance of her anatomy, restoring the bone with the straw. When she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and once she has done so, let it return in place, repeating this for seven days or so; thus will be repaired the breakage. If desired, take a sheep bladder, tie on its neck a rag, fill it entirely with liquid from nature (urine), then blow into the rag until the bladder is emptied inside: her anatomy shall heal the breakage; then let it be filled with cotton wool and left like this for several days until fully healed.
When the bone of an arm or woman is fractured, restore it as we have described for the hip joint; and these close breaks should not be hidden from those who apply their study and effort to this book. For such a break indicates various ways of proper restoration: thus pay heed.
When the oeuz de la brisees entier. Entendus quant les tiers ceste qui est l’oie pas dese; mais n'est la procuriez-li pries ce que l'ent. Quant li fumbrasse, et sonne, nequemant les coulis enle le estiuez de, dresse enties: se vient en oise qui les a cogneux.
Of a broken bone with wound
For those with a broken bone and wound, especially if it is large like the hip or shoulder joints, they should be examined now to see if the signs we have mentioned are present.
And if the wound is healing and there are no signs of lead poisoning, then continue to restore the break at that same hour or day unless abscesses appear.
Embedt; and eisted.
And if the broken bone is exposed near the head, it must be carefully set with gentle pressure of your hands in small extensions.
And if the extensions do not allow you to set it evenly with your hands, then use this instrument made of iron, which has either seven or six handles and long; the width depends on the wound size. Therefore, the healer should grasp three or four according to what is needed for each bone-breaking treatment; let them be round and slightly thick so they do not buckle under pressure at your work area, and have a handle that extends forward from its body:
And they are called "paliances" because the head of the shoulder must be placed on the exposed part of the bone; and it should press once so that it returns, and both sides should be equal to each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the extensions cannot properly grasp the bumps, then you shall shave the top of the bone until the extensions have enough space.
If you cannot bring the bone back as we have said, if with an instrument suitable for this, whether cutting or sawing, within your ability; then cut out that which remains in the hardened bone and minute splinters.
And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, ensure it is in its natural place. Do so until it reaches that position, then moisten a piece of cloth with vin stiptic black, and correctly as such; do not apply any ointment or other substance to the wound unless necessary, as this may cause rot and decay; then provide bandages once you have restored the bone, leaving the wound uncovered, cutting all coverings around it according to the size of the wile, ensuring that the wounded area is not strained with the fracture; and many times this has been done by wise men, resulting in recovery or death at some point; thus let the pressure be more gentle and softer than other breaks.
And if the wound is large or severe, and you suspect that an accident may have occurred therein, as we have said, and you find pain at the site; it does not require putting bandages on it; instead, wrap firmly around with leather wraps, then secure them. And when after one or two days, wound healing is evident in the area where you placed anything over it; remove all wine from there, and apply a sanative ointamen to the wounds as an antiseptic poultice and similar substances.
And it is necessary that you loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it is settled and healed.
And it is necessary to equip the limb in such a way that the bow bends slightly easily.
And if more than three days pass without healing and it cannot settle but continues to bow as if there are small bones within, it is necessary that you clean the wound with gauze, and remove all extraneous bone fragments causing pain.
If a fistula occurs in its place or another form of corruption, it is necessary to treat it as described earlier in this chapter. And when the bone is broken and exposed on the limb, like the pelvis or shoulder bones, and similar major body parts, do not attempt to set them, because many times death comes, but leave it until it heals; perhaps later it will naturally align itself after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, let it be.
Of bruises that come upon the swelling
We often come upon the aftermath of the injury during the healing process, especially when it is near the joint, and an unpleasant sight is to see on the affected limb; and perhaps it cannot perform its natural functions.
Then be aware if the person is fresh: if you administer medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and frankincense, honey, and other similar things; in any case, choose one of these items or all together, combine them with astringent wine or an abundance of egg yolk or easily melted substance; place the mixture on the affected area using rags, ensuring it is tightly bound, and do not loosen for days; then dislocate again, attempting another method until inflammation subsides; or apply a well-made piece of linen as its property is that it removes swelling from over the limbs. If the condition has turned hard like stone, and removal is necessary, cut away excess tissue on top, and continue until all appears to be removed, then take it to an expert barber for shaving until completely gone.
When the break in the bone is healed and weak after the limb and delicate, for many causes: one reason it was too narrow as it became so tight and does not move as much; or because there were too many ligatures, and cannot come to bleed at the member; or due to a lot of movement in its movements often.
And the care is to make the patient eat well and keep the body supple, until his blood is multiplied within him; and administer baths, providing joy and comfort; then apply pitch on the limb so that it draws out large quantities of pus, and often raises the flesh through frequent water treatments, until healing occurs in the member; then return to its natural shape.
And when the limb is twisted after health restoration
And when the limb is twisted after health restoration, and the bones are broken apart, and the shape of the member is unpleasant, yet it does not alter its natural purpose: do not heed foolish people who say that the entire limb should be newly formed; many a fool has done so in our lands; such practices are blameworthamo
At no time is there any bone that can be relocated by constantly rubbing it for a long time with wet hands. And have the member adjusted each hour.
And if the curvature is old and hardened, just like a stone, it must be removed with iron, up to the bone using a delicate incision tool gently; then apply cotton and study its treatment.
Here begins the book of disloceback-to-top
;s t.
When dislocation occurs on any joint, one must now reset it carefully.
Because if it is delayed, and the head swells, and perhaps when resetting to its place causes pain; therefore one should not move it at the time it is swollen, as this often brings about pus and other pains.
Also, when this happens, treat the patient well, then leave them, until the swelling of the abscess subsides; afterward, apply warm water and oil to the limb, then gently move each part as needed for treatment according to how it comes in its place.
by le et cun multiplely at the Em:
Of the jawbones
Sometimes the jawbones become dislocated due to slight movements and displacement occurs in two ways: either they are slightly detached from their place and loosened a bit; or they are entirely dislocated, hanging towards the floor, causing saliva from the mouth that cannot be held in nor can it close its mouth, and thus enveloping its tongue during speech.
When the dislocation is small, it may return to various positions on its own.
If it is complete and finished, then you must quickly reset it without hesitation.
And in such a manner that the minister soaks the head of the patient, and pours three drops from one hand into the root of the dislocation of the lower jaw inside the mouth, since the dislocation is made up of two parts; and the other hand should be free to ensure balance. Then command the patient to soften their mandibles and move them in all directions.
the blood:
If repositioning is difficult, especially if it involves both jawbones together, use warm water and oil, gently manipulating until they are positioned correctly; do not force the movement as we have said.
And when they are aligned equally, and the patient's mouth feels somewhat relieved, place wet cloths in a bag made of oil-soaked linen and wax; then gently bind it with soft strings.
and let the patient sleep on their back, with their head between two pillows, so that they do not move left or right, nor strain themselves, but eat light meat until the pains are gone, and the jawbones have healed.
And then adjust what it wishes slightly, and do not work on opening the mouth for eating or drinking until the jawbones are properly aligned and healthy.
And if the two jawbones cannot be reset within an hour and are not returned to their proper places, he may experience fever and usual symptoms, and possibly stomach issues or purely bile being expelled.
And when you see this, then know it is a fatal condition; and many times the person to whom it happens dies within seven days.
of the sling
The sling cannot be dislodged from within the body or along the spine and limbs; it is never dislocated accidentally, but felt strongly by the patient.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms. Then firmly press with your whole hand; it will return. Then place upon the plaster and tie up the bandage, applying pressure.
the oum. Do you de la pruchti mort par lait p dont ne que n's li Jekle les malheuret. I.
And thus it is also done when resetting the shoulder blade which has come out of its place.
Of shoulder dislocation
He knows that the shoulder dislocates in but three ways: one is when it dislocates to the front of the hip joint; and the second is at the back part; and occasionally above, which happens rarely.
and does not dislocate backward nor internally to the nerves; and often it dislocates forward towards the hip joint, especially in those with little flesh; for these, it happens quickly; and in those with enough fat, it jumps slightly, and returns easily.
And sometimes it happens to some men with a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells from a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated because of this.
Therefore, you must examine it to be certain, and then begin the treatment.
And it is known that when [the shoulder] moves towards the seat, and there is a clear difference between the injured and healthy shoulders, you will find their manifest variation. by placo. The
And similarly, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not concealed, for you can clearly feel it upon touching.
And this method of dislocation is not solee to reset when it is new or if the child is ill.
And the method is for the minister to lift the patient's hand upward, then remove the shirt under the elbow, and gently lift the joint back into place with force; then the minister lifts the hand and extends it upward before placing it down again, which will happen swiftly.
And if it does not return as we have said after many days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water; and they should apply soothing and softening remedeby boiling althea, fenugreek, and mallow seeds in water, and thus treated.
then cover the patient's back with a cloth of wool equally soft and not too thick or thin, place the shaft of an arrow under the elbow joint, and carefully lift the shoulder blade while holding the patient's foot on top, and treat the hand of the afflicted.
And other remedies wash the patient's head downwards, so that it does not move too much; now the shoulder returns completely, and you see if resetting follows this method:
And that you make present a man who is taller than the patient; and he stands facing their side, and lifts the shoulder underneath the seat of pain, and raises the seat upwards so that the patient hangs by an arm. And other remedies pull the patient's hand downwards towards their belly. And if the patient is too light, then you anchor them with something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
And the limb may also be reset in another way: and it is so that a long stick is driven into the ground, so that the shoulder is similarly aligned as with a spit, neither too thick nor too thin. Then it is placed under the patient's arm, but with cloth beneath them, and the limb should be long and sturdy; then their hand is extended away from that side properly, and the joint will soon return to its place quickly.
And if it does not return for all these reasons that we have said, then do this remedy: take two sticks of about 2 feet long and 4 inches wide each, with the heads recessed to enter into the shoulder on one side as shown here.
Then place the fust with cloth on top so it does not bother the patient, then put it under their seat; extend both arms over the long piece of wood, and fix the shoulder to the wood, with the arm at head level, then move the arm onto a shelf made from a wide slat, keep the hands extended downwards, let the body hang on the other side: the joint will now be maintained.
And when it is done in any way, if you need to place a spindle of wool under their seat, then apply the poultice with powdered herbs, incense and frankincense over the entire shoulder area, quickly strain from under the seat, turn the ligament over the poult groove, and wrap the hand around its neck, keeping the hands stationary like this.
And it is necessary that they eat little, as long as the limb feels comfortable because he will recover sooner; and then after 5 or 6 days, move it; and if it becomes firm and not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is severely out of place due to moisture or another reason, it should be attended with three punctures as described in the fire cautery chapter.
And if you do all this and it remains dislocated after six days, and the joint cannot be lifted or move forward in either arm, then know that the nerve at the shoulder's head is torn or stretched or weakened; and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation towards the buttocks or back is done by thrusting and extending the hands, and treated with another remedy; care for it until it is healed.
And if after healing comes stiffness to the limb and tardiness in movement, often using up the patient many times, until those stiffnesses are alleviated, and it returns to its original state.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder blade.
One says that the shoulder joint is dislocated at points and returns; and it's completely dislocated in all directions, especially front and back, and the dislocation isn't properly reduced because one can see and feel it; and it's displaced according to each case. And when you join the dislocated arm with the healthy one, if it appears clearly bent. For the joint is lifted, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary to reset as soon as abscesses appear, for if they were not reset promptly, the repositioning would be difficult; and sometimes cannot be reset at all, especially when located in the back; this is worse than other dislocangs, causing greater pain, and possibly death.
And the restoration is when it can be reset such that you extend its hand to your two hands; and arms are spread out, and the fingers along the chest, around and under, and position the joint back with its bones together, or at the root of the palm, until it returns to its place.
When dislocation is present at the front, it returns when he draws his hand back to his other hand, with the root of the palm's cost that has been dislocated.
And if it does not return to its place, give strong extension; and two ministers extend the arm, and they support from both sides of the arm at the point of extension; then turn the arm in either direction, after which you have wrapped a long and wide piece of cloth around it.
And when the physician reaches the joint at the juncture with his hand, if they anoint it with any oil to soften the joint, then relocate the joint firmly until it returns.
When it is back in place, then apply dry paste with egg yolk, firmly bind it, and bend the arm against the patient's will, leaving them for a few days, then release it.
And if the joint is firm in place, then release it and leave it alone; and if you see that the joint does not tighten properly, restart with dry paste and binding, leaving it for a few days until it is securely set; then release it.
And if it feels weakness after resetting the joint and moves again, so wash and rub well, and press until relieved; or put on the joint a greasy sheep fat bandage, then leave for one day and night, and remove the bandage, and let them have baths. And when it is swollen, if you rub the joint promptly, then reset and apply an ice pack, and do so twice or three times until healed; and if you see this, put on wet paste of whey heated with butter, and strain out; it will return to its place.
The dislocation of the hand
The hand joint dislocates easily, and its return is light compared to other joints Anyhow, it must be brought back quickly at the same hour as it becomes dislocated so that it may swell or an abscess arise hotly.
And the reductions are such that you place the affected hand under a table, extend its fingers, and align them properly so it places its palm over the appearance of the joint, pushing until it returns.
Nevertheless, you must ensure that it is properly placed; then position the patient's back of their hand under a table with extension and reduction. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, position the patient's back of their hand under the table and place your hand over its appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that is correct.
If not, strain from dislocating through soothing plasters, and let it remain in such a way to begin recovery.
And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot place it back in its proper position for several days, the displaced joint will persist.
the iciz quide e ce car'sbut; l’sir con fuudra and:
And when the hand is in its place, set it on the splint as we have mentioned, then strain and leave for five days, then release and leave so.
And if it cannot move well, and there is any weakness, apply warm mud, and rub until it feels better.
Concerning the dislocation of hand's toes
Never are the two of the hand dislocated to each side, never at the back of the palm or the belly;
Then are the two, and return the dislocation to your pockets as long as it returns, then support the head of the forearm, and bend towards the part where it is dislocated.
and leave it for two days, and then place it equal to that day; and every night as we have said, untie the ligature of a day, and move the joint, and re-tie the night, and do this often until it becomes tight.
Do the same with it if it is dislocated in the abdomen of the hand, and do so as you did before until it is realigned; and similarly act when it is dislocated elsewhere.
For the dislocation of the spine of the back
If the spine or neck is dislocated, and there are several such cases, if there is no remedy, because it quickly causes harm to the patient.
byz;
And many times, the spine dislocates in four parts; that which moves at the back is called "gilboys".
The treatment is to reset if the gilboys occurred from childhood: there may be no cure or healing in entirety.
It's of ancient remedies by words to be spoken with great profit.
But I have shortened it according to my intention, and formed exercises in various ways.
I say that in the inflammation which comes to the pus before the genitals, there is no remedy or health.
and likewise those that come directly under two sides, and cannot be treated with a remedy except for the one specifically coming to the back, as I say.
and t, ou n’t lessele les combs for his. P s; that he:lui ous; and c in the efad, la bler lese to bon le malp fe.
Then make a fire-brand in the ground firmly, and one for other joints, and tie a strap of leather around them on the patient's body; and another for hips, and knees, and ankles.
And two ministers know the straps, one to the head and the other to the joints, among the two fire-brands.
And be well secured, the fire-brand as we have said, and place your hands firmly on the spine until it recovers.
If it does not return with this treatment, take a tablet of three long arms' length, lift from the forehead, and let the patient lie on their side, then place the thick end of the tablet under the head. Then position the thin end along the spine. Then place the middle part of the tablet under the other side of the head and press firmly until it returns to its place; if you see this, make the turnet that turns towards the hand.
And insert two thorns on the head of one side arm, and towards the other two fingers, with an ample space between each thorn, above and below.
And in each ember is a pipe, through which the draft flows, and the embers are firmly pressed into the earth so they do not move; and between each pair of embers there should be one rotating piece, to which the reeds attach, and two small turning pieces about the width of a palm length, to turn the draft.
Then bind the reeds that are among the sticks at the draft of the pipe to the headpiece, and the other reed toward the ends to the other draft, and each minister turns its draft piece for all the reeds, and the master aligns the spine equally as we have said.
And once it is levelled, then place a drying paste with plenty of eggs on top, and then the sponges, and then the plaster from a board three fingers wide to cover the ulceration and the healthy part of the spine, then use a reed binding as we have said, and treat the patient gently until they are well.
If any condition arises at the end of health, it is necessary to administer soothing and relaxing medicines with a spoon as we have mentioned before; and never once do you administer one piece of lead.
And never does the appearance come in the lower spine of the back, and it is thought that these are dislocations; and it is the bone that moves, therefore one should not be presumptuous: perhaps this would bring about death.
Of hip dislocations
Joints of the thigh and shoulder only dislocate, not like other joints; the thigh joint is dislocated in four parts: inside and outside, front and back, more dislocated internally than externally, less so in front and back.
And the knowledge of its dislocation internally is such that when joining the injured leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer and more pronounced pain in the affected joint than the healthy one, and the injured cannot double their knee before fire. and is the lump which is close to a hot abscess, because the head of the hip comes near it.
And the sign of those it comes upon late is such that these accidents are contrary to those before.
And the signs of those who experience this condition is that they keep their leg according to completion; however, do not double bend the knee in pain, and if one wishes to make them walk, but they cannot before, and holds urine, and swells with grief, and as it walks, passes over the heel.
And the signs of those whom it happens behind are that they cannot spread their buttocks nor double them, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the swelling is softened, and the shoulder head from the hip to below the ribs is dislocated.
The resets of this kind of dislocation are that you should reset the dislocation as soon as possible, and it remains according to its positioning, if there is no treatment; and one must not act with presumption.
And in those where the dislocation is fresh and there are .iiij. ways of dislocation, hasten to return the joint, and stretch it out and draw it back, and move it right and left; perhaps it will come back on its own without needing further treatment.
If it does not return in this manner, one must prepare a strong assistant and firmly secure the leg with two hands or with a bandage around the shin. and other assistants extend their hands over the leg in such a way that they place their fingers under its heels, then tighten it gently with a bandage around the thigh; another pulls on the head of the bone.
and they stretch upward and downward all at once until the patient is raised from the ground fully, then let them hang suspended.
This manner of extension is common to four resemblances; and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
If not, care must be taken for its similarity. When the dislocation is in the jawbone, it should be supported by the patient's healthy ribcage, then place a ligature at the base of the hip joint, and the bone that protrudes from under the arch, then extend the ligature upward towards the arch, and towards the foramen.
Then grasp the head of the lower jaw and pull it gently at that place, and this type of dislocations is frequent.  Here are more common; and the following manner:
And if you cannot secure them in the manner we have described, it is necessary to bind both feet of the patient together with a strong swath beneath both heels and ankles, and above both knees, so that the afflicted leg is extended two fingers more than the other.
Then let them be suspended from a staff under the head and two arms' length off the ground; then command one assistant to embrace the waist of the patient, and have another assistant also suspended with the afflicted individual, who will fully encircle the waist, because the joints return rapidly.
And when the dislocation is in the foot, lay the afflicted individual down as we have described for those with spinal pain, and properly stretch a ligature around the affected leg and at its joints too.
Then place two cauterizations, one at the top and one elsewhere on the body, then insert a tinder between the buttocks in the patient just below the navel. And place wet swaddling clothes around it so that the patient does not move, then each attendant stands towards them, and the healer repositions the joint evenly with his hand.
If it returns, that's good. If not, place them under a table and press as we have said in the fracture treatment, and let the patient lie on their healthy side.
When dislocations are present, it is necessary to hasten in stretching the affected leg as previously stated; place your hands on their pain above the injured area, then press with the other hand and extend towards the groin.
If the dislocation is behind, you should not stretch downwards or lift off the ground, but instead let it be as if they were sitting with their lower legs hanging outback as we have said during lying on their hands and knees. and be prone, with the limb extended as we have said beforehand, and should massage over the joint to the surface.
When the patient extends their legs and they are equal in length; then place the buttocks, apply the splint, and tie with a bandage so that the knee does not move.
And it rests for 3 or 4 days; then reset the splint and apply a new one; and if you see that they are equal, as before, leave them tied for another 3 days; then reset the splint, and let the patient walk gently until the limb is comforted.
Of the dislocation of the knee joint
The joint is dislocated in three ways: it's due to the inside and outside forces, and from behind; not from the front.
And this is the sign that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the hip, and if it doesn't reach its hip, know that it is dislocated.
And the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright and extend his leg if he can, and place your back to his face, and put your feet under his.
thebbero are t. M.  is m and so they ; by it the rée;
And place the bandage over it, and raise the leg to the thigh, keeping the joints together firmly for iii or iv days, then release; and do not allow the patient to move about until the limb is comfortably settled.
And if the joint is not properly aligned, be diligent in extending it firmly, as we have described in the treatment of the elbow, until it is healthy again.
On ankle dislocations:
The heel is never fully closed or opened, but sometimes within and sometimes outside.
And the signs are that the ankle is swoln, try before reaching the part where it is dislocated.
The repositioning should be light, and you must gently extend with your hands when it's only slightly out of place.
; so that they a. If youm c s and it if he bien the line est lesse il’s:
Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then twice with your left hand, then extend it upwards, and skillfully raise the foot high.
and do this twice as we have said, pulling and pushing the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, resume the procedure because it will return.
and if it cannot return in this way, place the patient on his back on the ground and firmly insert a sturdy rod between his thighs and wrap cloths around him so he does not move.
Then soak the minister's thigh, and another minister extends their foot to its hands or on some bandage, that it ties under the neck of the foot; Then extend each minister equally, and let the straps be fastened between the thighs of the patient to hold them while extending.
Then place equal pressure on the dislocation with their hands, and another minister soaks the healthy leg from below, and the dislocated part will return quickly.
t.sbut ; the + de m line sbothert;
Then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligament is weakened, strain it again; then release on the third or fourth day, and prevent the patient from moving for four days. And if before this term he does not improve, it is not assured that he will not dislocate again.
And if an abscess occurs, then it is necessary to pacify it as we have said elsewhere, until it becomes healthy.
Of the shoulders
When the shoulders are dislocated, they must be extended easily with little effort.
And if the dislocation is in either of the shoulder or knee, you must make the patient sit on plain ground or on a table rightly straight and put your foot under where these joints are separated, then press firmly with your foot until they realign.
and lesse the text:
Of wounds and dislocations together
When a wound comes with a dislocation, and it is seen to be restored, many times the patient dies:
If you are not experienced in healing, unless you are skilled in the art and have practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compasseionate and merciful, nor late to act, do not be presumptuous.
the lesm and lion ons it irt: When you see hope, reset the member to its place now, so that abscesses may heal.
And when the member is reset, apply soothing things to abscesses, and treat the wound as it should be, with dry ointments.
And if with the dislocation there is also bone breakage and small bones displaced, and tendons torn, do as we have instructed in simple illnesses.
And be careful not to enter a state of fear, as I have said, for this is right according to your Maker, and for the health of your armor and body. Amen.
