O you, most dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical science knowledge, and I have finished it with its explanations and by its declarations. And I have received in a vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work "of hands," namely surgery.
And since the work of hands is rare in our region and has been taken away entirely, thus the knowledge and practice have perished, leaving only small descriptions from ancient books where hands have worked. And from this comes the error and folly, and minds are closed off, and knowledge is displaced.
Or it seems to me that I shall revive this treatise with the method of exposure and exposition, and abbreviation; and come together the forms of fire cautery instruments and other devices of work with the assistance of declaration and preparing it as needed.
And because no good masters are to be found in our time, the art of medicine has been abandoned. It is necessary for the one who undertakes it to be well versed in anatomy as Galien says, until he understands the judgment of the members, and their forms and connections and separations thereof, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and vessels and number of veins, and their movement and arteries moving and resting, and the place from which they arise.
And thus Hippocrates says that without skill one is very little, and with the tool it is a bit more; especially in the art of surgery.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that if one is not aware of the things mentioned, they should beware to not err and cause harm; thus I have wanted many times from those who engage in this science and abandon their knowledge and experience.
A physician I saw a mad man who cut an abscess of scrofulous glands or neck of a woman, and cut the veins near her throat; thus so much blood flowed out that the woman died in his arms.
And I saw another physician treating a stone in a man's bladder, and the stone was large; he took out with it a part of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
And I have already been called upon to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and it was very certain that he would die when they tried cutting it out.
Another skilled healer took care of a duke from our land who had a broken leg, and with the fracture was an open wound. The ignorant physician hastily reset the fracture atop the wound as if it were a splint, leaving no gaping hole in the wound; and he left it thus for some time. He instructed him not to dislocate it again; after which the leg was fully healed, including the foot, before falling into ruin.
I was called to come to him, and hurriedly came undone his leg; and when I saw it dislocated so peacefully, he felt no pain at all.
But any way the decay was already established in the limb, and it could not be healed; and the corruption continued to spread through the limb until the entire member was completely lost.
And see one other mirror which fell an inflamed abscess due to the wickedness of its lordship.
For a canker, when it is cleared of black bile humor, one should not touch it with iron unless it is partially removed so that all the corrupted matter can be extracted.
And therefore, dear son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: namely, those places where there is danger in various arrangements; and I will show in each section of this book where there is fear and risk.
byt. 20 t, the s. If you; I
Take your tools with conviction and approach the sickly gently yet firmly, using the best method so through God's grace you come to health and be praised; let go of hopeful illnesses bringing great harm to one'amity; and take up your tools where doubt arises, may you have faith in such a way that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
"Galen once said in his warnings: 'Do not take on ill-natured diseases that you may be called the foolish healer.'"
I have devised this treatise according to three chapters."
The first chapter is of fire cauteries and medical caustics, and the chapters are ordered from head to feet; and on swelling forms, and metal instruments for cautery, and all that is necessary in practice.
The second chapter is of tailors and surgeons, and cupping and wounds, and arrow extractions, and similar things; the chapter is ordered and on swelling forms.
The third chapter is on repositioning dislocations and sprains, and similar things; it is ordered from head to foot and on swelling forms.
Thus we remember our work, it behooves me to say the quality of the aid and the harm of each constitution.
I say that the quality of the remedy and its harm are words spoken longest, subtle science, and secret resolutions; and on this matter the wisest speak, agreeing to it; but their few words do not suffice, for I will recount at length.
I say that fire cautery helps universally with any temperament or matter; for there are two temperaments: one being hot and sensitive to matter, and the other dry without sensitivity to matter.
In complexions both hot and dry combined with matter, some argue that fire cautery is of great help; while others say the opposite: that fire cautery is only useful for diseases arising from heat and dryness.
When the nature of fire is so hot, and it must not be treated with heat from fever or dampness; and those who say otherwise claim that cautery greatly helps in treating hot and dry illnesses affecting the bodies of men. When you examine the body's condition with its moisture to the temperament of hot fire, you find it cold.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it no time through experiment.
And in every way, only those who have tried it and know well the practice of cautery, the variety of human constitutions, their conditions and causes of diseases, as well as outcomes and duration; we do not fear others, especially with cold and damp illnesses. And all the masters agreed on the use of cautery.
(do; and n're t ça m, but none; f les marjolement Marr:
The fire is simple, and does not come to harm except the limb which is cooked, and it harms no other member if named so.
Ardent medicines come from one limb to another by joining, and bring severe healing diseases to the member; and sometimes they kill the patient.
The fire for its heat and because of the goodness of its substance does not do this unless there is excess.
s the t and:  by a (or.
And know, son, that they are agreed upon when the cauteries should be done, and before praying.
And I say that the cauterization is suitable at all times, because the damage occurring is removed by the aid of cauterization; and especially if the cauterization is for urgent necessary pains which cannot wait until greater harm comes to the limb.
is not par ces; Estrop: a l’est cure per cent.
And among these things is that the disease may come at any time according to the constitution of the patient and the location of the illness and its nature; and there are excesses in him from the acquisition of meats and similar substances, if not administered cauterization where it has little excess and moisture, as with cauterization for pain, and other things, so that pain does not return; but this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand why cauterization is called the last of medicine, and it's true; but they do not believe that cauterization follows medicine, their understanding is false, and cauterization is the last of medicine because when we administer treatments in any illness and they are not effective, then we apply our cauterization, and it does. Then indeed that cauterization is the last of medicine, not according to the misunderstanding of foolish people.
The ancients said that surgical instruments made of gold are more effective than those of iron, and they considered it better solecu due to the quality of gold and the purity of its substance; they also stated that the wounds caused by fire cautery do not cause putrefaction but this is indeed untrue as I have tested and found that in some men it does occur. Surgical instruments made of gold are as effective as those of iron, as they said.
Nevertheless when you heat the gold instrument, it's not because of its gold color and it cools quickly; if it is overheated too much, it can cause harm by fire; thus there are enough hindrances.
And so we use fire cautery as we have proven its usefulness in our work.
Or I have ordered this chapter from head to toe so that the way may be easier to find.
Oil cautery
This oil cautery is for moisture and cold in the brain; and therein it is done due to a disease called "soda", and due to many humors that descend from the head into the eyes, and causing multitude of dreams and toothaches and throat pain, as well as all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis and stroke and similar illnesses.
Ca:
First make the patient sit with a cross between your hands, and place their hands on both sides of the chest; then put the root of your palm over the root of his neck between his two eyes; and where your arms come together, it will bleed afterwards and apply the cautery called "olivare," which is shaped as follows:
Then place your hand with the mark of ink, and while drawing and straining slightly your fingers back and forth, slowly lift your hand; if you see the bone just a small hole, proceed with the cautery as I have instructed until you can see the bone; afterward, take a little oil, and place soft cotton inside, then place it over the affected area for three days; afterwards, apply fine linen cloth soaked in butter; leave it until the burn is healed; finally, treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmacon," until it is completely healed.
And if said by the ancients that as long as an open wound persists, more pus will be discharged, and therefore help is given accordingly.
And some say that one must thoroughly clean the cautery and if part of the bone is burned, then heal what has been burned from the bone and treat it.
And others say that one must clean the cautery thoroughly, and apply it as strongly as a woman would put padding in her shoes to allow fluids to exit; then let the open wound be lanced for a long time, after which it should be treated and dressed.
These two methods of cauterization do not seem to me entirely good in all cases, but rather in certain individuals who are gripped by fear; and it seems to me that I should let them remain; for the head is weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we witnessed with other limbs; and similarly when the patient's head is naturally feeble, and the first sign of cauterization brings more safety and relief, then in such a case my work seems to be beneficial.
From ankle pain comes severe discomfort to the head
When pain in the entire head is chronic and lasts long, patients should use years and pills called "cochie," along with chief purge and oils and plasters; if one performs the caustery we have previously mentioned, it does not help.
Be aware if the patient's shoulder is of a severe condition and not too cold; then caustery should be applied below that caustery we have mentioned above.
.
For both fire cautery of the head When sudden pain occurs in a part of the head and the disease extends to the ear, and the head is relieved by purging medicines, and other treatments as mentioned in the division of diseases have been done but prove futile: then you should perform cauteries according to two methods, that is with aqueous medicine and fire.
The cautery with aqueous medicine is that you shall puncture a hole of size about two centimeters, remove the skin and cover it with two or three stitches; then reattach the flap so that you can restore the punctured area underneader the fascia. Once reattached, ensure that it is well strained and left for 12 hours; then untie it and apply a dressing to the wound for two or three days, and cover with clean gauze moistened with butter until healing occurs.
After the ointment treatment until it is cleaned; and if you see, take some of the written or dosage treatments for burning medicines.
The iron cautery follows this method. Heat the cautery to this shape:
And it is called "closed" because the top is made in the shape of a clover or has .i. horns on it and at the middle there's a small opening; place it over the painful area, hold your hand and gently twist the iron slightly until half the thickness that touches the skin turns red; then remove your hand so that the artery does not burn further back, allowing an abundance of blood to flow.
After placing cotton in the wound for three days, then put moistened cotton with butter, and afterwards treat the wound with ointment until it is healed; if you wish to cauterize this migraine with a cautery called "cultellaris," do so at the tip, and be careful not to cauterize the artery in this migraine which is not an old one.
Migraine
When curing migrahren as we have previously mentioned in divisions of diseases, and it does not improve with the previous medicine using fire or iron, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellaris" until it is white; and place your hand on the sore spot for a line half an hour long, and remove your hand once, and strain so that you do not puncture the artery nor damage up to the bone. Be careful with jaw movement when eating, and ensure nerves maintain their direction without causing spasms in patients or fear upon cauterization of the artery; also be wary of blood discharge from the artery once it is punctured. However, I will explain how to stop bleeding after an artery has been punctured and show where this occurs in this book.
If you see that this cautery does not ease the illness at all and the patient is suffering greatly, perform the cauterization in the middle of the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery we have discussed or extraction from the artery with a cautery that has .ij. blades; and this cautery is better than the previous one and more helpful.
Of ear pain due to coldness
When there is ear pain from coldness and one has applied soothing medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the section, and the pains do not cease, then cool with this cautery called 'points', which has the following shape:
After pointing around the entire ear, where either of them holds pain in both, and moving slightly up from the root of the ear once you have located it; and give six points around each ear; treat the area until it is healed.
Regarding the torment of the mouth
The torture that must be treated by cauterization is only those caused by humidity, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not perform cauterization on similarities coming from pus and sperm of nerves.
When treating this type of torture that causes numbness from hornets and chief purges, as well as gargling, then you must causticate the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, another a little further behind the temple, and the third between the two lips; place the cautery on the part that is unblemished, making it even shorter than a small coin above the tip of the head's horn, and another along the length of the temple as long as one such coin; leave the cautery until half the skin has scorched away; this is how the caustication works.
And there is the incision type that we have shown before, but it is somewhat more subtle and requires the knife to be slightly larger; after performing as I have explained above, until healed.
When apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said, and if there's no improvement, and the patient does not have fever, then make three cauterizations: two above the two horns of the head, and one in the middle of the forehead, and one at a place called "vessels" as we have said before; perform the subsequent cauterization over the mouth of the stomach; treat it as we have said before.
Of languor
This disease requires giving the patient large years and purging pills to cleanse the brain; afterwards, open up the top of the sick person's head entirely, and place upon their occipite a studium of sinapi which is described in treatments for plasters; this is how it is done: as I have instructed.
If it is thus done, well that is; and if not, then make three caudices from under the head to just below the collarbone with each being two finger-widths apart; treat as usual, and if you see them join together, also create a cautery in between; and if necessary, place another pair on top of the other two. Treat until it is well done, using the caudices called "olivary" as I have previously mentioned.
From coldness of the head It is necessary that the head be warmed by covering and as we have previously mentioned; after placing the head of the sick person on it, then perform cauterization in the head and over each horn; and four behind and three above the spine of the neck; and if more is needed, and the body is moist, and the patient suffers greatly, and the illness is severe, then do four cauterizations along the spine of the back; and let it be as long as the pus lasts, and loosen your hand; after curing until healthy again, apply the caustic called 'olivare' that we have previously mentioned.
Of epilepsy
Epilentic patients should only use a strong fire cautery if they are phlegmatic, and first, the skull must be cleansed along with other treatments we have mentioned in the section when the patient is large and suffering greatly from prolonged illness.
And if it is a child who cannot bear the suffering, let them gargle and chew with cleaning the skull often using bones as food; then put in their mouth a piece of fat meat, and do the first cauterization as we have said before, and another on the vein, and at each horn; and if the patient is extremely ill and suffering, they should be cauterized as I mentioned for those with paralysis and softening of limbs, on the spine along the back and neck, using an olive cauterization according to how I have described.
If the patient is a child, they should be given a subtle cauterization as follows:
When the cause of melancholy is excesses or corrupted humors and heavy phlegm, then the fire cautery for parts as we have said to those who have paralysis should be applied.
And if the cause of melancholy is declining vitality to melancholy, and the body is dull and moist, then give them something to drink so that the brain is clarified, according to what it currently is in its state in the division.
After the head of the patient; after making a well-made tire with a circle shape and placing it in the head; and cross the patient's brow, and hold it firmly on all sides; then apply the ointment, and move outward from the center to the edges; and warm up butter from old sheep fat at once so that the patient can bear the heat as much as possible; after making a circle inside the head, let it cool down; and do this once every week with another good governance until he is sane.
When you observe the cauldration, perform various points on the entire area to be treated. This method of cauldration moistens the brain equally; then place cotton wool soaked in butter and lard from a pig.
From around the eyes When the signs come first around the eyes as I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that clarifies the mind, and prevents all moisture, and they sweat or take baths several times on an empty stomach.
After instructing to return his head, and making a fire cautery in the middle of the head, and making two small cauteries on top of the two temples where the humors are located together or in one; apply a covering over the entire cautery for all veins and arteries that come from under the skin; let the length of the cautery be according to the width of the temple; and watch for bleeding, and if too much blood is seen, then stop it with a dressing as best you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of veins and making an incision, how to bandage it as you should; never make a cautery or heater under the two bones at the back.
Here are tears from the body
When the tears of the eyes are ancient and accustomed, and on the veins or near the arteries that appear just before the forehead; and you see they are cold phlegmatic superfluities, then apply the caustic as I said at the beginning of the last section: one cauterization in the head, two over each temple, two under each eye socket; and if more is needed, carefully apply small cauterizations above the eyebrows.
Throughout the body of tears within the eyes
When you treat according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three cups of urine (urine therapy); after that apply a caustic or milder cautery on his head; and make two "clove" cauterizations called clavicles above each eyebrow, but slightly below the brows; and be careful not to harm any artery. And this is the form of the fire cautery called "clavelis":
When the membrane of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then apply the fire cautery called "olivare". This is its form:
And if you see two cauteries on the two warts as long as the eyelids are; do not let go of the hand except until one-third of the membrane is burnt, according to the manner that I have said.
Of hairs which prick the flesh There is never an occasion when the hairs of the pores are converted into pus and they prick the flesh, and one applies caustics in two ways: that of fire or burning medicines.
For fire cautery instructs the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
s.
After cauterizing the wound you have marked with small and frequent applications, let the skin be healed at that spot; and signs of the health of the wound are when you see the paper retracted, and hairs raised to their natural length; then cleanse your hand, and leave it like this for three days, then apply cotton soaked in butter until the burn is healed; afterwards treat with ointment until well.
And if after this the hairs grow in and the paper is softened as before; then resume the cautery at that same place as previously done; and if the hair is sparse, cauterize until the skin rises to its natural level and becomes even, without touching the original hair.
The burning medicinal cauterization is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make a parchment in the shape of myrtle leaves; then take French soap and hot salt water each one (measured) amount, grind them well together quickly so it does not cool, and sprinkle on the form as you made with myrtcuid.medicine leafy, and put onto the paper the mixture; if the disease holds in just one part only, work is done at once, and if both alike; and put cotton soaked in oil underneath; and the patient's head is clean and put your two fingers showing on the medicine, and press a little bit every time when the patient feels mordancy from the medicine, because he feels it as if of fire. When you have done this thoroughly, apply the appropriate medicinal remedy to it. And when the swelling is gone, raise the area of wound; and if you see it raised as though lifted by heat or incision, then it's well done. If not, add more medicine to the wound or use a different medicine until your treatments are equalized, and the eyes are aligned; then place cotton soaked in butter on the area until healing is complete, followed by ointment called 'dyafenis', along with other remedies as needed, until it's healthy.
And if it's necessary to carefully watch your treatment so that the medicine does not touch the eyes. If the swelling softens again and hair prickles in oil, continue medication on that area as you did before; after treating until it heals completely; this is like the shape of a gentle breath:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to this, so shall be your instructions; and do not return them to their proper place for those who seek knowledge in this art.
For the treatment of a fistula by cauterization
When treating a fistula as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then it is necessary to perform cauterization according to this manner.
Command the patient to put his head in your hands; and instruct the assistants that they place the patient's head between their hands so it does not move or turn its head; afterward, place soft cotton on a spoon with vinegar or juice of parsley underneath it; then heat the caustic which is parted: and be placed at the crown as like a quill of an owl, together that the caustic be attached from one side to the other, and if you see, so straight on both sides, but anyhow, this that is placed above can move for your procedure.
After pressing the fistula if it is open, and treating the pus, and drying it out; and if it is closed, then work on it again and treat along the edge of the bowl; afterward place a hot caustic substance onto it well, and hold your hand at the caustic near to the part without pain above the oil, so that your hands do not go astray; and put the caution into the fat of the oil, and corrupt it.
If you come to the beginning of cauterization up to the bone, it would be good. If not so, then restart the caustic again one more time, and if needed, and leave for .iij days; after that apply soft cotton in butter, and treat with drying ointment until it is healed, and if xl days pass that it does not heal, put on medicine corrosive as long as the bone becomes visible. And so that it comes to its place according ceuque in this chapter.
And there is a method of fire cautery for an abscess that none of the ancients mentioned. Regarding an abscess and its location, after making a small cut in it place a fine rod as follows: And make the quantity of one Z. of lead; and hold your hand or rod firmly, ensuring that the patient does not move so the molten lead flows into its oil; and it is appropriate to place above the affected area a cotton wool in a vessel with half as much: the lead will fill the location of the abscess, and healed miraculously.
And if the abscess is healed by the fire cautery as we have said, it is good. If not, one should administer a purgative to the patient and reposition the abscess in its proper place according to what is suitable for that specific location.
From cracks of the lips Often, there are cracks in the lips called "hair," especially on children's lips.
When you treat these cracks as we have mentioned in divisions, and the treatment does not help, then apply a small scissor-like fire cautery according to this method:
they are in, and if the same as heal et cet the most:
Of an abscess of the throat
When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the ear, palate, or at the roots of teeth, after it has become putrid and rotten and old and becomes a fistula; treat as we have said in divisions, but it does not heal: then you must apply one cautery according to the quantity of the febrile. After removing or piercing the fistula, hold your hand until pus flows from its source, and after that; do so once or twice, after the treatment as we have said in treatments, until it is healthy again; if treated this way, it will be good; but if not, then you must expose the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in your textbook.
By movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, treat it with medicines as needed, then put your head in clean water; after cooling the cautery, place one so that you put a cone over the tooth; insert the hot cautery deeply, and hold your hand while the patient feels warmth coming to the root of the tooth; afterwards lift your hand and resume the cautery at your discretion; after filling the patient's mouth with salt water, let it sit for an hour and rinse thoroughly.
And in this way the tooth that was moved is confirmed; the softened gums are held in place, and the moisture dried up.
of the tooth's pain
When toothache comes from cold or heat and medical remedebe not help, then there is need for cautery in two ways: caustic butter and fire cautery.
Cautery of butter when taken from fresh butter and the end is shaped into a spoon of iron or silver; then take cotton and wrap around the tip of a tent, allowing butter to coat it, and apply quickly to the aching tooth until cooled; thus do often as long as its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. If you see the woolen thread and cotton in butter cool, then place on the painful tooth, placing a heated iron on it until heat is felt at the end of the tooth.
Cautery of fire when taken as a tongs of iron or silver, and it is large so that the heat does not reach the mouth of the patient; after heating the cautery, its form will appear afterwards, and place on the tooth and hold until cooled. Do this often, for pain will be relieved on the same day or the next. It is necessary that the sick person fills their mouth with good butter during the application of the cautery, and then wipes it; and here is the form of the cautery:
When scrofulous swellings are caused by cold humors and do not respond to medicines, then you should apply the caustic cautery as described hereafter which brings forth vapors from the other part; and place the hot cautery once on an abscess or twice if necessary until it reaches the font of the abscess. If the abscess is small, then apply a cautery according to its quantity, and leave it thus for three days; and cover with cotton soaked in butter until the burning subsides. After that, treat the wound with ointments and bandages until healed.
When moistures conquer over the channels of the chest, especially when it comes from cold complexion, then one must first purge the patient with soluble medicines; after that do a cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful not to come too close to the throat itself but only slightly. Then do another cautery on the joints of the neck at the top of the spine, where we have previously shown the form called "clavile"; and heal it as we have before described until it is healthy again.
In cases of throat inflammation. In cases of cold moist throat conditions, and the patient has neither fever nor sweating, and it is an early illness, then do two cauteries on each side above the lips; and another cautery in between the legs; and use the "clavile" cautery as per the form which was previously described.
If you see this, perform the cautery by pinching at all of the cauterization called "point" as previously described in ear diseases; and let the points be up to .xxx., or within that range. After treating the area as mentioned above, let there be the cauters with .iij. turns according to this form:
And therefore are the cauteries lighter because you make them into three parts.
Of the shoulder dislocation When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot remain in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have tried, then you must first address the dislocation. After examining the patient's back and ribs; then lift the head that is within the throat near your left hand's wrist joint; and if the joint is dislocated, heat the caustic with two iron needles as indicated by its shape.
and cauterize the head all the way to the ribs, with four caustics together; and thus is done cauterization using the iron needle that has three points, for which reason the figures of cauterization are these four points; and the nerve is according to the subtlety of a tent and it is the form of the iron needle with three points.
At times it is located near this nerve, for which there are eight cauterizations.
After placing the cautery near to it, make incisions with scissors; afterward let the patient rest, and do not move their limb for a long time until they are well comforted.
And if it is dislocated from above, a little happens to them, then you make cautery on the thick part of the clavicle, or many small cauterizations at the point. Because the joint is reduced, and bone moisture remains, and the patient feels well again.
t (de ars to: it e tirdt et les; man: C.
Ancient ones said that one should make pleurisy cauldrons from aristolochia roots in the following way: take an aristolochia root as long as possible, and let it dry; then grind it to be of the same thickness and length as your thumbs; mix with oil, hold over fire, and perform one large cauterization between the forelock and collarbone, two small ones slightly descending in the area below the beard; two more between the fifth rib and sixth, inclining backward a bit; one at the sole of foot, another above the stomach, two between shoulders, two on either side of the lower chest; where you performed the cauterization between the shoulders. Do not press with your hand too hard, but do so openly as when smelling something pleasant.
And some ancient ones said that no one should use fire cauldraturess like a razor, and heat it up, placing it between the ribs until it reaches an abscess; but in this case of treatment fear or sickness may lead to death now, or a fistula occurs which cannot be healed.
It seems that there is some missing text or information here: "of this work"; please provide the full contextual details if available. If you need more text is provided; otherwise confirm with the final output below. Here we are missing due to a historical medical knowledge in context of evidence but for translation and further analysis, based on its reliability (historical medical practice or not accurate; consult relevant historical practices was historically context provide an example: Historian'ise as evidenced by documentary sources which is debated: the context.
When treating the illness of madness as we have described in its various treatments, and it proves unsuccessful, then there are three methods of cautery that all work well.
One method is to make three or four cauteries, aligning them according to the length of the madness as we have previously mentioned, following the figure of the liver cautery; and do not press your hand against all the cauteries at once, and let the insane person be on their back.
And another method of cautery is to use the one with two nerves, as we have shown in shoulder dislocation; and loosen the skin where the madness' edge comes from the left side, and elevate the area you lift the skin according to the size of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
After placing the two inflamed veins until the core is pierced on the other side, then pass over with the cautery, and in this way there will be four. And if you see, cauterize completely at the cautery point of three veins. Afterward, treat it when it has obtained pus for a long time, and it is worth noting that it moves like the previously mentioned cures.
De ydropisie (or Idropisia in modern terms) refers to an abnormal accumulation of fluid within body tissues or cavities, commonly known as edema. It can be localized or systemic and often results from various underlying conditions affecting the balance between the production and removal of fluids by the circulatory and lymphatic systems.
Cautery is not used for ydropisie (or edema), but in the manner called "asclytes." When you treat it according to the methods we have discussed, if the treatment does not help, then it must be done with four cauteries around the boil and one on the stomach, and another on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back above the spine, and one at the spot of the knee. And let the cautery be close to the area where the swelling is located.
After leave the fire cautery open to let pus out for long periods, and do not abandon care of the patient after cauterization; healing would be faster, and both intentions are with God's help.
The form of the fire cautery for the belly is a key as we have previously shown; and that for the back should be an olive-shaped one, as it is placed before now.
From inflammamoins of the fingers When the feet are swollen in someone who is diabetic and full of pale yellow bile, it should be that you cauterize on the back below the wrist between the little finger and ring finger; and lift your hand with the cautery without turning. And do not enter too deeply, thus relieving the pale yellow bile, and let the cautery be as follows:
After performing on two legs two cauldrations in each leg at the ankle bone point; and let the cauldration be long, one below the knee forward and the other backward, within the leg; leave the cauldrations to grow long enough for the bile to come out; after curing the other procedures that we have mentioned.
For the treatment of menorrhagia (heavy menstrual bleeding).
When the solution of an upset stomach comes from cold and moisture, while the retentive and digestive virtues that are in the stomach and intestines become inflamed, they cannot be treated by conventional means; thus observe the patient suffering greatly with strong vitality, then perform a large cautery on the stomach as instructed before or the cautery of the stab wound, around which the cautery circulates; also four subtle cauteries surrounding the belly button to one cauterizing point, and two cauteries above the hips.
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, then perform a cautery on the palm, and one cauterizing point on each finger, and two small cauteries above the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good assistance.
Regarding the care of hemorrhoids
When ganglion(s) are found at their foundation or more than one, and they are old and consist of large cold and damp corrupt humors, and treated as we have described in divisions, and there is no benefit, so make fire cauteries: three above the spine on the back, the one that is all forward from below the navel and slightly triangular, and one near the groin. two;
And if you think his stomach is cooled and the flesh does not cook, and one sees swelling of the face, then make a large fire cautery on the stomach as previously mentioned, another near the liver, and one at the middle of all, with clavile caustic. Leave the fire cautery open for a long time. Then treat the limb until it is sound.
From the hardness which is called "theil"
When you treat an ulcer, heat the cautery which appears like a scraper, and then place it fully ablaze on that ulcerated area; and leave your hand as well as the cauterizing instrument at the birth of the vein so blood flows from it, of which there is much; do this once or twice, and if there are many ulcers, cauterize each one as we have said; afterwards use beneficial ointments until they heal; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on an inflamed area, it will provide greater assistance.
Improperly treated wound
When patients cannot endure bandaging or wrapping, we will tell you about it in its place; if a disease comes that cannot be healed but only by fire cauterization.
When it comes to a certain type of fistula that is old and infected with rot and corrupted moisture, one must thoroughly examine the entire area and know all parts within it. After heating the cautery so it appears like a shaving, insert it into the fistula according to the amount previously entered; resume the cauterization until the diseased body is cleansed completely, once or twice or three times depending on the needed quantity of salt required; and be careful not to burn any nerves present. If the fistula goes to the bladder or intestine, watch for these openings, do not make holes elsewhere but in the area needing it, considering that they are not persistent; after curing the hole so it is healthy, if the tissues are sloughed off and materials have been there for a long time, then know that the hole is completely healed; if materials haven't been removed, understand that the hole is still inflamed and corrupted bone at the front remains; thus as one of these we will say in its location.
Regarding kidney disease The translation of de l'avent sus les rains dite avient paroles qui li, ontes la mors; semblables tout le fistlesque tu leucilment l’an des maladis talies dui cauteres et vintes avont.
Of the bladder When the bladder is weak and cold from moisture, and the patient holds in urine, then make a fire cautery on the area below the bladder where hair begins to grow at the fingertip; and let each be as long as we are of one finger. And make another cautery above the back or two if needed; and make these cauldraries according to the previously mentioned shape.
Of the bone marrow When the testicles are cold and moist, unable to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted with delayed endings; when they come, there is great pain: then one must make three cauldrons around the fold, as we have said of the bladder cautery, and two behind the back; the third cauterizing pegs, as we have said.
Of the thigh
When the moist veins flow down to the thigh bone, and for this reason it moves out of its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the muscles are pulled away from their origin, then one must cauterize the patient on the thigh bone with a single caustic similar to a circle, and make two others in front of the fold as it turns, so that the bone lies within the circle; and be the caustics such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et si ces cauteries ne te sont pas présentes, alors fais trois cautères du laurier sauvage grands, et que soient les cautères aussi ronds comme toutes les clés ; et traite jusqu'à ce qu'il soit sainé.
And from the pain in the hip. When pain comes from the groin area, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient has been treated as we have described in the division and treatment does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the sick person of large humors with foul-smelling pills or other good-looking pills.
After the fire cautery, and there are two ways of performing it: one with burning medicines and fire cautery. Fire cautery has many methods, among which some are as follows: you perform triangular burns on the joint capsule of the elbow using three fires at a time, ensuring good depth and width, with space between each fire equivalent to the size of an almond; it should be olive-shaped. You never make a single cautery in the middle of the head of the elbow, for which there are four such as described here:
And if you see the triangular burn on the circle previously mentioned for elbow dislocation; but perform it so that the circle contains the entire joint capsule, and all areas with color are scorched.
And this is how it's done for sciatica when the pain is in the elbow and doesn't reach up to the thigh or leg. And if it reaches the thigh and leg, then do two cauterizations where the patient says that the pain resides, and one cauterization above the ankle four almonds, a bit on the left side; and the wax-shaped cautery, and let the thickness of color is scorched. And if the patient feels the pain spreading to two or three fingers from the heel or near it.
And if it is necessary to do so and the pain increases; and if it has been determined that the pain originates from beneath the genitals toward the thigh, then perform cauterization with a caustic or circular caustic, ensuring in all your cauterizations that you neither prolong the burning of the nerves nor the large arteries, and do not cause further harm and constriction to the patient.
And I have seen others who performed cauterization on the ankle near the foot, and they prolonged it until the entire leg was paralyzed, and the foot as well, which were pierced and corrupted throughout. Afterward, with a stomach purging, he died.
And if the pain is in two parts together, perform cauterization on each of them accordingly. // And wise men say about the caustic for the hip, which is as follows, make it a piece of iron or slightly larger than a finger's knuckle, or a bit less; and let there be gaps between it just wide enough to fit a pea; and have these gaps on both sides equally spaced apart like stitches, and also evenly placed. And also make the handle well shaped:
And be warmed until they are all red and sweaty with heat; then place it on the boiled pouch of the bad elbow, and turn it over the sound ribs; then cauterize once with one firebrand and leave for three days; afterwards apply a poultice of butter, and let the open wound remain exposed for a long time; after applying ointment until healed.
Albucasim says that we use this little caustic treatment because of the fear of its appearance, and few dare to do so; yet it is a good caustic, which can withstand pain, and where one finds relief.
From back pain
When pain comes to the back, whether by falling or percussion or from excessive blood loss, or from similar signs of cold matter expanded, among these resemblances none warrants cautery, rather that of one who suffers from infusion of cold substance.
After the patient has vomited from foul pills or other similar signs, one should place them on their back where they feel pain, making three lines marked by dots, and in each line apply 5 cauterizations or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and make the cauterization as is called "points"; and if you see, do 3 or 4 at the median clavicle following this method:
Often this disease comes in small children, and the signs at the beginning are that they have tight anuses when they defecate, and fear; and you find it on the very last spine of the back and above it appears like those over the other spines.
When you see this wound and it appears to heal, then apply cautery with a caustic stick in the following manner.
If the caustic stick needs to treat each part of the spine evenly. And if you see, then apply a hot cautery between the bones so that they are close together with 2 or 3 lines; and afterwards let it heal until it is healthy as we have said, and be careful not to place caustic on nerve bundles.
To alleviate joint pain.
When joint pain is from moistures spread throughout the body's limbs, and when pain comes to the feet which those called 'podagra,' properly so named, and when it is due to cold causes and remedies do not heal it, then they are treated with cauterization in this manner: make numerous cauterizations around the joint of the foot, and let them be olive oil cauldrons according to this shape:
And if there is a need to grasp the face of the foot, then make cauterization over all cauldrons called "points." And when pains come near to joints and other joints, which happens often, one makes cauterizations with three or four cauldrons from each part on every joint; and if more is needed, add them, but do not hold your hand away further than until the hair at its root has been scorched.
And if the pains descend to joints and the back, then administer the cauterization as we have mentioned in this chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the finger furrow two lines; and if there is no pain left at the joints, so do make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the edges or shoulders, cauterize each part, and manage well with medicine for the ill patient and administer good remedies. For if you give them a good management and purge phlegm, it will be healed by God's help.
Of the dislocation of the hip socket
When dislocation comes with the legs hanging down and it is new, when you see that you need to treat it, do not let them sit up for the day; use things that ease the belly so the sinews descend from their stomachs. After they lie on their back between your hands, instruct them to stretch their thigh as long as the dislocation is repaired and reattach the limbs at your elbows, and bind tightly under the dislocated joint over the bone of the wrist; then heat with the caustic in which this form is:
Then cleanse the limbs until they are white and hairless. Then attach them to their place; and instruct him to heat his hand so it cannot turn backward; and work well on the legs of the patient, and put a pillow and belt over his thighs, and another under his heels which you tie with your hands; then apply the caustic over the sign, holding it straight until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach the first time, repeat as necessary until you reach to the bone. Be careful that the hair does not fall out when applying the caustic; do not burn; and ensure by this that the patient does not die or suffer any other ills.
When you approach the bone with cautery, your efforts are in vain. It is necessary that a child's caustic be subtle according to their size, and for large people also proportionately large; after three days treat them at the wound site with butter until the burn has hardened; afterwards treat with other ointments until it heals, and let the patient lie on his back 40 days until the wound is well-healed; and ensure that their hairs are not cut for a long time so they do not stand up when they start to walk in bed.
After 4n0 days, when he wishes to get up, he should be fitted with a well-made bandage and keep it for 4n0 other days; he should have good rest, work little, and avoid excessive drinking and eating, and shouting too much; once this teaching is completed so that he is entirely healed. And I will say hereafter the treatment of cutting in his chapter. Of abdominal surgery
When rutters enter other bellies and are noticeable, and you see that they no longer grow, then make one fire cautery according to its quantity, and let it be three-fourths of the size; after treating as we have said; and none of the ancients stated that it should be cauterized with a cautery at three angles in this form:
But first sign the top of the wound and make a line for its width above the rutters, and another behind, and hold your hand around the entire caustic. However, the first caustic is lighter and more movable.
from ancient pain in any limb When pain comes to any limb from falling or being struck, and this pain lasts a long time with medical treatment proving ineffective, then it must be treated with caustication using the "needle" cautery according to the length of the limb and its size, weakness, virtue, location of contortions, and its pain. If healed by the first cauterization, that's good; if not, resume another cauterization above it as is customary for a member nearing recovery, so one must perform cauterizations until the patient is well.
Of medical treatment
Medical treatment sometimes provides great help, especially with diseases that arise from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. Can you treat them by caustication, being careful if the disease is at its onset, and following as we have said in the division, without delay or hesitation; and doubting whether the corruption does not affect all aspects of the illness, then apply five cauterizations: one above the head near the forehead, and another towards the end of the eyebrows; two on either side of the horns, and one behind the ear; leave your hand until the caustic touches up to the bone, and as long as scales come out so that vapors from large humors can escape.
Et si le mal est partout dispersé; et il apparaît manifestement, donc tu as droit à ces cautérisations que nous avons mentionnées précédemment, y compris celui qui se situe en bas du nombril, ainsi que deux sur la colonne vertébrale de l'épine dorsale, et cinq au-dessus, et une grande quantité à proximité du coccyx et une autre près des parties génitales ; ainsi que deux aux deux omoplates ; deux aux côtes flottantes ; deux sur les tendons des pieds ; une pour chaque articulation de la main et des orteils ; au-dessus des creux palmaires. Et veille à ne pas brûler les nerfs qui se trouvent derrière, ainsi qu'à éviter d’effectuer l’opération chirurgicale sur le radius ou l'os du côlon, et une autre sur la vésicule biliaire.
Et soyez conscient que plus vous faites de cautérisation, plus il est utile pour eux, et ils en profitent davantage ; et soyez conscient qu'ils ne ressentent pas de douleur au cautère comme les saints le font, parce que leur corps est complètement corrompu. Et il convient que la cautérisation soit grande ou petite selon les membres et les articulations, selon ce que vous trouverez en manipulant des fers à cheval. Après avoir traité l’endroit avec de la farine de seigle mélangée au miel et d'autres remèdes jusqu’à ce qu’il soit sain.
And soyez est cautération, li mauvais les jointures à suivant des fasse délaissiez est mots, comme l'est en eaux li est que la douce et au defermet andré jusqu’s le plus quoie ce est pas entaide. Andresne ce traité qui aure ce n’oeu dressez oculte les jointures des cote la couche, ce quete à l'est ce comme s, et de douces ou tu êtes chauquoi au que ce cuyons toutes metre. Cautéris li est à traité qui fait plus douce en le tue parle d’oie les f, jusqu’s la curez. Et quant vous est quate lest de vont et li soient you sont des, et est ce que li. Ande, andresiement ces.
When inflammation occurs in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, but it is not healthy; then you do cauterization on the limb according to its size and importance; the caustic should be slightly intradermal depending on the color of the skin. Then treat it with ointments until it becomes healthy again. At times a cautery is done on the hand, foot, or back at the exit where the nerve moves the limb, thus causing bone inflamm
The skin on the affected area becomes reddish and swells up after cauterization, and it should be treated carefully to avoid further damage or infection.
When the disease known as "albaras" is chronic and medicine proves ineffective, then cauterize with a slight caustic, according to the quantity of the flesh color, until the redness subsides, and its color changes; then treat with flour meal, lentils, oil infused with rose petals, and plantain leaves, along with collagen and eagle blood extracts from each in equal parts; mix them all together and bind it with a cloth, apply it to the area until healthy.
The treatment of ulcers by cautery
When ulcers begin to appear, and if you want to stop them, the caustic is applied in a circle around the entire ulcer using a cautery; however, it is said that one should also perform cauterization within the ulcer itself; yet I do not think this is good, as I fear they will become ulcers and corrupted, and I have never wanted to see such a thing happen before. It would be better for them to be causticized around it using what we call "circular" cautery, as we have said in many other cauterizations.
if you, au is:
When someone suffers from an illness called "adubelati," which is likely to cause death due to excessive discharge or because the patient is very old and has little blood, or for some reason; if you see it hastening towards death: then cauterize around with many small cauldrons by pinching; afterwards leave it as such. For it will be prone to die.
And if you see the entire cauterization being pierced, then heat the cauldrons so that they are connected.
And place your hand in the midst of the disease called "adubeblati" until you feel that the core has been pierced by the cauldrons, and make such cauldrons so that the patient feels it behind them, ensuring that the course of pus is directed properly. Then cure it until it is completely healed perfectly.
The healing of fire with iron
Another way of disease called "corrodens," and it is nothing but a collection on the limb, for it eats away at the limbs just like fire dries out tinder. If you see this disease in place that can suffer cauterization with iron, then first apply small and large cauldrons of cautery as needed according to where the body or the disease is; after cauterizing all parts until you have removed all the corruption, leaving nothing but what has been turned into bone. Then leave it for three days, and put ointment with oil on the scorched cauldrons until they are healed from fire burns, and completely eradicated. Afterward, apply a cure of emollient unguents thrice daily. And if you see after three days that health has not returned, it is good; and if not, resume the cauterization on what remains corrupted in the cauldrons. This collection is never healed with ague medicine during a fire cautery treatment of iron; however, fire cautery is more helpful, and I have already explained the remedy for ague medicine within that section: take as much as you need.
of small piles which come to the feet
Often it happens that in the feet a disease appears following behind, called "closed" according to our thinking, and is a large swelling which affects the foot. The fire cautery for this disease has two methods: one of fire, and one of hot water. Fire cautery is such that you heat a caustic as with an oven bellows; it should be good iron able to reach every part of the nail, with sharp edges; after heating thoroughly above the nail, turn your hand entirely around it until it reaches the forge's font. Leave in this manner for three days until pus begins to form; then make a plaster of ground elder berries mixed with wool, and leave the plaster on throughout the night, from which the nail will draw out and be uprooted by its roots. Then treat the wound with soothing ointment as long as it is healthy.
If they are converted forward the body, and often it occurs in hands and feet; then you must perform hot water cautery; which is as follows: Take a cone of iron or lead, or an oven bellows, place it over the nail and the base, that is to say, for warts; put the cone around so that it encompasses entirely, then add some hot water, hold your hand firmly and press while turning until the edges of the cone reach the root of the nail, allowing deep access by the hot water to its roots. Allow the patient to endure a bit of burning from the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will be uprooted completely at all its roots. Do this again afterward until you have addressed everything on the body, then treat with soothing ointments that relax as needed.
by them from of the t end they cone are not s, le to l’a to: de f pains is it; and wixtreams: after nail ete.
When anyone shivers from coldness of nerves or fever quartan or other, it is necessary to make them four cauterizations or four on the spine along the back, one between each vertebra; and one at the base, and one over the stomach with an olive oil cautery; this will stop the trembling, and their health from the cold disease.
Of painful pustules
Never apparent from behind the body bathes or painful pustules that come of corrupted matter. If at first they appear one makes cauterizations over each head of the pustule: a subtle rod of myrtle wood, wherein the point is taken in flame, or a long root of aristology; or lenticular cautery. And never should you cauterize them when they first appear according to this method, and it does not allow them to grow further onward, but is broken up the superfluity from which they come, and they are healed; but it must be done after blood evacuation.
When the artery is ligated Many times it happens that there are great blood flow issues from the ligated artery to wounds caused by paradoxical events, or incision of an abscess, or cauterization on a limb, and similar things; and it is very difficult to stop bleeding.
And in any case if it happens to you, hurry and put your index finger on the wound of the vein, and strain very tight until the blood is calmed under your finger; then apply with fire small olive oil cauterizations both large and small until they are all red; then take .i., or a large or small one according to the size of the wnid and its location, where the artery runs, and place the cauterization over that vein on which you hold your finger, and keep it there as long as the blood stops.
And if it leaps out when you lift your thumb over the vein, and the caustic is extinguished, then quickly take another from the ones that are on fire.
And continue to do so one after the other until the vein is fully closed; and be careful not to burn the nearby nerve, and that no further harm comes upon the patient; and know that when the artery is cut off, it cannot be properly sealed by itself if the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods we have mentioned: by caustic or extraction if it has not been treated, or by a strong bandage with thread, or by medicines applied which can stop bleeding; and make them tied and held simultaneously.
Who will administer the tight bandaging with cloths or other burning substances if it does not prove effective.
If this occurs in someone and they have no mirror or present medicine, then one must place their index finger under the wound on the vein as we have said, and extend it well until it is resting above the wound and vein; do not move it, but moisten with cold water often so that it may be quite cold until the blood congeals and thickens and rests; then make incisions where needed for cauterization and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter all diseases where it is necessary to use fire cauterization or burning medicines, and poultices, causes, essences, and forms of cauterizations; and I placed that chapter up until fingers, and I will now proceed in this chapter along the same path so that you find more easily what you seek.
And so, as I begin this one, it is necessary, dear son, that you learn in this chapter there is more danger and fear than the first of cauterizations, and therefore greater care is needed.
For in the practice of this chapter, there are often instances of blood evacuation when opening veins, treating abscesses through incision, wound healing, arrow extraction, stone cutting, and similar procedures; where doubt and fear arise, leading to death for some.
And I admonish you not to take foolhardy actions. For many methods arise among people in treatment. Those who become so consumed by their illness that they die easily due to the despair from their condition, and its severity; about these one should be fearful. And of those who take your oath, and say: "Wait, I am in charge"; the patient is despised. You should not give consent to those coming to you with this manner, but place greater care on your honor than on your self-interest, and act not foolishly but wisely from what you are certain of and can have taken hold; and use prognostication and indication in the treatments of your sick so health is converted; and that will aid you in achieving good reputation, glory, and memory of kingdom.
Three dear son, Our Lords grant you good understanding and integrity, and if you wish to aspire from the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or I have ordered this treatise by chapters as they appear before you in the section of cauterizations that I have described from head to toe, so that you may find it easier to understand what you will need.
Full of water at its head
It is said that this illness often occurs in children during birth, and when the childbirth channel tightly grips the head of the child; sometimes it heals without a known cause.
And I have never seen this illness outside of children, and in all that I have observed it is swift to cause death; therefore, for my part, it seems better to focus the treatment on certain healing methods.
the et thes conbt in de sonne with S’s; s sgrin te ou f ici leme by themde other (t la croirement se est ils termeward.
If moisture is very great, and the abscess becomes larger, make two incisions shaped like a cross as follows:
If the moisture is from under the bone and the signs you see are exposed commissures on each side, and the vein springs out when pressed with your hand inside, and it has not been repositioned: then it is necessary that you make three incisions within the head as follows.
After the incision remove all moisture thoroughly. Then cleanse the incisions with cloths and powders, and apply wine and oil; leave this way until the fifth day; then release it, and treat the wound with bandages and ointments, allowing even pressure on the head, and give the patient dry meat with a little moisture until the limb is comforted and healed.
And another way of incision is to observe whether the head of the abscess is swollen and the collected veins; for it never lies in front, nor behind, nor on the right, nor on the left.
Indeed, open the abscess properly and fill with water, then follow according to your ability; and be careful not to cover the artery; ensure a flow of blood, so that the patient may die from the deterioration of blood and evacuation of moisture.
To restore
When it happens with any disease that is called 'catarra' in the eyes or on the genitals, and the illness has been long-standing, and medical treatment does not help, then the last resort of treatment will be cauterization along with those three arteries that are cauterized.
Then it is necessary that when you see the joint covered, the patient should turn his head back; afterwards rub the area with a coarse cloth until the arteries become visible, then gently pull the neck with one full cloth; then observe where the vein bends, and both eyes are positioned behind each ear, and few are repositioned; then tie up the eyelids, then cover each of them with a strip measuring two fingers wide; until the area reaches the bone, wrap it as broadly around the head.
And if you see, place the strip below the artery and cover it above, cutting as two fingers width across.
And when the vein is covered, let it be punctured continuously inwards.
And if the arrow does not break on feeling, it is necessary to measure the quantity of space for three thumbs, then tie and push until the bone; and what is required in blood amount is five ounces, plus or minus a bit depending on what the patient can endure, and the repletion of the artery; then examine the wound: if it does not remain near the bone without an abscess, if no spout appears at the incision site, then stretch the wound and close it, and apply ointment treatment until healed.
To remove a splinter
When an ancient splinter is present and the patient has acute cataracts, caused by moisture from tears and heat in temples and old headaches and similar things, and all forms of medicinal treatment do not help him, we extract the arteries of the temples and perform cauterization, as we have written.
The method of extracting them is that the patient must comb back the hairs on their temples and listen to the pulse in the temple, as it opens well due to its beating, and is quickly restored like some men who are too cold; when it restores, instruct the patient to tighten a cloth around their neck, then rub an abrasive cloth over their skin, and apply hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible; then use this spatula:
Then lightly scrape the skin until you find the artery, then tie it up with pincers and separate well into towels from each part; if the artery is delicate, turn it at the tip of the pincer, then cover that area according to the quantity of the two veins. For if it is not covered, the wound will not heal entirely.
And treat the blood of the three veins until it reaches three fingers in length; and if the artery is large, you must tie it with two pieces of a strong double thread of silk so that decay does not come before the healing of the wound, and for bleeding to stop; then cover the excess tissue between the two ligatures at the same time, and then, if you see, cauterize the flesh until reaching bone as long as the veins are tied off; this is a complete work, unless the patient has fever and he is of hot complexion.
For the fire cautery is of great assistance to end swellings, for it provides greater aid against them. For when extracting arteries, fill the area with old cotton and apply well-made bandages; after removing them, treat it with dry medicines that generate heat and bandages until it is healed; if there is any cut from the artery as much as you do work on it, haste to cauterize with fire, or fill the area with vitriol and strain it in your hand so it becomes discharged; and if not present, place something cool over the area until numbness occurs, and apply cold water to the area until the heat subsides, and strain as needed; and for those that are movable and lighter during artery extraction is to cauterize with a sharp fire caustic of 2 parts, but ensure the sharpness lasts longer by being well-prepared. For when there are too many sweatings, it retains less heat. And it must have between the two knives a sufficient space, and then when you hold them tightly in place with both hands, make the iron glow until it reaches up to the bone, cut open the vein on both sides; and they should be removed from between the shoulders because there is no such cautery for all cases; this is the form of the cautery.
And tears
When the tears from the eyes descend into veins that are under the forehead's surface, and there is no benefit from medicine that can be applied, and you see the face of the sick person turning red like with flickers; and their hair on the eyelids become damp so much that the skin peels off, and they become burned by the heat of tears, such a case requires this treatment.
And they call it the ancient "contusion cure", and you must instruct the patient who has this illness to cut hairs on the forehead, then make three evenly spaced incisions according to the width of the forehead; one incision spanning two-thirds from root to tip, and the other two each at the junction of the eyebrows, being cautious not to cut arteries located there. Position your hand away from the continuation of the two mandibles, with each wound measuring three fingers' breadth apart.
From the incision which is below the second to the first; and scrape off all skin that lies between the two incisions through to the bone beneath, then make another cut from the middle incision towards the other end, and then extract this tissue sample.
If the instrument called "culterius" is placed into the first opening, it is very sharp on one side and smooth on the other, not cutting. And place the cutting tool toward the artery opening at its root, and the smooth side toward the bone, filling it until it reaches the middle incision; then cleanse all vessels branching from the head down to where the aperture is opened, and make another incision in the middle up to the other exit; then remove blood equally, express the lump for collected blood; then place a tent of old cotton in each incision, cover with moistened linen cloths soaked in wine and oil and herbs, ensuring no abscesses form. After three days, loosen the ligature, and treat it with abundant fresh water dressing, followed by basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil; then apply other healing remedies until it is healthy again.
The reason for this is to prevent infection and promote proper healing after the procedure has been completed.
When certain catarrhs occur habitually, and you see the eyes swollen and small, with impaired vision, and burning of the papillae; and hairs fall out, and there is a throbbing pain at its core, and patients sneeze; thus from these incidents it can be known that such materials and those catarrhs do not come only from many veins, but also from their distemper.
And it is that you instruct the patient to return his forehead, then make a large incision between his eyes, and another on either side. I. Poc. Begin at the incision near the left temple to the right temple, and extend up to the bone; and remove your hand from the nerves of the temples when they move while eating; and once the b
And in this manner: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of wine spirit (colophony), mix them well; and administer it to the wounds to promote healing throughout.
Of the stopping of ear bleeding
Everything that flows from the ears is one of four things: grains or beast matter, stone fragments like metal filings, or similar substances; seeds such as castor oil seed, peas, or beans; or fluids flowing like water and easily released, similar things.
When it flows into the ear in the form of a stone or other matter that does not fit in the ear and grows in the ear, do not place the ear on fire. If you see the stone, distill some violet oil or saffron oil, then perform an extraction; and if there is sneezing due to this condition, block the nostrils when sneezing occurs, and put pieces of cloth or wool around the ear; and place the ear above. Often it heals by this treatment; but if it does not improve, then a delicate extraction with tweezangs is performed as follows:
If it slips out through the pinceros, that's good; if not, make a subtle extraction at the oncine doublet with a small tool; and if it does not slip through this, create an eel stitch in the incision of the head or ear hole, then stuff around the incision with soft wax so that the winds cannot enter with the incision; then properly treat the area, as often slippage occurs just as we have stated; and if it does not slip off in this manner, take a point from where they take birds' nests, and use some precise instrument to aid in the process, placing a small amount of cotton around; then press on the glue above the wound or whatever it may be, and treat properly. If it does not come out from all the methods we have mentioned, quickly make an incision in the ear as to where pus is present and spasms occur; and the manner of the incision is such that you first cleanse the patient's head, then drain the blood according to its severity, then have them sit between your hands with their ear turned upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear near fat or tissue; and let the incision be as round as a moon until reaching the wound, then suture it as best you can, and suck out quickly into your mouth; and treat until healed. If it is not, then remove the pinceros if iou ne soiet graisse puis traite de lerement la pois estraient, et non a cue mout que il saut; et si bon esgretienk espouvrir les teneu penseil amont le veinte.
And make an incision in the grain of salt. But do not attempt this when you think the grains are moist due to earwax, until you have made many attempts; then extract with fine pincers and a suction cup, as we have said, so that the extractions be smooth.
Then when the water indeed flows into the ear, have the patient sneeze initially, and fill the ear with old cotton. Place it over the same ear where the water entered. If it comes out forcefully, that is good. If not, take many pieces according to the size of your finger and light objects, and warm them briefly by fire; then put a piece through the patient's ear hole, and let it pour out on the other side, and pierce another hole into the place where there was an ear. Do this from hole to hole until all water is drained, and thus it will come out fully. If you see this, take one stick, put a head in the ear, and warm the other end by fire until the softer part burns; then use others of different lengths as we have said for stones, until all water is gone.
In the extraction of animals (referring to worms), if it is small in size like fleas or similar things, treat as we have said for division; but if it is large that can be felt, then make an extraction with pincers; and it is easier to remove what lies inside the ear.
During the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the division and treatment of distillations, if the remedy does not work, it is necessary to examine the ear under sunlight; if there are no visible worms, use fine pincers, and if they do not appear, take the cauliflower-shaped instrument.
It should be narrowed above and widened below. Then insert the more delicate tip into the ear according to the amount of pain in the patient, followed by gently moving it throughout the canal; do so often until all the worms come out. And if they do not exit, stuff around the cauliflower-shaped instrument as I have said with stones; and if they do not emerge as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have tried in the incision of worms, and you will find them or treat the distillations; and if you distil oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument of which the form is as you see.
It should be made of silver or fine pewter narrower above and wider below, with small holes to allow for distillation and larger ones on top for pressing the distillation into a well-made ivory instrument; then take a rasp and wrap it around the tip gently, and cover it completely with cotton. Then pour your oil or juice into the ear canal, ensuring that they are in the ear; then insert the rasp through all the cotton and press firmly until the oil is distilled or as much as possible from the ear; and the patient feels relief, and let the distillations be at a fire so it can be distilled in the ear. And ensure that it does not too cold, because medicine would not as good healing.
From the stoppage of ears
No child is born without any openings in the ears; and this same thing happens in adults due to wound healing or a foreign object lodged inside the ear, and these blockages always occur at the front of the ear, so it cannot be seen; sometimes no hole remains for seeing, but all is well.
But when it occurs at the front and cannot be seen, it is of good healing in various forms, and in that which can be seen, one must place the affected ear to the sun; look inside: if you see an inflammation visible, do the work with all this matter where the form exists.
so;s the ches thatnttutor are t s is pr  (also ; an Ouzen son les on a bax ca.
And if the inflammation is primarily in the ear, take a fine subtil raser and heat it slightly over fire, then place it on the body of the ear. If you feel the inflammamo[u]r causing the patient to tremble upon hearing, pierce lightly without burdening the nerves of the ear; afterwards place in the ear a tent according to the size of the perforation and grease with Egyptian ointment.
Do not make any opening until the wound is healed, then take a tent and grease with rose water, and powder with vitriol paste; if you see an effluent ear, it's suitable to replace the tent and move another greased tent made of rosy oil and wax, as long as the swelling remains; afterwards care for it until health is restored.
And if bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge and wrap in cold water, place on the ear, and employ other treatments that remove blood stagnation which are or to be treated with distillations.
From the collection of papers
This hair that comes in papers when wet and dry, it is necessary to stretch with tongs and tweezers, and the tip of a sterilized needle at its roots; then place upon white lead ointment.
And if it does not heal on its own, then by using the fine-pointed caustic tool for cauterization after the incision is made; and many times they regrow when nothing remains of their roots; and when cauterized with fire, those roots are burned away and do not return.
Of clay
Oft times come from paper the things that resemble clay in form and hardness, and therefore this disease is called "grandine," which consists of a large amount of moisture above and below; its characteristics are such: be careful if grandine moves on both sides, as it is an easy thing to know. Then widen the gaps slightly, then carefully peel each side, then grasp with forceps, and cope (cut). If you do not pierce without some pressure, nothing will harm the patient; and if there are large fissures, assemble them into a stitch, and treat until it is healed; and if they are small, make no strong efforts, for the ointments will restore them quickly and bring comfort.
When the granulation is descending into the depth of the ear towards the upper part, reverse the paper, and stretch it with forceps; if the paper is displaced by incision, it matters not; when the granulation has been compressed, gently wash away any foul water, and care for the area until the patient is healthy again.
Of the fat of the eyes
Exsinus is a fat that forms in the sheets of parchment above, and it occurs more often in children than adults, causing much irritation to their eyes, leading them to wake up early, and unable to look at sunlight due to rapid tear production; therefore, they lie on their faces with moist eyelids which become inflamed and have an appearance concealed by exsinus coming out of the oil. And when you press the area between your thumbs and feel the exsinus beneath.
The manner of treatment is such that the patient places his head in a tub; then takes a linen cloth and makes an arch-shaped tent according to the quantity required from each part, placing it over him; pressing with both hands on either side so that the parts come together within the circle; then make a slit in the middle of moisture at the spouting area, not wider than the wound made in the vein's skin; and continue cutting through the hide until reaching the parts; and in various positions, excretions from the fissure occur according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Remove the whole cloth between your hands and turn it right and left until scattered; keep that you do not approach the fissure, so as to go up to the end of the spouting area, so as to scrape it clean.
And if the excretion does not open at the beginning of the fracture, then slightly widen the fissure until it appears; then extract as we have said, moisten some linen cloths and water them, and place on top, and bind with bandages.
And among such men who grind seeds and place them to spoil that moisture which has settled there. Then treat until it is healed. And if an abscess comes into being, soothe with plasters until it is healed.
Of the hair of parchment papers.
When hairs on papers grow in a manner other than their nature and become aged, they harm the eyes and bring about diseases as with accustomed tears, softening of the paper, and albugine, which leads to destruction; and there are cures according to four manners: or by fire caustic alone, or by ague medicine as it is before this chapter on caustic, and it is done either by incision and suture or with cantharides, as I will say.
It is necessary that you place the patient's head in your lap, then turn the sheet of oil into your left hand; if it is turned correctly, well; if not, insert a needle through every single thread on top; and do this near the edge of the paper where hair grows near these threads, and draw one thread across all the paper, then roll it towards you with scissors; then cut along the part below the paper, next to the hairs closely grown, up to half a finger wide; then extract a filament, and place under the paper a small tent made of cotton and linen, then press down on the paper with an envelope-like shape as in mugwort leaves, and always ensure that the figure is according to the amount you see elevated by the paper when lifted from all sides.
If you need to cut off a large quantity of paper based on how much the paper has been moistened; then trim along all four sides that you have marked, and start from the large edge down to small; and make one of the fissures near natural hair growth in the size of a root, then insert a pin into one of the corners with your finger, then scrape it completely; then bring together both edges with a stitch using an extremely fine linen thread, and remove any blood, and trim away excess threads along the two eyebrows as needed; if you do this, otherwise don't worry about it. Then leave the stitching and threads for three to four days or more; then treat the wound without drying agents and compresses because the paper will relive at the site of the wound and its joining, but the suture is bothersome (as the old say), and this is a procedure without fear.
and if in another manner: take the paper to resemble the shape of three oak leaves, as we have described here, at 3 inches high based on the form shown below:
Then cut out what is above in equal small forces according to the shape shown below.
And if you cannot hold the pincers properly, and it is not equal, then take an awl or one with thread, and place it within the figure; insert another thread next to the large edge, and the second thread next to the small one, then evenly align the two threads between your fingers as we have described here. Then lift your hand equally, lifting all the skin over which you marked, then sew together the two edges of the wound with stitches, and let it heal until it is healthy; if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar ointment.
Sometimes, the hair of a wart is transformed: if it occurs as we have mentioned regarding incision, but the treatment on either side is more artificial.
The treatment of warts is as follows: and it is that you transform the wart according to what I have said, then make .ij. (two) incisions by hand, and .ij. (two) delicate ligatures equally long as the wart and broad like a thong; and tie the heads of .ij. (two) strings or where you hold the threads; then join one to another subtly above what stands out from the wart on oil, and strain both .ij. (two) ligatures firmly; leave them as such for several days, and the skin that has been strained will die, shrink, and dry up, until it falls off by itself.
If it is delayed, if you tie them too tightly, then treat until it becomes sane; and when the wound has dried up quickly, and if the wart elevates itself and cannot grow hair anymore; and this is how you will make .ij. (two) incisions according to this pattern, and according to this length and width:
First of all, one must select such operations where you take a fine needle, and insert a thin silk thread; then join the heads and carefully align them both finely, so that the length of the threads is about the width of a palm long; then arrange in the fold another short subtle silk thread quickly, and wrap around the head with the first filament; then place the patient's head in your hand sanitized, and ensure it is close to sunlight so that the operations are clearly seen, as these are very subtle and minute tasks; insert the needle through all the fold at the root of the hair nearest to it, and cut the paper hastily until you tear over the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the fold, and place in the foln another hair if there is one or two or three or more; then carefully remove your fingers so that all the hairs appear smooth on the paper with the natural hair.
And if the fold is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, you will comb the fold from bottom to top along all the thread that you have arranged, until the fold appears full on sight through the oil; then you will comb the fold and the filaments, and leave them loose for two or three days or more, until the hair takes root in its place and new growth appears above it; and if the hairs are short, accompany one long natural hair with it, and elevate that alongside, until it is separated out and then lifted.
And lift so forth the hair from fold after three or .iiij.
When the disease known as "aleacrati" or festering occurs in the eye, it comes in two ways: natural and unnatural. And it happens through sudden wounds, cutting instruments, or fire cautery, and similar things.
And the treatment method is that you split the suture and separate the lips of it, and insert linen pads inside; then ensure it remains clean. It should not be treated with things that dry out and constrict. If you do this, the disease may return worse than before; but treat it with soothing substances such as fenugreek; and use water or diluted linseed oil, and ointments mixed with any type of oil, and wrap a pad around it, and apply that treatment.
And the secrets of your treatment are that you must ensure it does not heal according to its previous form; and the treatments we have mentioned are only for addressing this disease so that it does not return in its original form.
From a wound caused by an instrument entering the eye.
This disease called "axacrati," is true and both natural and accidental. The accident occurs due to wounds, cuts, cauterization, and similar things; the work on this requires you to take an awl with a double thread, insert it into the wound, pierce through from left to right so that the threads reach two sides of the wound; then extend the wound upwards across all the awl, and cover it with a spatulum (spatula) as wide.
And if the flesh returns to its proper shape as it should be, that's good; if not, take a rasor and place it in the fissure, turn the flesh, make two fissures or cuts within the flesh; and let the heads of these two fissures align with the angles of the incision you made. Make them so that when they come together, the figure is as if a letter has "J" on it; then remove that wound according to the quantity which swells up around or below it, placing what's needed for the flesh, and sew up the two separated parts with a linen thread; then apply whatever remedies we have mentioned of mollifying medicines and bandages until healed.
And if the disease comes from a cut or stitching or cauterization, it is necessary to make a clean incision above the hairline of the paper, and as mentioned before; then between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and the procedure must be done according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters skillfully devise all means possible to make the figure return to its natural shape; and the sickly do likewise, according to what needs treatment and adjustments in various positions.
And on the suturing of paper
And when this suturing occurs between the hands in such a manner that the paper above is sealed with the fat of the oil, and cannot move or perform its natural actions; therefore it is necessary to put the tip of a razor beneath the paper, and lift it upward; and stretch out the edges as much as you cut what is within the subtle edge, which should neither be too dull nor too sharp so that the patient does not suffer from an overly sharp or blunting edge; and make your incision lightly, so that the paper can resume its natural shape. It is healed, and there are no injections of acidic oil, but rather use lukewarm water and colostrum, and put a linen cloth between the paper and oil, then wool fleece; and after three days until it is clean.
From the nail of the foot
He says that the nail has two kinds: one is nervous and appears like a hard sore with pus, and another which is not nervous but resembles a frozen moist blister; when touched with iron and heated in pincers, it cannot burn. Both types begin at the great corner of the nail, and grow slowly until they cover the entire field of view and light, as well as the movement of the toe.
The method of incision is as follows: the patient places his head in a prayer position, then you work with him. He removes paper from your hand, then heats the nail using pincers; next, extend it upwards. Then take a needle and insert a horsehair or wool fiber or ox hair thread into its tip; slightly bend the needle'clockwise and pierce through the entire length of the needle, attach the nail with the thread and pull it out from underneath, scrape all the way to the base of the nail where the vein is located, including the skin up to the head. Then cut off any remaining portion at the root near the corner; in such a way that through this incision the body does not produce tears as usual; and it should never be extended by itself only, but with thread just like we mentioned before. Afterward, scrape all delicate tissue of the type shown:
Keep the spatula from touching and breaking the skin flap, and ensure the prunelle is not punctured; after incision, pour a bit of boiled soap into the wound, and along with it make use of lead-lined collar, and leave until the following day; then treat as needed until healed.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot insert the needle, and the knuckles do not enter, this appearance of a nail has often been treated with medicines; as described in the section, and if you see it swollen, treat the patient's pain, and use the light spatula slightly according to this method.
Gently remove the nail above subtly, and if you see that it does not reduce in size and there is a redness afterward, distill from your mouth into the lead-lined collar and along with it use wool bandage, and leave until the following day; then resume the other procedure according to this same work, until it is completely healed.
If nothing is against you in this regard as an abscess, then treat the abscess first until it is healed, and resume the work as before, until it is healed.
And if the appearance of flesh on the thigh causes great harm in that place, suspend it by a thread and cut off part but not all, so tears do not come forth; then let it drain into the oil red chyle which is made from litargur.
of yellow discharge coming out near the eyeball
Some men are afflicted by redness that covers the gums and is held down over parchment and turned towards relief; it appears like an almond rose. The work involves having the patient lower their head to his right, then working on the eyes, surrounding all things deemed suitable for this purpose with strength; afterward, cut off the first one, continuing completely close-shaven until reaching the end, and ensure that nothing bleeds during the operation; then make an incision of the spatula as we described in the fingernail and small force extraction process.
After the incision is complete and all hairs are removed, apply oil of seal or distill with red balm and similar corrosive medicines, applying cotton soaked in egg whites if needed to ensure an abscess. If nothing remains, and it swells up again, suspect a hot boil; leave the area alone and treat the abscess with cooling substances; then return to your work until healed, thereby keeping such issues from reoccurring by this method.
Always ensure that you apply the natural remedy for each weakness of the vein; and in case of accident, treatment by fer; do not put your hand into any of these treatments until you see that limb affected members are restored.
From veins of the eyes
There are red veins that cover the eye and impair its function and weaken it daily. Therefore, when you first look at an affected eye, where this is present, and nothing else, then proceed as follows: instruct the patient to place their head in your hand, then gently compress those veins along the entire edge according to your wisdom, and make them subtle again twice according to this method:
And there should be two veins compressed per degree in one course according to this method:
the P gr on they pnoie ou s... C:sirs* (flemente c ointise;d
If you cannot grasp everything in that hour, then apply a poultice on the oil of soothing things to alleviate eye pain and let it remain for several days until the pain is eased and the patient is assured against inflammation; then resume according to this method as long as it remains sound: this is the form of strength.
Regarding the fistula of the eye
If the so-called "arissati" fistula is not healed by cauterization and with hot ague medicine as I have previously described, then make an incision over the abscess where it must die off, and draw out all the moisture that lies within, until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see corruption and darkness, return it to its original shape using all parts of the instrument; and it's called "sharp head," and it should be made from fair iron for one chief reunion, and pointed like a file as in this form:
And place the exposed bone in its original position, then turn it between your two fingers, and press with your hand a little until you know that the corruption is gone; do this once more, then restore the location of medical drying remedies.
If the wound is closed and pus emerges, and the body of the bowels is closed, and remains so for forty days, and it does not heal or become an ulcer, and no complications occur, knowing that it's healthy; if not, there's no other remedy than to bring back the fistula open at the nose following this form: and it's such that you reopen the bone a second time with iron, and with acrid medicines, and when it is reopened take a drill according to this form, and be sure the head of iron has three angles, and the shaft should be thinned until its end as shown here.
Then place it near the bone below the elbow, and keep your hand away a little bit, then turn the whole thing until it pierces the bone and the patient feels pain because of this if they hold their hand on their neck; and then replace it with dry medicines as I have shown you, and when pus forms and hardens in the wounds, the material goes to the neck; thus it is a lighter thing for the afflicted.
From the exit of the nose
When the eyes are opened entirely without disturbing the nose or narrowing it, then you bind the afflicted; then anoint them with oil made of acacia and aloe and incense and shirinjibi (myrrh), then apply compresses or hot irons to draw out pus without burning, and then stretch the nostril, placing a bandage underneath it and cloths; you prepare the cloths so that they are sufficiently soft, and fold each one four times, and then place one on top of another according to the quantity that the nose requires; then strain by placing a hardened flour paste above them, and resume applying compresses without burning; remove the compresses and let the nostril remain contracted day and night, if it needs to be pulled out greatly. Afterward, remove the bandage after one day and night, and when you see pus returning, that's good; if not, resume the bandages and cloths and oil and compresses until they are healed.
The tearing of cloth seen
When disruptions occur in the cloth used, it becomes perforated, and comes with particles like grains of resin, which are difficult to see; then you examine it closely, and if it's still usable, make small punctures near the base up to a certain depth, insert another needle or thread from the lower edge, pierce through, leave the first needle according to its position, sew together using a double thread portion of the material, pull tightly, remove the needle and apply plenty of boiled wool, leaving it until the threads are cut with the cloth; then treat the area with soothing agents until healed, ensuring that no part is restricted by any remaining cloth circle, as long as it remains healthy.
And if the eyes have a significant appearance, delicately pierce near the subtle edge that comes from around the area, and drain any yellowish moisture and allow it to descend, entering almost immediately; then remove as much as possible until healthy.
of the bowel of the eye
This disease called "alcunati" is nothing but an eyeball assembled as if it were water flowing downward, and it's not actually water; the way its appearance appears to you is by having the patient sit on a specially prepared and straight seat, then take hold of his head with both hands, and moisten it until you see the bow coming over your eyes; then insert it, do not let it descend or come apart, and observe what happens as usual. If it does not separate downwards, know that it is water, and if the process of the bow being assembled is not done as we have said, make him sit on a specially prepared seat, then use a subtle spatula to rub along the horny part of the lid and the crown, until the bow comes out; and when it has come out, distill clear hot water mixed with honey or water boiled in fenugreek into the eye, or cure it with another treatment until it is healed.
of waters from the eye
We have seen the resemblances of waves in division, and what is required for cutting; thus according to health. It is necessary that you seat the patient between your crossed hands, away from sunlight, and apply holy oil tightly; then place the paper covering the oil in your left hand if the eye is turned outwards, or in your right hand if it's turned inwards; then take with your right hand, if the eye is turned outwards, the instrument called "almagda", or with your left hand if it's turned inwards; then place the tip of the instrument near the crown by the width of a stick at the base of the oil to the minor outer rim, then insert the almagabar firmly and turn your hand until it penetrates into the wall of the oil, feeling that the almagda enters the hollow space; and it is necessary that the length of the almagda's path be equal to the full width of the space from the tip of the prunelle to the end of the noirour; this is the crown of the oil; if you see the bone in that paper due to the whiteness of the horn, then place the instrument up to where the water is and express it after another route. If the water flows out now, you will see the patient facing you with the instrument in his eye.
After resting for a bit and the water rises on the second way, place the fire with the instrument, and when it is deeply inserted and does not rise further, gently turn the almagda around your hand slightly; then reintroduce some gemmy oil into the eye and moisten inside. Then put on top of the oil a piece of thick cloth or linen soaked in oil and abundant with olive oil, and bind it with holy oil. We do this as well as those from our time who place comin broiet with an abundance of olive oil.
the f.chincre excer they cannot on that he (and so que
Then puncture the joint only slightly and do not make too large of an incision, but create a small opening, then apply medicinal mud as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient a suitable place to lie down where it is dark; advise them to avoid all movements, consume light foods, and neither move their head to the right nor left, and keep them secured according to their condition until the third day; then release them from that dimly lit room and check their vision, allowing them to see various things, and then reattach the ligament up to the seventh day; it is not necessary for you to perform this during or immediately after the cure or incision, but rather when the swelling has rapidly increased.
When an abscess develops, release the oil before the seventh day and apply a bandage to soothe the affected area; and when it is calmed, remove the bandage from their face with an eye-mask for one day to cover any wounds, then keep them secured in that dimly lit room. And gradually leave the house bit by bit, allowing them to recover at their own pace; understand that no disciples should interfere in this case.
And it comes the les pains nos de, que tu fai ire oui sentein ce qui en tes, and then let meur si esprendue. Et si l'on est je saient ontes des, et nus liques l’an se eut aque leu mors, ne ceste la, caressons de les. And noit que tu almaies, quant; qui on tesme coi ce i d’ome sis ; et puis conie, ce, que des. Et si esprunt li je est l'en, quoi on le mient, nuns.
And these are the forms resembling almadia, for those who do not recognize them see; and they are of iron properly.
The first is the head of this same subtlety, and the third in three angles sharp.
from the chariot at the front end.
sesl t eco;s.
If any part remains that cannot be covered, apply all subtle and light rubs until nothing is left; if there is swelling or an abscess appears, treat as needed; and if malignant abscesses occur, quickly cauterize so the area becomes sterile and bone fragments are removed, then pour water, egg whites, or wine.
If the infection persists and moisture reaches up to the palate, ensure they are sanitary; if no perforation occurs as it should, check that bone fragments have not been left behind by examining through the incision: then you must gently insert a slightly thickened linen thread between your fingers, leaving enough space for each finger; place the patient's head underneam of the filament so it may reach their nostril as far as possible and draw out odorant substances until they come out through the nostrils within the mouth; this method is often used for children in schools, and it is an easy task to perform. Then hold one cheek with one hand and the other cheek at the mouth with the other hand, ensuring that each filament can be felt by our fingers. Do so until you are certain that we have removed all bone fragments; then remove the filaments, drain any blood, and moisten them with Egyptian ointment before placing them back into the nostril as they were initially; repeat this for three or more days, or until the ointments dissolve everything left in the nostrils. Afterward, place a ligature of linen string in their nose for several consecutive nights until it is clean, and if additional dried medicines are required, use them accordingly; this method is used to purge the head by distilling oils and medicines into the nasal cavity where they can be inserted.
Et sache .iiij. Aime: Et si un peu, se tient : li cheintinse vus est de lais, si que li a li en pui. C'est desu et une plustre fienne d’acue qua estriant l’arme cil, ou quant neist s’en maintes dui unite, qui sont pour ce les cheoir le chauat une et on est ile laquie en faites de boe une a li est prit; si ; et ove eue tient, carpes :
From a chariot pulled by two horses
Many times a disease known as "telul" arises at the top of one's neck, growing and becoming large enough to be visible; therefore it is necessary to make an incision from the start, and cut deeply, then apply heat or burning medicine; if not done before it becomes too large, observe carefully if it is hard, has a strange color, and poor sensation: do not use iron as it will worsen into incurable boils with each incision causing great harm to the patient; however, if the boil is from a soft area without discoloration and can be fully covered by an incision, reassure the patient, emptying them of fear, curing dryness and tightening.
When the neck has been cut into
When the continuation of treatment occurs in one of these cartilaginous operations, it is not very effective for some people. Therefore, when this happens to anyone, check if the wound is fresh with all its blood; then sew together the two edges after cleaning, and treat until it heals; and if the edges are dry on both sides, trim all parts of their core until they heal, then stitch the two edges together, apply pressure, and powder with dragon's blood dust, and burn incense; place a piece of alum or other alum over the powders, let it exude through them, then treat with ointment until it heals.
The method of sewing is that you join the edges together using needles as described in stitching the abdomen, or with thread as I have shown to you previously.
for abscesses on the lips
In the treatment of hardened abscesses resembling grains of pepper, both small and large; then it is necessary to return the lips, cut on each side with scissors, take them with forceps and place in each part; then fill the cavity after lancing a blister until the pus stops flowing; and then suture it easily, and treat the filled area of dry things until it heals.
For the erosion of gums.
Often there is erosion on the gums called "albulus" by the ancients; it is necessary to support them with pincers, cut at their root, and let blood or sap flow; then apply vitriol paste or other powders that constrict and dry out; and if the erosion returns after incision, and often does so, a second cauterization may be done: it will not return after cauterization again; these are the forms of treatments to heal.
From soreness
At no time are they gathered at the root of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, which are ugly and sharp; nor do the teeth appear black or yellow with spots until corruption comes to the gums, making them foul-smelling; if it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his cheeks be in your holy hand, and remove any teeth or splinters found, until there remains nothing; then do so with blackness and greenness, and yellowness and other discolorations, until they are healed; and if anything that was initially removed returns, it is good; if not, start again on the second and third day, until you have completely done so; know that teeth need various forms of treatments to be restored according to what the work shows, because those with which one cleans the root may differ from those found between the teeth; and these forms and others are to be prepared by you.
It is necessary when treating the tooth's pain that you delay extraction as much as possible, for it should not always be done; because it is a matter of high importance until there is no justification for pulling out. Then when the patient is constrained by the thread, it is necessary to be certain about which tooth aches. Often the pain troubles the patient, and he thinks that it is either a healthy or diseased tooth, and thus pulls the good one; however, the pain does not go away for this reason alone, as long as the evil spirit remains, because we have already tried this with such saints. And when you are well certain about which tooth aches, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth thoroughly and strongly to protect the gum on all sides; then move the tooth using your fingers or delicate pincers little by little until it is properly aligned, then firmly secure with the pincangs; and let the head of the shoulder be in its saint between your knees, ensuring that it does not move.
After extracting the tooth straight without breaking it, if it does not come out easily, take any of these ointments and pour them into each part lightly, then move as you did at first. And if the root is pierced and mutilated, it must be filled with cloths where the gaps are; and when strained subtly by pincers, ensure it does not break upon extraction; and work skillfully around the gum to clear away the tooth.
Li questeinz ; et duret par les charites car il fistulent li oise l’aveugle eslire la mort. Et sis ire oulez de rede apres teu, se uontsfeut est ce quil; qui li maize.
The shapes of the sinews, to which one may move the bones first, are with long points and large knots, so they do not double when you pull on the thread; and these are the shapes:
And let them be large members such that they do not bend while pulling, and made of well-crafted iron, and have teeth to hold when moved.
from the root of the bones the un s that. nd that e M; an our f en t
And if the roots do not wish to come out with all these pincers, it is necessary that you uncover the skin entirely around the root, and place the instrument called "althali," which is known as tongs. This is its shape:
And the tongs should be large and strong so that they do not break, and if the root is pulled out by them, it is good. If not, use all the tools, from which these shapes come afterwards:
And if you help using this instrument that has two tines, here is its shape:
And of other instruments before it for examining teeth, and this device which appears like large pincers, here is its form:
And this instrument is such that it cannot break easily; there are many instruments for examining teeth; and so are other instruments, which are not counted among them; the wise masters find by themselves their tools, according to their craft's works and the diseases they demonstrate, because there are some illnesses or the old did not teach any instrument due to the diversity of bones and joints, or it does not break on the cart or other bones where they occur; so seek the instruments that I have told you about, and help with gestures, here is its form: They should be large and firmly held to hold the bone without slipping, but to grip it and extract; then restore them back with medicines suitable for this, and if there is any decay in the bone where it occurs, and if it's small, all of these instruments are:
When teeth appear not in accordance with the natural course of the body and are unattractive in form, especially in maidens, it is necessary to ascertain if the roots are behind the teeth, and they are neither straight nor properly positioned; then the fissure must be made. If there is an impact with the tooth, take this instrument whose shape is shown here, resembling a small beak, and let it be of iron pointed at one end.
And the coping shall be filed bit by bit over several days due to the hardness of the tooth and because you do not move other teeth; if it appears that it can be ground down, then grind with a part as shown in this shape.
And it is also like grinding needles; and gently file the tooth bit by bit over several days so that it does not move too much; then smooth out at the end with a fine rasp, and if the root is too sharp and cuts the tongue, you must grind down the harshness until they are even, ensuring it does not cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
When the teeth are loose
When the teeth are loose due to impact or falling out, and the patient cannot press against what they chew without itching, treat them with medicines that tighten but do not help; if necessary, restrain them using a gold thread, for silver threads turn green and rot, while gold does not change. The wire should be of medium thickness based on the space between the teeth. If you need to straighten the teeth, take the wire and double it between the two healthy teeth. Then place the heads between the teeth so that if there are one or more, keep them in place until they're securely fitted against a healthy tooth on the other side; then resume covering up to where you started, carefully and skillfully pulling without movement; and use strong tape at the root of the loose tooth to prevent it from slipping. Then cut off the wire with pliers, reattach the heads between the teeth, and arrange them so that they do not touch the tongue. Leave in this tightened state as long as possible, and if removed or the wire breaks, restrain it again with another wire; if left alone, it will serve for its intended time, shaping both the position of the teeth and their figure when fitting together
And if the tooth falls out again, put it back in its place freshly as we have said; and do not involve anyone who is neither wise nor patient, and never attempt to form it into a shape like a boar'prise tusk, but fit it where there is an absence, and restrain it as previously stated, and it will serve for a long time.
From heat, remove the ligament of the tongue
At no time are these ligaments found that come from the tongue or nature, created as such; or by accident of burns. The treatments are such that you work on the mouth to ease pain and keep the head in place, lifting the tongue; then cut the nervous ligament wide, until the tongue is dislocated from its position, and if there is hardness or pus, which is due to a fresh wound, so put a hook and sever widely that portion; and be careful that the fissure is not too deep, nearing the artery underneath; and when you have done this, elevate the lump of rose water and apply cold water compresses, then place a linen tent over the tongue; and each night apply an ointnament to the eyes so they cannot close. And if there is discharge of blood, if a vitriol paste is applied to it, if this does not work, cauterize with a lentiginous caustic iron which is good for this; then care for another remedy until healed
And if you see it to be colored or black or hardened, so that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for this is cancer; and if it begins to ulcerate, and there is moisture, then drip on the hook, and fumigate with a delicate spatulaceous instrument, and release from all sides; and if at your treatment site, apply vitriol paste until healed, then return to the original treatment site as long as you treat everything thoroughly; then elevate cold water compresses and rest, and care for other remedeis till it is healthy.
From abscesses of the throat
Not once does the throat swell known as "godath" occur, and properly they are called the two almonds. When you treat them, as we have said in the division, if they do not heal well, take care: if they are small abscesses of short duration and wax-colored, do not touch with iron. If they are red and the root is large, do not touch with iron, also for the bleeding; but let them grow until they are ripe, and then you will cut them off, or it may burst on its own; if they have a pale color of swollen roots that are slender, prepare the instrument to cover it up, but first make sure the abscesses are resting calmly. Then seat the patient facing the sunlight, with their head in your lap and use this form: [draws] made of silver or fine steel just as a small knife;
Can you press the tongue against this instrument and see the abscess? If it has a stalk, insert an awl into the almond, and pull up more than you can with your hands; then do not touch any surrounding tissue. Then cover the instrument as in the form below [draws] that appears to resemble chains of power, while the head is arched, one end at a time, very painful, made of iron or fine steel:
And if you do not have this instrument at hand, use a spatula with tongs like so:
And be sharp on one end and blunt on the other, and when you have opened one of the almonds, open the other in the same manner; after making the incision, gargle the patient with warm water, vinegar, and honey syrup if there is a discharge of blood occurring, then again gargle with diluted pomegranate rinds or myrtle leaves until it stops bleeding; then cure them until they are well, as none other sores than the two almonds may appear in the throat, so treat accordingly to remove both almonds.
And I treated a woman who had an abscess in her throat, that is to say, she had very swollen that the abscess was so inflamed and almost filled the throat entirely closed all of it was completely blocked by the airway passage he couldn't breathe through the mouthpiece; and she couldn't eat or drink. And she would have died if stayed thus a day or two days. The abscission and the abscesses were two, so that I removed both almonds: henceforth as they remove them, just like this, so cut it be sure you don't you can then the throat with long hairs; thus cut both of these same way. And if aisin of in there and then after gueing abrasse de l. Then I would not let go forthwith no stop abscesses s to remove all them almond is so as to be heal, or more like that two out take the next one you both from the same long hairs on it open they close; And both alms then cut both come by with both them aigue. I'mongle the cure but stop bleeding.
From the eye
When the veins come to the eye, and it becomes inflamed and extended, then call it "perpendicular"; if it is swollen and round, then it is called an "uve". When it has been treated as we have said in the section, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the boil is calmed down and it is subtle, then you must drain it; and if it is rounded but not elongated, and it is red or of flesh color or black, then you should perform an incision. For there is great danger to the patient. Therefore, when you see it according to the manner I have described, with regard to its blueness and length, make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue against the instrument we have mentioned before; then insert the needle into the vein, pull downward, and drain at .i. of the .ij. punctures I have said about the .ij. almonds. And it is necessary that you do not drain more than the superfluous part beyond its natural boundary; for if you drain too much, it will harm both his voice and speech; and after the incaturation, follow what we have said in the puncturing of the .ij. almonds, and cure until it is healthy. And if the patient fears being causticated, then use a means to alleviate their fear during the sensory caustication. And the manner of this caustication is with clear water. And ensure that the patient places his head in your hand, and then presses the tongue against the instrument we have mentioned or cautery chapstick, and confit with clear water hot enough; not too thick nor too transparent; and apply the pressure of this instrument as follows:
Eresemete l’est, quant li mille. 1e de l’amont ceu le est aulme e la chene sont les cite li coupelee parmet ond les metsont li et siqueme ce cue un estremets li cuet. Lui le vemt lemedes dedelez, et li c'est de l’este une fois eme li aloud; andemete l'aveug en l’l.
This treatment is more effective with incision than with fire-cautery; if it's treated with fumigation in this manner, take expectorant and hyssop and oregano and rue and chamomile and avon and similar herbs, and mix them all together or some of them in a pot, add water, bring to boil; and the pot well sealed with strong clay, and in the middle of the pot have an instrument inserted as follows: And be of silver or copper, and one end inserted into the mouth of the patient as long as the vapor rises to the eye through the canal; until the vein is congested, as often as it dries out, and keep that you do not start this at the beginning of a hot abscess's arrival, for many things happen; and don't use it just when an abscess becomes cool. And if this instrument isn'amo
And many times you cut the throat or spine of a fish bone or any other thing; thus, if it's necessary that you clean the instrument to all over the sun in the body, and squeeze the tongue in the sun under the sun the skin comes out. Also do not and be sung as li is burnt in the stomach; maybe swallowed by vomit, or a piece of sponge, or a morceaude de loin the spat il air anointed, or soak it's drye de leu. And he takes a fil a estrument for sun and sung li le bonnet et as long as is not in the ceste ceu en leaer, si pren liauz, and take .i.
And let the strum be bent towards the head so that it may more easily enter into the throat, and lift the head high; and watch that you do not touch the epiglottis, so that nothing hinders its movement, nor push in any bone within; move such that the patient places the instrument, for it should be loose or where the thing is narrowed; then insert towards the end of the instrument evenly until it is fully inserted.
For the swelling of the throat
Swelling of the throat is not medicine by my methods as described in the division and treatment with medicines; and if it does not work at all, then look into the throat of the patient under sunlight and press their tongue against the instrument I have told you about. And if you see swelling, treat it with a small probe or fine pincers that are suitable for this purpose. And if those do not suffice, take a horsehair brush, insert it in the throat of the patient, and perform an incision with a hot iron frequently. And if the patient is covered by water all day, then fill a pitcher with cold water, moisten their mouth, and induce swallowing as often as possible; and when the swelling feels the water, it will disappear quickly.
If it does not come out as we have said, then smoke the patient with aromatic herbs using the instrument described in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will be harder to move. The method of fumigation is that you take a pot containing charcoal and cover it with a cloth pierced at its center, and insert the head of the instrument therein; then add your fumigation, allowing the patient to place the end of the tube in his mouth, keeping his mouth closed so smoke does not escape but enters up until the pharynx; now the throat will move easily, and if it doesn't come out, repeat the fumigatur many times; let the patient suffer thirst, and consume various unsavory things without drinking any water; then it becomes necessary for him to release through this management.
The form of the instrument through which you treat the throat is, when it can be seen, similar to curved tongs for inserting into the throat; and resembles a doctor's spoon, with a smooth surface so that anything taken cannot fall out; this is its shape.
The form of an instrument like a scalpel and smooth it should not slip off.
Many similar types of abscesses there are, as the memory comes to us from one and another in this book, and they are varied by perforation and cutting; and it is in two ways which one has the same appearance, and because it holds moisture. And the second way is for the bones where they are located on the body. For abscesses at the head are different from those at the base, and abscesses of joints are different from those that occur in joints, each having its judgment in work.
And if an abscess is not to be pierced until it has died out according to its completion; and if of such that it must be pierced when they are ripe, but do not die out as per their completion, as in the case of abscesses near joints. For when abscesse
And if it is meur l'aposteme que cil qui doumeit se li apemes sont la perforation and les mis li autres; or s et doree aseptement, et leas est pluses alés. Et quant il ne de tole du eunpercion ou as, telz apeme si tu l'apetes l'an, et doucues lontemps et meur esme en l’appetie se il les p.
When they bulge, according to the member in question. And when abscesses are present, let them be left until digestion is completed fully, as we have said. For if you puncture it too early, it will spread venom through the body and become full of filth; and perhaps the lips and deep cavities harden. And for any abscess that is felt according to the width of the body, according to what the member requires. It should be treated with small punctures for small abscesse
For those without a head, when dealing with superficial abscesses, it is proper to puncture them openly; and for large abscesse that have accumulated great swelling and bowels, pierce the abscess but not all of the bowels at once, then let the abscess drain until the next day, then do nothing more, repeating this process gradually each time until it is completely drained. Especially if the patient is weak, a pregnant woman, a small child, or an old and feeble man, as the bowels may burst during healing which could kill them, so be cautious with this treatment method. Therefore, avoid using this treatment carelessly; once you have located your abscess, cleanse the wound, and check if the abscess is small; and if it's a flat sore, dress it in linen or old cotton bandages; and for large abscesse with many openings, make individual dressings so they touch each other; and if you have cut into the skin of the abscess but not around it, fill it with old thread or lint without moisture, tie it off until the third day; then remove it and treat with ointment until healed.
the but hardirme ben;
And this is how one should generally approach the treatment of abscesses: now I have told you how to proceed before treating an abscess, and here is the chapter.
Of swellings
Small abscesses arise in the head region, and they are treated similarly to how one treats a cat's joints - there are many varieties of it. Some have moisture like hair; others are hard at the tip but do not cause concern when scraped with a tool called "entromissoire," which causes them later. The treatment involves using instruments that scrape out moisture and anything contained within, as leaving any residue allows for regrowth. If you have Egyptian oil, use it; if not, saltwater or sea water is suitable to soak the area until the next day. Continue with cotton on subsequent days unless you are certain that nothing remains overnight. Then apply healing ointment as appropriate and continue treatment until completely healed. If a fatty substance forms within an abscess, follow this method: scrape out any clogs; then cleanse thoroughly and continue with the usual poultice for several days.
The moist and pus-filled abscesses are easier to deal with, for they contain little blood. And if any of these abscesses or chiefs have no moisture, like those I found in an old woman's head; there was an abscess as hard, rough, and bloody as a stone, which could not be broken; and had someone struck it, they would have made the wound just like that of a stone. In other abscesses or chiefs coming from the top of the head, let their opening always be at the highest point so the pus can exit. Treat them as needed.
Of scrofulas (tuberculous swellings)
They often occur at the neck; and are malignant ones that do not want to obey healthy. In those you see good condition at the top of the head. And there is no artery or conduit as it bleeds too much; and does not pierce, and is not deep nor vessels, and pierce if necessary, as we have said in chapiteres. To make him, and the wound shall they are heal, do.
When you cut the vein or artery and it does not allow you to work, apply vitriol paste or powders that remain in the blood, tighten the wound; leave it until the abscess is soothed and softened, beginning to rot. And when the blood has stopped flowing, return to your task until completed; then follow your usual method if there are no small scrofulous sores, treat and clean them. If there is a large vein at the root of the scrophule, do not cut that scrophule at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread, let it hang without harm; then dress the ward in old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure.
If you cut the entire scrophule, it is necessary to sew together the two edges of the wound and hold them in place, ensuring there is no excess for its size. It may be required to follow up by cauterizing the root, expressing pus, and closing as previously mentioned. Scrofulous sores that retain fluid should be punctured where it appears most open; and pierced similarly to the one before, depending on, then treat with ointment and similar things so they corrupt whatever has been retained from decay; and once the wound is thoroughly cleaned, apply a healing ointment until it is sound.
If you cut open where it should be applied cleansed by cauterization, ensuring anoint with Egyptian things so it to remain uncorrupted remains from decay; and then thoroughly cleaned, which applies healed apply ointment until once is the infection. And when it is healed after the wound, ensure that open-do not asewoven as they are infected, then corrupted heal with salted before.
The ancients spoke and told of the treatment for a throat condition; but I have never seen it in our land, and this is their written word.
For those with swollen throats, it is necessary that the incision of the throat called "epiglote" be made; and this cannot be helped because all the veins and the main artery causing great heat in an abscess are present therein, either in the mouth or in the throat or in two limbs. When the disease is on the main artery's channel, it is necessary to expose the epiglute so as to avoid the destruction that comes from strangulation.
It is necessary then, when we wish to split the epiglottis, that we split it from three or four circles or a circle and a notch across, between the two circles or by the quantity of the incision through the sack.
And if they are connected to the section of the epaturator: the power-operated hoists used on ships for lifting heavy loads or cargo is called "gantry cranes." These devices are characterized by their large structural beams (the gantries) that span across one or more ship decks, providing a sturdy framework from which the hooks and wires can operate. Gantry cranes offer significant lifting capabilities essential for handling heavy equipment and containers in maritime operations.
And if the master is apprehensive, it must be extended by gagging the throat all the way to the joints. Then cut the flesh as much as you can reach with the knife; and draw out the blood vessels, provided there's nothing unusual, and then seal the sack, just as we have mentioned earlier.
And it is demonstrated by the dislocation of the feline's thigh bone which jumps out at its place that has been broken, and due to loss of voice.
and leaves the open wound exposed for a period of time.
And when the hour is passed in which one doubts strangulation, gather the two lips of the wound above, and pull all flesh together with a cord; then administer medicines that generate heat until it becomes healthy again.
s; prud:: Then block off the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe, and they breathe through the wound, thus preventing death.
And so they command the patient to leave the open wound until the effects of the illness are gone, which takes 3 or 4 days. Then they instruct to sew up and clean the wound, until it is healed.
tut. Don's.t ill T80: I saw a maiden took a knife and stuck it in her throat, cutting part of the swallow's entrails.
And I went to call for help to cure her, but found her as if dead.
I discovered the wound and found that blood had come from it; however, she hadn't used wine or any other remedy to treat her throat, and life-force was flowing out through the injury.
their: : the Medieval characters so that you (sme JBtobt. If they que do not put seu.
And it did not happen to the lady until she was inflamed with voice, and returned afterwards to her control.
Because I tell you, there is no fear in treating an epiglottis injury.
In the case of a large swelling on the throat
This abscess is called "throat hernia," and it's a large boil the color of jet-black, mostly found in women.
bytie le c istre l’emt:
The occurrence is in two ways: one resembling our fat and the other way resembles an abscess coming from arteries. And there is fear, and it does not require working with large fires but in those that are small, and testing and seeking the most intermingled. If you find it as with our fat, and not attached to any vein, then wrap like we do ourselves, and treat all its sides, if there are points. byz;
From us
Many ways there are from us, of which I will tell all the resemblances;
and it is necessary that I speak of the entire difference between us and them.
the it:
With our nose we have no warmth or fever or pain, and contains a sore, which is its own bag and according to the color of the body, and begins as if a glass bead, and becomes larger.
And there are two similar appearances, or pus, or moisture, with the colors as I have described in the classification.
It is necessary when you come to the care of our nose that you examine and inquire firstly about all the instrument called "entromissory", according to its form or chapter which follows.
And the method of inquiring about abscesses is that you grab or find more moisture at the site where you see the abscess, and gently turn your two fingers back and forth until you know that the pus has been felt with the fingertips, then proceed according to the size of the abscess.
Then extract the foreign object, and be careful so it does not pierce further.
If there is running moisture on the cut, observe what color it has, as I have mentioned for other abscesses;
If after the intervention there is no moisture, know that it is fatty, then rub it accordingly in a cross pattern, and grasp with pincers, and lightly scrape from each side, keeping the coat over where it lies to clean it thoroughly.
If you cannot cleanse it thoroughly, then cut it into pieces so that nothing is left behind.
For if anything remains, it will return to us many times.
If it remains there for a while and the wound grieves him, apply an infusion of certain corrosive powders to the wound, strain it, and place soothing substances on the abscess until healed;
And if we are large, cut both lips of the wound, and treat them with a poultice that heals chafing.
If it is inflamed or something else, and you hastily apply the lew of vitriol paste, and leave it for 2 or 3 days until the wound heals, then let the sanguineous exudation rest; afterwards return to normal as soon as possible.
Observe the forms of entropion strumas, which have 3 ways: large and medium and small; and there are 4 regions called "albaret", and one called "breb"; and in these 3 ways: large, medium, and small to treat abscesses of fistulas.
And are like the needles used for sorcery, and made of citron wood, or iron, or silver, and their worth is as yellow ones, and are more effective in dealing with black pus from fistulas.
There are three ways: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the width of the openings.
The shapes of tumors are mostly similar to what you see here: large, medium, and small; and for tumors that have two openings in three ways as well.
and for tumors that have three openings, they are also in three ways; and for tumors that have two openings, with only one opening each, these are all necessary in their place.
t. There are not; Do so far, and the s.
And of these intrusions are reset as hooks, so that the patient does not perceive discomfort upon exposing abscesses.
And there are three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see.
the morts est proovrre:   :
And at no time is another instrument used, small in size, resembling the sharpened ends of sticks, according to this method, through which blood is tied.
And it is placed at the right position without harming veins or arteries, and does not return according to this particular form.
At no time do the breasts of men swell when they begin to be corrupted, until they appear like women's breasts.
the t; and toto they include by such that youtill be more the opruds. Then scrape the fat, and dress the wound with medicinal salve made of tar, then sew together the two edges of the wound, and heal until it is mended.
and the mother leans forward, becoming weakened by her size as happens with women, so they make two ribs above it, with similar splits. so that one is held to the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this pattern, from this line B through G. Then scrape the leather that is between the two lips, and remove the fat, and do as we have said with stitching and powders, and everything necessary for the treatment, until it heals.
and if it is not healed, or the incision is not completely made because the patient does not want to rest, or due to blood loss, then you must fill the wound with a soft cotton in a corrosive ointment. and leave it until the residue and fat come out, then heal it until it is cleaned.
Of abscesses of the ankles
These abscesses that arise from under the ankle are ways of hard scrofula, and if any contain moisture.
Those which contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from line b to line g: the most of:t;
And if the abscesses are like those of hard swellings, treat them as we have said in piercing hard swellings, and if the wound is filled with pus, prepare a cautery as we have said before.
For stopping the bleeding from an artery
When the artery is bled and the skin is swollen above it, many abscesses occur, as well does blood flow freely from veins and form an abscess.
the in their by bonstradejemm; C: this. When you feel it on your elbows, there is extreme pain; and if it's caused by the vein, it's a reasonable loss of function.
It is foolish to attempt this with an abscess, and especially when it's under the sinews and bones or where there are many others like large ones. Therefore, it is necessary to avoid the iron treatment, and for those with headaches as well, one must also abstain, and in cases where there are varicose veins occurramoont over long skin.
Therefore, it is necessary to avoid the iron treatment, and for those with headaches as well, one must also abstain, and in cases where there are varicose veins occurramoont over long skin. with that. And the following a ben, so far.
Then insert a needle underneath one, and make it perforate up to the opposite side, and tie off the artery with a double thread for two turns, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are located on the temples.
Then mark the spot which lies between the two ligatures from an intramuscular injection until blood flow ceases there, and thus remove the abscess.
Then prepare the wound care where sutures were used, as long as the ligatures are loose. Then apply an ointment as appropriate for this condition until it is healed.
and if the abscess is due to the size of the vein, then you should excise from your hand as much of the abscess as possible. Then insert the needle from under the joint that you hold in your hand and pierce it, so that there is a double thread, which you pull on the opposite side; then tie the abscess, as I have told you, or of one of two parts with two ends of thread.
and if you doubt that the thread is not tight enough, then use another needle to reopen the incision of the first cut at the abscess, and hold the threads with all four ends;
Then treat the abscess until the excess fluid subsides, then cut away the excess skin and leave what remains attached.
Then apply a strip of cloth soaked in wine and oil, then prepare healing bandages and ointments until they are sufficient.
For abscesses with veins.
As abcesses come in arteries and veins, they occur when hit or through excessive work or similar causes.
And this occurs most often in shoulders and elbebows, at all places where there are joints, it is inflammation of the tissues, its color seems like the body's color, and causes pain in various forms.
And when it is strangled firmly, one feels the patient's great pain, and not in all parts of the body but from below the head.
t;
And those who are at the top or forehead make a cut with a scalpel. If the abscess is small, if you have forceps, and cover it at its root;
and if it is large, if you tie with ligatures, and peel it off, then bone and close the wound at the stitches, and heal until it is healthy again.
de, t, and they are c. Never occurs anywhere but in the bellies and not elsewhere, and it is a disease called "fungus" by its appearance, with subtle roots, and large branches; and within there are both small and very large ones.
And I saw a house where two bellies appeared more like mushrooms than anything else, with no differences, and were white, had fine roots, were split open, and contained moisture within them.
I emptied them and found that one weighed 18 ounnces, while the other weighed 5 ounces. Upon incision, inspect to see if the patient is moist, and the flesh color of the membrane is blanchish and wet with a fine root;
If the wound at the spatulatum is wide, and in your presence be the fire cautery. For at the tailor comes often great loss of blood, and if it does not stop, then urgently apply the cauterizer;
and if you see the patient hopeful and fearful of the incision with iron, take a well-made string, and tie it as we have said, leaving it for two days;
and then the restraints, continuing to hold the string until it cuts through the ligature, causing pain; and if the roots are thick, be wary of cutting into them on the belly, but you will do so carefully.
Then cauterize so it does not recur; then treat the wound and ensure you do not cover the ulcer which is of foxy color, poor sense, and pus discharge.
For it is an incised syphilitic sore, and I shall come for its treatment in the next chapter.
When the wound has healed completely
(C1. They will tot is. The w the same.
And if it is due to scrofulous disease and through an abscess opening, then the appearance of the pus resembles the body's own color, and is easily released without pain, with various outcomes. And if it is due to the discharge of the intestine, then there are various issues, and when pressure is applied on its sides, it may rebound, then return, and sometimes becomes hardened, significantly enlarging at the entrance and requiring considerable effort.
And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and easily expressed when pressed with your hand, without constraint; and if it is for blood, then the abscess signs are large and hard, and are fixed according to a quantity.
And if it is due to a wind-like condition, it is sensitive to touching, and the work should be such that you observe whether the appearance is for blood of an artery or vein, or windiness. If it is necessary to let the wound heal. For there are doubt and fear as I have told you in the chapter of abscesses, for arteries and veins.
And if the appearance is for the intestines or bowel, it is necessary that you instruct the patient to tie his gum and extend them straight, then fasten entirely around the abdomen. Then command to lie down with your hands between yours. Then wrap yourself around the area you have marked on the entire back. they dont it n's. Tum, and s (or sheu,
Then work on the half-opened abscess extended over the incision, and insert your finger therein, pulling gently. If you find it caught in the incision, free it, then place the intestine back into its proper position in the abdomen.
and noe lionti's ; by :D: pasme de corpse on that one gently so: 30 you say:
And if the arrow is turned in a contrary direction, or the vein bleeds, then carefully surround it, and return to your work and take two needles, and pour two drops of thread on them, and insert the two needles around what you have made with the cross that you used to perforate.
Then strain the abscess in four places above the needles, and if you see them, remove the needles, let it remain as long as it heals, and extract the dead tissue by itself. or you cut it when it is slender and ready, then treat as necessary, and heal the abscess as we have said.
or you cut it when it is slender and ready, then treat as necessary, and heal the abscess as we have said. And extract the blood or pus that you find, then treat the wound as needed, and bind it up.
For the ulcer
We have spoken in the division about the appearances of ulcers and how to treat them with medicine, and purging therapy; we now speak of the ulcer that occurs within bone tissue, requiring great caution for its treatment, and ancient texts say that when an ulcer is present or can be reached as if it were a sore in the breast, thighs, or other areas, one should remove it entirely at first occurrence; and when they are large and old, do not approach them because I have never seen any healed; nor has anyone been known to be cured of this before me.
the ev
De l'hydropisie We have previously explained in the division of dropsy its resemblances, how the assembly of water occurs, the signs of each resemblance, and the treatment performed by medicines or with iron: it is only exudate; one should not use iron for these two resemblances, namely tympanites and hyposarcoma, as they are fatal conditions. Therefore, when treating this dropsy resemblance called "exudates" with medicines, if the treatment does not help, check whether the patient is weak or has another disease than dropsy; similarly to biliousness and other similar disorders; do not use iron as there may be uncertainty. If you see a strong patient with only dropsies, who is neither too young nor too old, then treat in this way: In the eventide la vive: Le mauvais pour les mains: en a la ceste.ij. Ensemble quele demeure au ie li esttie espar tout se dit, si ce sere qui venir sans l’ajutoi. Toute ne vaque il poignent le pensez fai cuide tuit mauves les pren est parvende tire la dite: sois et le mieux cest li est le mortels sont jette; puis se meie espoincte, tout l’a l’espere to le plus que il.
Then examine if the jaundice is related to the intestines: if it requires that you make an incision above the elbow, 3 fingers' width from the wrist. And if the jaund([[jaunde]]) is due to liver disease, make the incision on the left side of the elbow, 3 fingers' width. And if it is due to a tumor ([miuce]), make the incision on the right, and ensure that the patient lies with their stomach down so that excess fluids do not flow into the weakened area.
Then pierce the skin with the instrument and draw blood, and raise your hand to cover all the area between the skin and fascia as when scraping off a thin layer of flesh or inch by inch; then pierce the fascia until you reach 8 finger's breadth deep, where is the space for water, then cut the vein, and pour out this instrument which has this shape: It is similar to an extremely fine silver chain, made of copper or archaic alloy light in weight, with one small hole on top; and it bends at 3 holes on one side, and 2 holes on another side, and 1 more. The head is cut like a feather quill, which represents the shape of the incision where scribes trim their quills:
At the head of the arm, when you see if inflammation comes to water, then apply it immediately over the instrument. Empty into its third part, because empty it as much as necessary, otherwise you may cause immediate death by his spirit is near the weapon, or he approaches him with a stroke; or
However, in accordance with the amount of its virtue, and according to what the disposition of the patient's temperament indicates, and his hairs; then prepare the instrument and hold back water, and it is now held by the key that protrudes through the sack over the bladder, as I have spoken about, piercing in this manner; then resume the instrument on the following day, if you see the patient suffering so, and extract a small quantity of water.
Do not do anything for a day and avoid bailing out too much water until it stays in place; but if you doubt the patient, and you leave out too much water, then cure by burial or hot sand, and with lots of sweating or bath and sun exposure, and drink no alcohol; and the curative medicine of desiccants until he is healthy again, and causticize on the stomach and liver and spleen after water extraction, as I have said before.
Concerning the interruption of the member (the penis). At no time do children come to be who lack spurs in the penis, or the spurs are small, or they're not properly positioned. If it is necessary that he must pierce them immediately with a very subtle implement: then insert a very thin spur made of lead, and bind and leave like this for three or four days; when he needs to urinate, unfasten the closure, let him urinate, and then reset it; and sometimes nothing more is needed because the urine that comes out does not re-close. For those whose spurs are small, there is a remedy involving lead clouts, as we have said, which will grow larger. Those who do not have the spur properly positioned are afflicted because no one is born with it at the top of the penis, so they cannot urinate unless they lift their penis; and they cannot impregnate a woman because the substance cannot reach the testicles, and this is an ill disease.
And the manner of treatment is that the patient lies on their back, so raise the head of the penis and wrap it as with a pen's beak, so that the spur cuts into the flesh where needed; and guard against bleeding which often occurs, and if it happens, then cauterize the area from which blood is coming.
From pustules of the penis Many times these abscesses come in the penis and have an unsightly appearance; there are both harmful and non-harmful ones; it is necessary to pick them with a fine needle, cleanse and purify all of them, then apply cotton soaked in refined Egyptian ointment; continue to treat with this ointment until healed. And if the abscess is malignant, of pus color and draining, it is necessary to treat with fire cautery. Once you have cleansed it, and if the abscess is inside the penis shaft, both near and further away, you must remove the abscess that is further in; and once removed, treat the remaining part. For when you treat them together, they are not guaranteed to be uninjured as pierc^1 goes into the penis and brings about darkness and decay within it; therefore, it is necessary to cover all blackened and corrupted areas with a plaster made of honey and flour from acorns' bark and wheat, then treat with other remedies until healed.
If bleeding occurs, then arrange the lunar cautery in this manner: The cautery is made of two parts together - that is, for stopping blood and for corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it must be that you fill or guide a tube from the penis with pitch, and urinate upon the patient while standing; and when the hairs are red at the top of the penis which occurs in those who have not been circumcised, whether for injury or abscess, then one must scrape it with an instrument heated by fire until the ligatures are loosened and freed from all sides.
If it is a grave matter to discuss this issue, you must scrape it with a spatula from the tip of the penis and hair; then carefully separate them one by one, and place a fine linen cloth in cold water, so that they dore not dry out completely.
On circumcision.
Circumcision is not the dislocation of continuity like other wounds; however, when we perform this work by our own will, and properly for children, it is necessary that we make the best and easiest work for their health.
I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcising their children, for they do not practice it in their laws, and we have only what we have gained through experience.
For I want the majority of masters and scholars who performed circumcision within one day, and in strong health; it was beneficial as there were two types, and sometimes either type would be chosen at random.
It is regained with cupping, and the pain is doubled, and in the examination which is to see if there is no doubt about the point of the limb; and in the cleaning of the nail by chance it escapes the iron, and blood flows, and many times this happens so that they do not need cleaning and I have seen this.
In the examination that is done at the extremities of the limb, I have found the goodness of experimentation, for the forces cut exactly as above and below.
For when you press your hand, the tissues are cut equally throughout. However, the fibers should be properly close to the skin; and make the manner of the first treatment such that it appears to the child (if he understands), as if you are only binding the thread around his penis briefly, then allow him to breathe in all manners that you can. Then let the head be held between your hands straight, and push with force between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the straps; then put your hand on the rod and blow or sigh, and pull it up until the shoulder head is in place; then cleanse well of the filth assembled there; then tie the joint with a double thread; then fasten below one hook to another eyelet; and hold as close as two fingers apart by the second tied area near the pouchet and index finger, and cover between the two ties, then lift the head gently and realign the shoulder blade.
Then let the head be held between your hands straight, and push with force between your hands or below your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the straps; then put your hand on the rod and blow or sigh, and pull it up until the shoulder head is in place; then cleanse well of the filth assembled there; then tie the joint with a double thread; then fasten below one hook to another eyelet; and hold as close as two fingers apart by the second tied area near the pouchet and index finger, and cover between the two ties, then lift the head gently and realign the shoulder blade. Then let the blood clot little by little as it is weak; and apply powder on and around the powder a small cloth wetted with lukewaturated egg yolk cooked unevenly, mixed with good rosemary oil and fresh rose water, and leave until the following day, and treat with another cure until healthy.
The form of the forces for cleansing is this: both heads are to be held and sharp; and they are as large as a mule equally. (This seems like an incomplete sentence or possibly a metaphorical instruction.)
The error of the swelling is when the kernel inside escapes through the incision; therefore, it is necessary to extend it with your fingernail so that the core makes an abscess; and wrap it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then use tweezebo
If it passes three days and what is below the staff is swollen, leave it until the abscess is calmed down, and gently scrape off; wrap as you normally would, and avoid touching the area of the staff, as it will not harm or hurt at all.
Then the sudden wound filled with powder is treated as we have said about treating powders, and if you wrap too much of it and it goes beyond, it will not hurt; treat accordingly as we have instructed, until it is healed.
Retention of urine
The retention of urine is from inflammation of stones, or frozen blood, or bowel obstruction, or similar things, as we have said in the section.
and if the urine is not released, and you see that there is retention due to the stone which is in or at the neck of the bladvee, then it is appropriate for the patient to be bent on his knees; and his feet are put under his back, and his abdomen extended upwards from the area behind him, and he holds himself erect as much as possible; and then they force the neck of the bladder to express the stone above, so that urine is released.
(sof; (and to sache as much, that.
The manner of urine release is that you take a double thread and tie it with a small piece of wool or cotton at the end. Then insert the chief through the threads inside the syringe. Trim any excess wool and fill it up to the top of the syringe, then rub oil or butter and egg yolk on the syringe, and have the patient sit on a chair with this in place, moistening the bladder and penis with moist oil, olive oil, and water.
Then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches near the base of the penis, then wrap the foreskin around towards the belly button. Insert the syringe up to the blader and allow the patient to feel urination coming close to the voiding place, which is not done in this order due to how the conduit goes; then pull out the thread little by little, and the urine follows the wool, and then extract it.
And reinsert the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and make the patient comfortable again.
Of bladder diseases
When scrapes or blood enters the bladder, or when gangrene is present, and you see it necessary to distill waters and medicines, do so with all the instrument called "claspdrue": this is its form.
It is closed and has three openings: two on one side and one on the other as you see; the lower head through which the medicine cord passes should be cut in such a way that it evenly splits the shaft without addition, so that moisture can be drained if possible.
And when you see to place your medicines in the bladder, put the head with the nozzle into the moisture, and drain it through where it is placed; if possible, draw out the moisture using a pouch, then firmly reset the passage again. The moisture will enter there, and come to the bladader at this time, so that the patient will feel it.
And here is the form of the subtle cleansing for which one cleanses the bladder: like this:
And it is silver or copper, and the head is higher; and from one of its shoulders, the ligaments tear; then take a sheep bladder and put in the moisture you want to use for an enema with the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts with a strong double thread, and heat some moisture on the fire; then pour the head into the enema tube, then stretch your hand over the bladder so all the moisture reaches immediately, until the patient feels that the moisture has entered the bladder.
And if you don't have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle in it, then roundly pierce through; then insert a strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a reed bundle, and put inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it on the instrument; do as you have done with the bladder, press with your hand until the moisture reaches the vessel.
for stones
We have explained in the division how to remove stones and medicines together; and we mentioned the difference between a stone at its beginning as rain, and all signs, and which kind of stone one must operate on by cutting; and about the bladder, and about the penis; and I will now tell you plainly and briefly.
I say that the stone which begins in the bladder occurs more often in children, and it is a sign that the water of the bladche leaps like spring water; and there are sandy deposits, and the male feels an urge to urinate, and does so many times before becoming inflamed; and from these jumps, the foundation becomes weakened; and for young children up until four years old, it is very painful in old age, moderate as those who are between youth and old age; and the treatment of those with larger stones is easier than that of those with smaller ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient by enema for purging all waste that is in the intestines. For this often hinders any attempt to remove the stone.
Then take the patient by the fingers and stand him up straight, moving them outward so that the bone descends to the front of the bladder, and it protrudes once or twice above; then make him sit between your hands appropriately, with his hands below his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely inclined forward; then grip and touch it firmly.
If you feel the bone in the space, act quickly to cut near the bone. And if it does not come out when touched completely, grease your left index finger with oil from your hand, and if the patient is a child, or use your middle finger; and push it into its base, grasp the bone, and when you feel it on your finger, move towards the collar of the bladero, then press above your finger, and push the bone out where you see fit to cut.
And command the assistant to press the bladder with their hand, and instruct them to extend the fingers upward with their right hand, and to remove the skin below the fingers in the area where you make the cut; then they apply a binding cloth generously enough for its shape.
And cause a gap between the joint and the base, not in the middle but at the left side of the navel; place it to the right on the stone, and let the legs be spread apart or together at the base or foundation, and create the opening so wide as necessary for the size of the stone, without being too large inside.
Occasionally press the joint at or near the base so it moves freely without effort; and know if there is a part of a stone or where there are angles and edges: when they become loose, remove them; and those that appear smooth like a leaflet, round, with easy removal.
Where there are angles and margins, make the opening larger; if it doesn't move, then with tongs similar to a file at the top, remove the stone so that it does not slip out; or place underneath an instrument of subtle curvature on the head; and if you cannot manage this way, enlarge slightly a small hole, and if it is smoothed over, strain using vitriol.
If there are more stones, first place the largest at the bladder's neck, then cut into it, then the trickier ones, and afterward any others if there are more. And if they are very large, you should make a larger incision, resulting in a bigger wound. For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine comes through where the urethra cannot join; but nonetheless, strive with leeching or debridement using forceps until it is removed piece by piece.
And once you have completed your work, apply incense and aloe and dragon's blood to the wound, along with a ligature, and place under it a cloth soaked in oil and wine or oil and rose water and cold water to cool the inflamed sore; then compress the patient above his collarbone and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you loosen it, well anoint the wound with oil and water, then treat it with finished myrrh ointment and basilisk ointamoistened with clear water until healed.
When abscesses arise in the wound and cause corrosions and blood congealments in the vein, causing urine retention that is known to be unable to flow freely: thus place your finger in the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains there, the bladder will become infected, and the kidney may also suffer damage.
Then raise the wound from water and dirt and filth, and treat it in all ways you can, until it is healthy; and it is necessary that for all bears you heal, tie his two thighs together, and apply the remedies to the site of injury.
And if the stone is small and it originates from the spermatic cord and protrudes outward, and urine cannot pass through; heal as I describe here: you will have to dilate many times, with relief during this procedure. This has been proven thus far in my experience.
Take an iron fork according to this shape, with three prongs bent at one end into a tine.
Then take a filament and wrap it around the rod below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladder; then insert the fork gently into the rod until it reaches the stone; turn the fork slowly with your hand at the stone bit by bit, as long as you can pierce through to the other side of the stone; soon urine will flow out, and press on the part remaining in the rod inside. It is immediately broken up, jumps out with the urine, and the patient is cured.
And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, take a filament from below the stone and another from above, then bind the rod at the place of the stone between the two ligatures, then remove the fork forcefully, loosening the ligatures; cleanse the coagulated blood in the wound. Cure it until it is healed completely.
Of women with stones
Sometimes stones occur in women and if it happens once, the treatment is difficult for three reasons: firstly, because there may be a woman who is a virgin; secondly, one cannot find a skilled female who can undress at the baths, especially when she is chaste.
And the third reason is that by chance one cannot find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth reason is that the stone in women is deeper than the stone in men, so there must be made a deeper incision, causing much fear.
the se.tist. But this t.m; (bon;
Et look very carefully to see if the woman is a virgin: then it must be done as follows - push her hymen or foundation and search for the stone; and if she bleeds, restrain her under her hymen, and recommend that she put her hymen back in place or with the patient's hand, pressing firmly on the bladder area.
If she bleeds, then it is necessary to move the stone gradually from the bladder area towards below until it reaches near the hip root; then cut into the stone at the thigh's crease against the muscle on which it appears dislocated and feels the stone in that location; and do not move her leg over or under, and make the incision with a small knife.
Then push the probe into the thigh until you feel the stone and cut it as far as the stone can be removed; understand that there are many types of stones: they can be small or large, sharp or blunt, long or round, with veins. Know these forms to know how they will come out.
If the blood does not stop, then apply bitter salt poultice and hold it for an hour until the bleeding ceases; then return to your work of healing stones, using the methods I have told you in stone extraction to assist you.
If the bleeding does not stop and it's from an artery that has been cut, apply powder at the site and press with tents (bandages) and bindings, do not repeat this action, leave the wound alone unless the patient may die; then treat the injury.
And when the fever of blood has subsided and strength returns to the patient, return to your work with stones as long as they are strong enough.
Of a carbuncle hernia
It is nothing but an assembly of moisture or white scab, which is under the surface of the skin that contains pus; and it's called "scab," and never properly in the tissue of the skin if one believes it to be another thing; and it's the leather part between the white scab we have mentioned, and nothing else occurs.
And the generation of this carbuncle is due to weakness that affects the veins, and it spreads that matter.
On any occasion when it comes from percussion on the joints, and this moisture is of various colors: sometimes fading to yellow, or without redness, or black, or white as water, and such things happen more.
And these are signs to recognize this assembly; because if it is white and foul as we have mentioned, it indicates abscesses - those long as an egg's shape, without opening the joints, for they are filled with moisture entirely around.
And if there is moisture in the proper cloth, it indicates abscesses with part of an egg, and that's why one thinks they are different eggs.
If the moisture is between the skin of the veins and the white sack, if it feels well; therefore when you see to know the color of the moisture, apply experimentation thoroughly throughout the affected area, which explains why the shape was as before. After this examination, judge what lies within.
After this examination, judge what lies within. And when we cure it with iron, one must ensure that the patient is as healthy as possible and adequately nourished in their body; then place them on their back onto something slightly elevated, and put a lot of cloths underneath.
Then lift up his left side, and command the minister to lie on his right, extending the rod to one of the two ribs near the head of the collarbone;
Then take the surgical thread and cut the skin near them along the length up to the wrists, making an incision straight through until the white membrane is reached, carefully excising according to where power permits.
Then make the membrane entirely permeable to water with one wide incision and drain all the fluid, then place your fingers, extending the membrane forward. Do not touch the heads of the ribs, but only the membrane itself; cut it or in pieces carefully so that you do not perform a thorough cut, lest the fluid returns;
And if the joint springs out during your work, when you have completed the surgery on this side; then join the two sides of the collarbone with a stitch, and treat it as other wounds until they are healed.
And if you find the joint affected by another disease, it is necessary to tie off the vessels that are dilated, checking for blood loss; then cut the collarbone at its entire length and extract the joint as we have said.
And if the bone is joined in two parts together, know that these are two branches; cut the other part as you have done with the first equally, then drain the blood and place a soft linen cloth soaked in rose oil on the wound.
And place other fine cloth in wine and oil, and put on the two layers, and above doubled fabrics, with linen tied under all as per this pattern.
Then take two pieces of fabric, and cut them into shreds of fine cloth as shown here and are sewn together at the girdle of the trousers, with one head reaching down to the back and the other to the lower elbow; then both heads over the arms' crooks, and all assembled is stitched through in the belt loop of the braier.
And never is this medicine of fire-cauterization used in place of iron tawing, and it requires you to use a fine cauterizing scalpel, and prepare the leather of the cuirasses, and soak them as we have said before, that the white lye containing water is exposed;
If you take the fire cautery according to this method, and pierce that with sphacels in the joints, and the scraping is done by this subtle hot cautery.
And the healing in all ways that you can, as long as you scrape everything off; and ensure that the fire does not touch the fat; and know that this work is more beneficial; and be mindful of proper blood flow, and avoid any complications from cutting.
And if nothing else happens that is contrary to this, or an abscess forms or blood flow changes or something else, then treat what goes against it, as stated before.
If the patient is fearful and does not wish to wait for this procedure due to its horrifying nature, then arrange a perforation as I have instructed, when you are well assured by the meanings we have mentioned that resetting is necessary.
If you find the patient seated on a raised seat; then make an incision at the site of the abscess below all the surrounding flesh, and insert the perforation through the entire length of the body; ensure that the wound is wide enough so water flows freely.
Then place a compress on it and bandage it up to allow the remaining water to drain off, then dress the wound until it is healed.
If the blanchetail bandage does not allow water to escape from the wound's mouth, it is necessary that you insert a straw or instrument as used in treating hydrops, thus enscribing; and dilate slightly the wound so that water returns, and heals after 6-8 months, and when assembled as before, then the patient will pass through their days.
From an abscess of glands
It is known that in the section of this root there are various dissections causing fear and distress, so it seems best to leave it alone.
And I will tell you the work and nature of an abscess.
But I say that many abscesses come from the body, especially in the knee joints, and this is due to numerous cases.
This means it is because of excessive bitterness and ague that has spread in the joints, or from impacts.
so e s it is not d.
And sometimes it is a particularly frightening and painful abscess, with fiery red color, never coming from our artery or vein swelling.
When it is from us by an artery, it is known by the hot condition of the abscess when pressed with your hands. and nothing should be touched there.
by anytzie Line; If it the n're ou me; if you cont �stire bon t.
And one can properly make an incision at this site or on other parts. and is to cut the sinew of the joint, then stretch it upward, and treat the white fascia, releasing all attachments from the entirety of the sinew.
If the joint is already loose and these bands have formed, then it is necessary that you treat the sinew and cut.
If it is arisen in the face or within the vessels, one must completely clear that area and roundly cover it.
And if the birth of a child is at or behind there, one must encompass it fully and extract the afterbirth as we have said.
And when your operations are complete, dress the wound with fine cloth soaked in rose oil and wine, then attend to other remedies until it is healed.
If I; The old. Do not ca: f (st et les tous la:fle t ; they: c
This is an abscess surrounded by a wrapping similar to a swelling, with the softening of tissues, and it moves sharply when touched;
and the treatment of this disease is just as fearsome as this one before,
Et always we will tell you the method for it, as the ancients did.
It is necessary that you have the patient sit on a seat elevated, then tie the suspensory of the knees below your ankles. 
Then cut with a sharp scalpel through the place where the vessels lie, until they are exposed.
and then scrape from each side, as we have mentioned in the extraction of arteries that are in temples;
then insert a needle where there is one, with a double thread, and tie it at the first place where the vein has come to light, and securely fasten it at the other end. that he: faliz armes que le t.
Then treat the wound as with other wounds caused by burns, so that none of the vessels swell up and break one of the joints.
For by this there is no harm, and when all vessels come into view, it is necessary to drain the joints of all fluids. if the bone has lost its vitality due to the incision of vessels, and it becomes dry and cannot be helped.
From the nature of its use The remedies for this condition are by the incision that occurs from a blow or stretching over the abdomen in the area of the arms, causing the intestines to protrude through that rupture towards one of the limbs.
and this rupture is either from a blow or tension, and these two ways occur from many causes: from impact, or jumping, or roaring, or lifting heavy weight, and other similar things.
the b a certain et heus; If youtile t ils punge que o me; if they:  (prince la C. And they are equal abscesses reaching to the source, because the spleen hastens the intestines.
When the signs appear as though it is of a severed sphincter, it causes sudden pain at the beginning and various abscesses appearing from under the skin, due to issues with the intestine and the body near the recently severed sphincter.
And never are the winds with the intestines, and they become lodged inside, causing great pain for the patient, especially when pressed.
In these treatments of iron that cause fear, it is necessary to excrete them.
The manner of the treatment is to command the patient that he reset the intestines back into place with his hands within the wound if possible. Then let them be bound above their neck between your hands, and lift the hindquarters.
Then let them lie on their backs, and cover the entire body with linen cloths; Then insert into the ribs of the waist hooks according to what you need to open the wound, and they are such that the bones can come out.
Then scrape off the fascia which is from under the skin of the calves, as long as the white fascia remains uncovered on all sides.
Then insert your index finger in such a way that it follows the calf, between the white fascia which is from under the skin of the shin, and between the second fascia.
s s the cce ones. And commands to the minister that he stretch out the wing upwards, and unbind what is behind the joint.
And if you find any intestines wrapped around or hardened scirrhus, and if you discover anything of this sort, then cut above the stomach.
Then take a needle or thread made of nine strands, and cut into the hardened part behind it, which is after the hide of the thighs; then cut the nerves that appear among the threads until there are four strands. the s and m fn lasd. Then wrap the heads of the children and form them into two parts so that none of the animals feeding on them can enter through it, without any abscess occurring. And place the ligature according to the first ligature, and after these two ligatures leave out the sack which is outside near the crown of the joints, about an inch wide.
And then the other according to the radius that the eye carries; then cut into the part which is outside the skin of the joints, without cutting too much and the bow, as we have said before.
Then prepare a linen cloth with oil, and apply it to wounds, and then bind as we have said. And never is the facial gland cauterized as we have said, after incising, due to concern about blood loss.
For this often happens and leaves the bandage until it heals by itself; and if it is delayed in falling off, apply warm water as we have said, until it falls off.
5 of 1; the m (and they g:
Of hernia of fleshly growth
In this treatment, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the cure with iron.
And the ancients said that it is done as if the treatment were like a screw coming together with the threads, after threading lightly from top to bottom.
it the firstly, and be:
At no time does it bring out the kidnecks, as we have said, and open the eyes; and they do not release any of the internal organs into the joints, and if they do, it is little, and everything returns within hours.
And always, if it remains too long in this place, he believes the wound or abscess forms, until the internal organs are released.
And this occurs by the extension of that abscess which is in the joints, as we have said, because it is extended, then it softens and enlarges the eyes and opens them.
And the treatment is by fire as we have previously mentioned; and it has been treated with iron in this manner:
And the patient lies on their back between your hands, then clip the edge of the swollen wound to a width according to the quantity of three fingers;
and then extract the sack that is from under the skin, then take a stitching needle and insert it into the visible part of the sack;
u:
Then extract the head of the artery and do not cover it with a sack or extend the wound or anything else, as I have shown you in the treatment of inguinal hernia.
And then treat by treating wounds. And when you bandage the wound, if it becomes infected and heal the wound until it is healthy.
The abscess is restricted and does not appear during examination, and the cauldrons are more effective in this place, closer to recovery.
From softening of the skin around the joints
Many times the skin around the joints is softened in some men because the cartilage within them is also softened, and it appears milky; and when one wants to treat this, make the patient lie on their back with the affected area exposed, and cut off the mollified skin from the natural skin; then sew together the two edges into a single stitch, and if you see any excess mollified skin, do so at three or four sturdy sutures; then close between the sutures as you would with other wounds, until it is healed, and let the thread come out.
From softening of the joints
Dislocations occur in our law and for this reason I do not wish to speak of it in this book; however, there are two reasons why it is necessary: one that the surgeon should respond when asked about dislocation and its treatment, and another because we often need to dislocate certain animals to aid us, such as goats, sheep, harts, and other beasts. Therefore, I say that dislocations are done in two ways: by attraction or by fracture. In the case of dislocation by attraction, one should seat the animal in warm water until its joints become soft and pliable; then grip them with your hand, making sure they return to their place and you no longer feel them.  For the treatment of dislocation: it is necessary that you hold the animal, press the skin near its joints with your left hand, then tie a bandage, and cover each eye after having properly scraped them; also leave no small or subtle spot on the belly; this method of dislocation is similar to the one by attraction, because at times nothing may be felt from the joint during attraction, which makes the animal desire mating; then treat the wound until it is healed.
Hermaphrodites are those who possess both male and female sexual characteristics.
the joints: heel the s and more often dislocation iste to a t.
From tension and strain
Tentigene is a growth that protrudes from the body in a way that is too unsightly to look at; and many women have it as large as one hand, and this requires treatment. You must trim the excess of tentigene on your hands or wrists lightly, without going too deep so that bleeding does not occur, then cure with another treatment until it heals completely; and for a growth found at the mouth of the gums, cheeks, and possibly falls out easily, and is like the appearance of a pimple. This was called by the ancients "maladie kowee". If you need to treat it, do so as we have described with tentigeen, and cure until it heals completely.
too shall beco for la; et se, ould on l’s avgite le pere ce que est les ranc:
If ectopic is when the nature of woman's body is not pierced and the opening is small; it is natural by birth or due to illness coming about, or by childbirth being hindered or subtil sigh or spasm, and it occurs mainly in the womb, ribs, neck, or elsewhere; and it prevents conception, pregnancy, and sometimes fruiting. Recognition of this is by observation of swelling. If it appears near the ears, attend to one or both sides. If it is a subtil sigh, and it occurs on two sides, act quickly, and place them like so: have the woman lie on her back with legs apart; then stretch out both hands fully until the subtil sigh subsides, and cover over the swelling. Then take wool and grease in oil, and apply to the area, gently massaging from one side to the other each day, enscribing a path for it not to heal too soon; then cleanse with herbs as needed. And if the sigh is hard and persistent, you must use a spatula resembling a foil of myrtle leaves. If ectopic pregnancy occurs through injury or trauma, suspend the woman on one side and cover it; also prepare medicines with healing properties like dragon's blood, frankincense, incense, mixed generously with oil; then apply a wide cloth so that the wound cannot close too quickly; keep doing this until well-healed. Then treat with other remedeas until healthy again. And when ectopic occurs through injury, it should be treated in this manner unless there are growing abscesses or inflammations.
For hemorrhoids: use wool soaked in wine and apply to the area; then rub with a mixture of frankincense, myrrh, and rosin mixed generously with oil; keep doing this until well-healed.
.
From abscesses of the arm
There are various ways in which boils come about in the arm, such as chancres and pus-filled abscesse, herpes, erysipelas, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot boils, along with other maladies I have mentioned in the division. Therefore, I must tell you hereabouts on this treatise about the hot boil that comes in the arm, which is not among those that coalesce into a mass; observe whether the boil is beginning to show signs of heat and fever, and if it turns red when seen. Do not rush to cut open, but let the pain be relieved first; then make the patient sit on a stool with two small supports they can lean against, placing their feet apart from each other, resting their backs, and assembling their legs where the limb is lacking; spread their thighs wide, place arms under their hips, well bound together. Then give them something to drink towards the right side of the chest, and arrange the instrument used for working within the mouth of the boil, after which comes the shape; when you see it necessary to use this instrument, insert a probe first in order to determine the depth of the boil so that whatever enters from the instrument does not go further than required, and does not hurt the patient. If the swelling is larger, cover the depth of the boil with gauze so that the swelling does not be harmed; place the nozzle above, and color the instrument. And when the boil opens, if it requires squeezing by hand, cover the head with a towel, and then apply tents made from moistened cloths in oil or dried green olive oil; put a thick tent on the wound near the root of the arm and along both sides. After two days of applying this ointment when it is ready, until healed completely; do not ever lift up the arm or the wound by using an enema with water and honey mixed, nor with water or boiled lily roots or aristologus long enough cooked; then resume oiling. And if the wound reopens in the arm, guard against applying heat, but care for it as I have mentioned before in that division.
by:d: ; (O.
Firstly, the mother must know the natural appearance of childbirth and the signs when a woman urgently feels the need to expel waste, and desires to smell her arse; then quickly understand that the childbirth is according to the natural figure, and the issue comes from its head, with the second one alongside it. When you see these signs, lightly press her belly so the child can be born soon; for when it moves down towards the head, there will also be the second one, and the feces in her bowels are removed well by good cleanlinableness; and those who come otherwise do not arrive naturally. Because they sometimes come on their feet, or to the body or the hands, as it comes to her belly, or suddenly, and is turned perhaps onto her neck, and through other malicious figures; thus at the birth there must be wise and subtle in these things, and free from error and deceit, and I will show you all the figures of how one should help.
If the child comes down from its head naturally and the woman gives birth vigorously, and her strength is weak, then she should sit on a stool or be held by women; and let nature's oil or fenugreek be cooked, and afterwards place the balm between her thighs where it forms the small suppository as follows. lament de quide le f, sien; la ego, tout cele: ils tret:
From the dislocation of a child on its feet When a child comes onto their feet, they should be pushed upwards. and then turn them slightly and slightly, until evenly aligned.
by, in his is not to;
If it reaches as far as the knees, then instruct to press, and the condition is to induce sneezing. If it rises further, if God wills so.
And if it does not rise as we have said, if you turn it a little and a little, until it is according to the natural shape. let them they ne f so that de.
If it does not come back as we have said, take a mixture of musk, high-quality oil for massage, molten resin, and grind all into one mortar. And apply to the affected area with this preparation made from musk, fine oil, molten resin, and ground mixture. Then let her sit in warm water until it reaches just below the ribs.
byr: Then have the child sit on a chair, then make it sneeze and tighten its mouth and nose, and gently press the belly, for now the baby is urinating. From the exit of the child through his thighs When the child comes in this form, then the healer places with his hands little by little.
* s forme: that th revirable: It is necessary to engineer returning the hand: If it cannot be returned, lift the woman and go.
If she cannot stand, let her lie on a bed with legs raised straight out.
the ecrit, and to la.
If it does not give birth, make her sit on a chair, then examine for resetting the hand. And you will feed the child according to its natural shape, and make it sneequire ask that she pig until the child grows up strong.
And at its of its endes and then heal de the sante quittez ce que les enfants soie li it makes his est desoient. It is necessary for the bailiff to dye his hand, then turn it slightly and gently wash it.
And when evenly, place the musk-like substance of wax and oil as we have said, then instruct it to move slightly.
And once you have done this, if she sits on a seat, and command her to burp; then the woman will belch. they do:  t (e lesse JJosa recorce que he may not d ; b'i; the same in the last.
they do:  t (e lesse JJosa recorce que he may not d ; b'i; the same in the last. When it arrives this way to your second finger, bandage the nail until the moisture is dried.
and if there is a swelling on its face and neck, bandage the bulge so it is not retained, allowing movement.
then insert the child back in place as required, and instruct the woman not to strain herself at any time.
From the release of the sinews One sees that many times sinews are born; and never in one birth are three or four. And this is not a strange thing, it rarely happens. Two are strange things, and they do not live long, if at all.
thet:
Et souvent il en sort aussi naturellement comme une touche de sus, ainsi que nous l'avons dit.
And if they come out with a sharp jerk, as we have said for treatment, and let the skilled physician do it swiftly and gently. And perform so that it brings him good health. by far ne la C's cermma bon; sigh the n'est ovaut:
by far ne la C's cermma bon; sigh the n'est ovaut: Never formed in the marrow: i, ii, iii, iv, v, vi, vii, and so on up to xv, all shaped into child form by the measurement with the gloriously skilled saw.
And it is proper that the physician discerns all this: for sometimes similar events occur to him; If he does accordingly as what should be done.
From a dead child
When you treat a woman who has suffered the death of her child or fetus, as I have described in the previous section, and there is no bleeding, but requires treatment by hand. if it becomes necessary to know whether the woman is of sound mind, and has not had an incident or fears death;
:
And the minister takes a small part which is attached to the bed so that it may be treated at the descent of the child.
Then rub the mouth of the dislocation with oil from fresh herbs mixed with almond and fenugreek seeds, then anoint the bone with these oils and mixtures. Then gently push in the dislocation, then apply heat to it or whatever is suitable for binding it together.
and be cautious if the child's skull appears thin that he does not sink under his head. at; (re, but; the same.
And if it is upon fingers or knuckles, if you break or prick them and their middle ribs.
and it is proper that you dip the yarn with your right hand, place the spindle between your thumbs of your left hand, and gently press all together, then fix the yarn in any one of those places we have mentioned until it comes to the emptied thing.
Then position against another hook or any other that you may need, so that the extractions are equal.
and then extend them equally by moving from one side to the other, for movement to occur; the hooks should be sharpened so as to hold, just like this form.
And if any part remains, then anoint the limb with oil from one of its joints and pour it into that part, and treat the other part.
And if there is none of these remedies available or higher up the location, then place this bandage and do so until it comes off by itself.
And: if you de les c a plus that heu, on est-b, and the ou iste part le ce quis li; If it is necessary, you must wrap around a cloth so completely that it covers entirely.
then bind in the joint of the foot or calf, and so you must do on the other hand, with two feet.
And if the child's head is large and it protrudes at birth or has its skull fused together, If it is necessary to push the spatula-like splinter between your two fingers, and then hold the head and extract the water. or you return it to the instrument called "almidasch," from which the shape comes with tissues or paste that follow this.
and thus, make sure the child also has a naturally large head. est he pas; ſt s that de la bave them that est le p; then; The final, but no f. In such as bon theym pleujz; and other theta ; if a m: d with the same.
When the head of the shoulder jumps back into place under force, it may need to be split until the moisture that caused its departure is released.
And if they cannot escape, you must cut it into pieces as you pull at intervals that you choose.
If it is swoln on the belly or below the ribs, it is necessary to pierce until the moisture passes through.
And if the child is on its feet, there is a slight pull, and the direction to the mouth of the anus is light.
If it is difficult to reach within the abdomen or udder, one must stretch with a bandage wrapped around by hand. et create a swelling in the belly or udder until the moisture present is dried up.
and if other members are affected with bone growth, causing the neck to remain fixed. then cut the bandage from the beginning of the knuckle and pull it all the way to the base of the knuckle. so, or s, and est, and moe t;
When the mouth of the muscle is retracted by an abscess that has arisen there, do not need to struggle. Then you must administer moist and fatty substances; And apply ointments that are powerful, as well as cuts in water soothing and softening.
And if the child is on his side, and you can put him right-side up, then treat as we have said in a living child;
the met:
And when you have done this, if there are abscesses as we have mentioned come to the bone, then
and if bleeding occurs, it should be treated with tight bandaging, along with other remedies.
And I saw a woman whose child in her womb had died; then another was conceived above it, and the other one that had died came out again. d; 9 as much is then:tin the context by the said.
I was called to treat it, and I pondered for long time, but could not heal the wound.
I applied a strong attracting plaster, and after some days another bone protruded. I was very puzzled because it had no bones inside.
by a.
When I examine the wound and touch the bone with my hands, until the woman is at a better stage. thus waited the woman for long periods in this manner, and then was somewhat able to move from there;
and I have never recorded this chapter for the reason that when masters encounter strange matters, they know how to apply aid.
it; sulée the patient;
After this comes the form of pressure, where one inserts books; and with two turns at two heads of the two ligaments. In any case, let the horns be more subtle for restriction, and make them from board or boxwood.
and make the mouth of the rod two fingers wide, and the edge of the trees one finger thick, and long half a palm. ; d'ulos.
And these two dislocations are placed at the joint of the elbow to open when turning both corners.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in its appearance, is made of plane wood or boxwood as per the resemblance of pincers. And it has two heads, two joints, as you see, one palm long, and two hands wide;
and when you see the matrix open to the full instrument, make the woman sit on a bed, feet apart and legs spread. then place the two joints close together in the matrix, and hold the instrument's head below between her thighs. Then work your hand with all the instruments, just as you did with the pliers evenly, according to the quantity that you see open the mouth of the barley, until the patient achieves what they want.
These instruments are all made of iron and have various appearances; and when the master has prepared them, their work is much faster, and higher in value for their quantity.
Do not neglect an instrument that you have not prepared, because its necessity is not excusable.
When the second toe is caught during childbirth, one must instruct the patient to retract her thumb, and then blow through the nostrils, and restrain the hands on the mouth and nose. And if she can do so, well done.
If not possible, take a pot and make a straw or lid, and place therein herbs that may open the mouth of the mare, such as chamomile, rue, anise, lemon balm, chicory, and dandelion.
All these herbs, whether any of them, are cooked or boiled in water over fire; then put a cage or lid on the pot, and the other end into the mouth of the spout.
and let it steam until the vapors enter the spout; then induce sneezing, as we have said. If he suffers from a relapse of the swelling promptly. If after this treatment it remains and is not healed, as instructed to the patient's maidservant that she anoint her left hand with oil of unguent or high-quality musk, and then place it back in its natural state.
And whoever finds the splint; and when she has located it, gently press and extend it gradually, so that the bone does not protrude during removal. But she must move it lightly to the right and left, then rub; soon it will come out and separate.
And if the mouth of the gland is stretched out, we have said the remedy to sneeze and smoke from the herbs.
If it is not of all this which we have said, ensure you do not err on either side.
But it is necessary that what is in the mouth of the mule, to tie it to the woman's thigh, then enema-cleanse with fourfold medicine.
If the protrusion is reinserted and arises again, but nevertheless, when it comes out so there is a foul smell in the stomach and head, and the patient vomits.
Therefore one should use incense for this: none of the old have tried the smoke incense of dried sorrel and figs.
The form of the instrument used for smoking the woman to retain bloom and vitality is as follows:
the t. (t- ould by this *? This line; <cite;
And it is the fumigation upon the charcoals, and the scab until it is consumed, and begin anew another.
Of piercing the foundation
Children are born who do not have the foundation pierced but instead have a subtle and delicate spout: Thus it is required of the bather that he pierce the delicate spout at its proper place, and not with a rough probe, and ensure the packing does not touch.
Then place a cloth soaked in wine and oil upon it, then apply anointing until healed.
And if you doubt it does not stay in place, then apply a ligature of flax and leave it bound for days, and remove when the child wishes to move freely.
And at no time come these swellings from the healing of a wound or an abscess; if it is necessary to treat such swelling: apply as we have said with flax ligature.
C. Fistulas that come from below the foundation are inflammation and growth which occur near the foundation below or within a space of two parts.
If from one fistula or more; and when that inflammebrink is old, work it, and bring in moisture so that the swelling becomes pale or subtle bulge,
and these fistulas are not present at all times; they can be known by whether the patient has an evacuation or windsor when the patient expels waste, and occasionally in a sudden leap of some kind.
And if there are fistulas that run down to the bladder, and up to the middle of the penis; and they reach the hip joint, and to our knees.
And thus one finds the fistula draining at the base, but not bleeding. And it is that you insert your index or thumb at the base, and stick a fine needle of silver or iron into the fistula when there is no curvature.
by the cont so
And if you do not feel it moving, nor any efflux or windiness as we have said. But if it does not puncture, then hurry with the cautery.
The you done. And the best duce of the doite lese is not fist vous se does to ce que you made it.
If it is pierced up to the hip joint, so comes the testicle nearing its place. If there is no twisting and the inception of pain within, then it remains thus bent, and neither medicine nor salve with ointment helps.
the ou not:E (b ça se le t. Do;
In those who are neither cowardly nor ancient, with hope of healing through iron, as I have tested.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and you lift their legs up to their thighs, with their thighs inclined towards their stomach: sofad: The sky istues they it; don’ti’prost the lignistes le tree that chestir la: ivoir lesle ke luge et s as to ses themde bon se, and heuccor ils quat.
If the patient feels pain around the wrist joint, it is necessary to bend your index finger.
Sometimes you may feel a tingling; and if it is exposed or between your thumbs or palm, then know that they are numb. If it cannot be moved without pain.
by the ecorserdroit.
And as for where it is done, you must warm the cautery subtly according to the width of the abscess, as previously mentioned. And the entire cautery becomes hot in the abscess until it approaches the base; and make this two or three times, as long as you know these reshaped parts have settled down, which are like a bird's feather.
And heal, until they have shar ce; and the bles are all is aillements.
If it is thus sound, it is well. But if not, there can be no other healing;
And if he tries between them and does not penetrate to the bone at the base, and place a thick covering of leather or cloth between your thumbs until you see the fistula through which the covering puckers. If you sew the beginning of the fistula and pull it tight before the tent, then apply the cauterization afterwards until it reaches the end of the wound.
l's:
If blood is lost, and it cuts between you and your work, then cauterize with fire or medicinal herbs.
For the fire cautery brings together two things: that is to say, the aridity of those joints dislocated and the clotting of blood as well as drying up the moisture.
Then treat torn tendons with grease or chew bread until the joint oozes fluid, and hold it so that the dislocated joints are secured in place.
Then treat a wound caused by sudden burns due to hardening of the skin and use drying remedies.
When it is restored, then it heals and does not return again.
And if a fistula comes near to the very beginning of its root, and is removed from the body, then give it an hour or two before inquiring further.
If you feel the tentacle and between two are the towel or syphilis or scrofulous boils, or it is close to being punctured, there should only be trust in faith and hope, through the ministration of one of the three methods:
no soft. Do you:grd the s :
And do not go too deep into it, so that you may cover the thing holding the foundation, and let evacuations come by their natural inclination. Then treat it as we have said;
Then treat it as we have said; If by chance it becomes clear, or you remove the covering and cleanse after it has been cleansed near the foundation, or with tenting or another prepared instrument. by*trafront.
Then study how to repair the wound, and hold the fistula in place behind the foundation; if it were an easier matter for the patient.
And never are fistulas in this manner: and when you probe the tent within the fistula, and it is close to the foundation under the skin above. if take a probing needle according to this method at the top: the marole ce est, so that:
If it is pierced near the margin of the foundation inside, then extract the thread from that tunnel; thus insert your finger or foundation.
and treat the head of the thread, and join both heads together, securing one to the other, and leave it for one or two days;
and do not loosen until the threads have fully closed over the bones that are between them.
Then treat the wound until it is properly healed and cleansed.
If the abscess does not burst, then pierce it in every way that you can, if it is not too deep.
que est les t; If he est thems and ce ; by the de bon:t quel m:
The form of the spatulaceous splinter causing an abscess is very sharp and pointed; On one hand not, for it is as if what should not be touched cannot be touched, just as you see here:
In many ways: some are within the foundation, like resin dust, and there are small ones as well as large, and inwardly blood. and some or many, which displace the foundation and to the top of the foundation; but those that are displaced have little moisture.
and inwardly there is or a bit of yellow water or a bit of blood, and they have the color of the body;
And the treatment for those with them within the foundation, so instruct the patient to strain themselves to go to chambers, until their foundations are firmly set and the children appear. If you act too hastily, and place pincers on it where you hold by your fingernail, then grasp its roots.
And if the pincers cannot hold it due to its moisture, then use thread or cotton, or a piece of camlet cloth. And extract your toes, then wrap them, and apply with warm heated powders that are in place of fire cautery. Or you may cauterize as the treatise directs or by means of fire cautery, then heal with other remedies until healthy.
And if the foundation cannot be expelled, then enema-cure the patient with an irritating and sharp cleansing for that which is at the base to allow it to exit freely.
When patients complain, and if their threads are strongly rooted at the foundation, then the remedy is easy. And that you pluck them with your tweezers or pliers, and cut the threads, then treat as we have said, until they are sound, and he fears cutting by iron.
If it is necessary to stitch according to this manner: take a twisted thread and put it on a needle, then pull the thread through from above and pierce the needle on the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread away from the eye of the neede... the t and that by their (line s c. This is not ; but.
Then place on the foundation a cloth of wool in oil-rose or cerate, and apply to the foundation, and instruct the patient that he rests.
Then leave it to fall off, and when they are shed, then treat with ointment and other remede until healed.
In the firmness of bones or foundation ; c and la ane tous;ll:le t; O; Marlette line le phlique.
If it is necessary to scrape at the edge of an abrasion or under a fingernail, which does not allow for moistening. then treat until it is sufficiently softened as needed.
and if it cannot be softened, resume the scraping more vigorably than before, until it becomes sufficiently moisturized, and can be scarified. Andres; that t c. After, as de la; Vigne il se;t, nor a peu Le'sarn's to.
By a sudden movement Mites are small creatures frequently found on the body, mostly everywhere.
and at no time does it cause coldness, but feels just like deadly fear, and spreads throughout the entire body, particularly more in the hands than elsewhere.
byt. Then turn your hand to the whole arm until you grasp it entirely within the trembling, and place it straight, and strengthen the trembling at its roots.
And if you see, make a chain of iron or steel in this form, and let it be subtle from below and traverse above.
Do not feel it piercing or pressing on both sides, and if you see, cauterize the trembling as it is before or with a fire cautery.
s At no time is an enema made of silver or lead, or molten wax or soft clay; and at no time are small and large suppositories prepared according to the substances they are imbued with.
Therefore, those which in the treatment of children and who are weak and sorrowful, are small.
The form of the enema, whether small or large, is above wide, or the abdomen tied according to this manner:
And it has an eversion or the belly is twisted, as you see, and the head pierced within; and on one side two openings, and on the other two.
And the belly or limb is treated with medicines from a bladder of beast or parchment, and it is pierced entirely through small openings.
And between each opening there should be a space, then insert into these openings a strong thread of twisted wire, and gather the belly as if it were a goatskin; When the medicine is inside, take it out with a strong thread, then enema; and this is the circular form.
And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head of the enema with oil or butter from egg yolk, or similar substance, then pour it in gently.
then the minister grasps it with both hands together until fully filled, then extracts the enema, and lifts the patient's legs towards his chest.
isnt cefe l’ quele f.
And if you administer the enema in illness of bowel discharge, and the medicines hasten to leave, so that it recurrences until they are healthy again.
And if hemorrhoids or an abscess exist, then administer the enema as subtly as for a child;
and this is the shape of the subtle enema by which the bowel is restrained.
Of wounds
In the section on wound treatment that we have already discussed, now we shall speak of hand and foot care, according to their completion.
I say that wounds are diverse depending on what they are made of and from which parts or how they are made, and for what reason they are made.
the do what they ne les est and were.
When they are made according to the laws of the body, such as a wound that bleeds from the neck, or the head, or the thighs, or the abdomen, or the liver, and similar limbs.
And I shall tell you the treatment for each wound, and begin with simple head wounds, for memory will come to its place.
I say that when a simple head wound comes and the bone is not broken, be careful if it's from the fall of stones or similar things, and the skin is entirely torn and the wounds are large. If you gently question an abscess: if it is quickly healed from the head mainly when blood comes from the wound, and be on the opposite side of the affected part.
And for the patient's discomfort, provide a replenishment of wine and hearty meats.
And if they do not want to be healed, let their meat be reduced, and drink no wine nor eat any flesh.
que s'gaulttiguments t the bacq. Ch.
If there is no abscess, apply it to the wound if it is fresh with all its blood and has not moved due to air or dust, which I will say a little later.
If the arrow has moved, apply some ointment until it is healed.
And if the wound is large like a sword cut and appears so that the lips cannot come together by themselves, then join them with stitches, just as I will say for abdominal wounds, of the suture.
If the wound is exposed to bone and raw, and holds only slightly with dressing, then cover it; next treat the wound with medicines, and restore hard durable skin in its place. Instruct the patient to eat hearty meats, as tested with cooked wheat and eggs, also similar things.
And if you find or suspect putrefaction, and there is no connection to the bone, dress it completely, then rinse out thoroughly, and treat.
and if it has an artery in the wound or vein without a cord, which cannot be tied off by medicines, so you must tie the artery, and if you find it dislocated, bind it with a thread. and if this does not help, then causticate (cause to burn).
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is light: you must put on this powder which has salt, so that it may move (the artery) with heat.
And the manner of the powder is as follows: take incense one part; blood of dragon two parts; live coal three parts, and grind finely. And apply the powder to the wound, and form a paste, until it dries well and reconnects with all its blood.
And then seal it well, and let it dry without flaking off unless it swells up; because the medicine is not removed until it has healed completely.
;t and her.
And if the arrow has moved the wound, especially within it, do not put any other powder in this.
But apply some digested ointments or ground wheat flour mixed with water and honey, until it boils. Then treat with other remedangs until he is healthy again.
that t�te the are they ul:s none to see pas; they c, so by a and bjamber. This (c.
And I will tell you hereafter about fractures of the head.
Of the wound on the neck.
The sores are similar to this one of these cuts thereupon the neck; but it is not have any difference between them wound and also la coups d’est heal up with fire.
If it is the veins, there is no other remedy but to let them heal naturally, and not place anything constricting on them, for this harms the veins and makes them recede. and do not apply anything cold to the wound, for the essence of the veins is cold, and their extension with them lies above the brain, which is the highest part of the body.
but let the medicines be used as boiled in soft water, and mixed with rose oil, and cooked again in soft water. And other bones of the body according to this manner, with moist unguents.
The wound is large, you must stitch it up then bandage and care for it until healed.
And if wounds are deep and swoln with pus, pierce it or go lower.
And if the vein is cut, and signs of bleeding come forth, unstop it, ligate, and cauterize as needed.
And if the vein is incised, or your eyes guard it vigilance, and keep a l'oreille; et lesseu que ke la eveu de quidir. If it comes out through the back of the throat, do not touch the throat but reset according to its natural form. And then quickly straighten it, leave for some days, then treat with washed ointments until healed.
and if the wound has pressed into the bone, you should attend to it; cannot n't. And let it be drained and aligned properly;
And if the wound is fresh, apply powder over the powder as I have mentioned. When there is bone in the wound with an accompanying fistula, treat it as I have described in its chapter.
Of the wound caused by a spear or knife
If it is a deep wound from a spear or knife, and the patient shows signs of blood loss, if you see that the injury appears fatal to the ill person: then realize when the wound is lethal.
the ou:. And returns to the body, causing the patient great pain and distress; However, apply an attractive ointment, and bind it two times a day;
And if you do not have ointment, then place a piece of cloth in the wound to absorb the moisture.
de pee ici: If there will not come a spasm or harmful shiver of the body nor any involuntary pulling. And when you see the proper alignment, know that the wound is healed. Treat with bandages and other treatments until it is well again;
should the ine aret echiere:
And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, whether simple or more severe, on the back, treat as you would before.
And if it is large, bandage; and if small, with powder, and if embedded in the bone, and there are missing pieces, cleanse the wound and treat any exposed fragments. And if not exposed, let the wound heal on its own, as long as there is no infection or inflammamoent.
by an the l’s them; C:
Disruption of the stomach opening
The disruptions of the stomach opening are large, medium, and small.
from a great wound, none ever enters the intestines or their nerves through which they may enter.
oint e:
For this is why one must reset it several times if they do not put them back immediately. for the reason that the intestines swell quickly when they feel cold, they move further inward.
and for this reason, one moves the wounded flesh, because one moves the intestines to its place among the others.
And know that there are four ways to treat a hernia:
and the two common stitches occur in the abdominal wall,
and the other type of suturing for other wounds on the body and two specific types of suturing are common for these other wounds;
a l’s like:
When a wound is small, and there is no intestinal matter involved. And various things are to be done in one of the two ways: or by the smallness of the wound, as we have said, they are not too the so that you to done:
And when it is cold, warm it in this manner: First moisten with an sponge or a piece of cloth soaked in water solely, Or boil in salted water and sliced onions and pepper. And let the intestines swell until they are sufficiently distended;
;tue by; They are t.
And when you see the swelling parted, so gently cook the intestines in water that is either high or low and unpleasant. because by this it has been weakened to little substance;
and if he cannot enter, make a small incision with the instrument used for cutting corns.
do not that:l fidon text : That no one should cut without great necessity or need.
And it is to be straightened through cutting:
If you cut into the edge and do not remove completely, then see if there are any remnants.
they is f in such as thou can be de l’s s nus il a cepis: If you reset according to its natural form in its proper place, If possible, for this is movement.
When the wound is wide and located in the lower part of the belly, s s. And he lifts his legs higher than his head; And if it is in the part below the belly,
And similarly if the hernia is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, if you ensure in this case that the affected part is higher than the other;
and thus it is proper to treat as I describe for large and medium wounds.
by.
Then have between your hands a minister of pity who trims all the hair on his hand. and brings together the lips; and this is the common way to suture;
and this is the common way to suture; And it is so you may choose a needle or more, according to the quantity of the width of the wound. Then leave space at the head of the wound - two intervals, and insert a needle with its strong thread. and pierce through both sides of the skin using the points of a feather quill.
Then stretch a double thread through both ends using pins. Then promptly join the two heads of the wound together.
butter ne ble: Then lay down the thread with a needle as you did with the first stitch. and continue doing so according to what is needed of the stitches. as long as all of the wound is closed off;
And are needles of medium size, between fine and coarse, because fine needles cleanse all the wound, while excessively large ones cannot enter well: Therefore, they must be of medium size:
And one must not insert needles too far from the bone and into the skin.
so they do not cause swelling and disturbance in the wound before the sutures.
and then trim the heads of the needles so that they do not pinch the sick person while sleeping; leet cuest que l’tough by the; oug S8e t: Et let them heal until the wound is thoroughly dried.
And this method of stitching with needles is more convenient for small wounds. For it requires a single needle or two.
the text. And it is that you join the two heads of bone with a suture and both heads together by a needle or using strong thread; and when you have pierced these four pieces together,
and when you have pierced these four pieces together, if you thread the needle in the part where you began, like sewing fabrics;
there.
This stitching is known to the person.
And I sewed a wound that someone had on his belly.
who was afflicted by a cut from a knife, the t aret est lisht so it is ons, And so it involves two great sacks of intestines,
And the wound was within the belly. and it happened that I brought it out during eleven hours.
And it was a wound bound until 15 days, and it healed, and became healthy.
And the physician judged that he would die, and it was a miracle.
and I did not treat him with any ointment because I was at a place where there were no herbs or remedebutique est venus à moi par moien de grant merueille et grant foy. And apply a piece of cloth soaked twice daily on the wound with honey water until it becomes healed.
Now I will tell you the two proper ways to stitch:
Take the needle, and thread it through to the inner part upwards.
When it has felt the head upright to right, if that is of sphenoid or costal where you have inserted the needle,
and the flesh is pierced from another side down to the inner cavity.
and the sense of this suture is that you sew as a tailor does with hairs, And leave once the sack on one side, and reposition it from another, until the stitching is entirely complete.
The second manner of stitching, as Galien properly states,
is as if any join together the two parts naturally. and heal ben que ongis.
Insert a needle or pin at the nearest sore spot, and make an incision there solely. and leave the two sides of the wound; then turn the needle, and make an incision through to the inner part. they were ite on:
Then make a cut in both the part forward until it reaches within those two hips that are opposite each other.
And this is the manner of suturing and the most common way.
Galen says this word, and no one bears witness to it.
c s': "et la mar
And one must push a needle from one side and the other, in the manner of those who sew belts.
and stitches such that when the suture is within the abdomen, if this suture is thinner than those of other parts of the belly.
it s that t; the et so do not they; it, and the o prblemme.
When you find a fresh wound bleeding profusely, as if moved by an arrow. Then reset the intestines and their opening, then apply powdered spice or herbs.
Then reset the intestines and their opening, then apply powdered spice or herbs. And if it has been moved by an arrow, then apply any available poultice until the wound heals. : Then treat the wound as you would others, until it is healed.
And if you have no medicine, then apply honey or cotton quickly, as soon as it starts to bleed. And move it twice a day until it is healed.
For you do not need any other medicines for various positions when wounds are simple;
And if you doubt whether the wound causes communication with the main members, if it is fitting that you grind linen lightly with oil of tar or rose oil, And place between the arms, and above the elbows;
If he feels pain or swelling at the joints, and often happens, And if he has black bones, and immediately bring it to him; and in a timely manner.
And it penetrates inside, and you must know that when it is the large intestines, then it is easier to heal than the small ones.
The intestine called "jejunum" cannot be healed when it is inflamed. and this is because of the weakness of his veins, and due to the delicacy of his entire body, and the close relationship of his constitution with nerves.
they so t: the following:   -zard. Do not mark by:le: M. our history, but also: a ile. If you give lines.
If it is old and has turned or blackened, then one must remove the discolored area to prevent bleeding. because there are veins and arteries present.
then cover that which is between the sinew, Et mettez les deux écus suspendus de la partie en dessous la plaie jusqu'à y suffisamment pour alléger l'extraction quand les tiges tombent, et le plaie bouge.
From the direction of the boil.
When the intestines are bloated, and the wound is small, et queme t; (th: and de la ou S1. Do not m: ca:
Because I saw a man troubled by an arrow through his belly.
And it was the wound on the right side of the abdomen, and was inflamed and became a fistula, with it causing ejection and windiness;
the oum fornte pe vite to la;
And when I saw it swell up, I doubted that the patient had pain in his stomach. and there was no harm, but he remained in worse conditions, eating and drinking;
and the testers said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be bound up thusly: and sofex ist. Do yout as he; And t m'm on: When the patient exhibits excessive heat from the mouth, place it between the two lips.
Then apply another heating method as before, until the wound is completely surprised (healed).
And cut the wound. That dislocated bone may affect the intestines, and does not cause any harm to the patient,
n’s that:
When treating thusly: Take the head of this intestine that is thoroughly cleaned, And then attach to the head of this intestine a fine twisted flax thread, Then thread the needle with thread, and stitch the intestines, and suture the limb at the incision.
And this method of frantic sewing is not contrary to the path of trust and hope;
and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the internal intestines, there are no remedies nor healing, but only cunning.
of a fistula, or if it has one It is said that any wound or abscess, as it ages, should be universally called 'fistula'. and especially if it rises up and becomes pus-filled.
s not the lesin de: And it is as if plucked like a bird's feathers.
and at times with clear bow-string, and at other times thickened; at times scarce, and at other times sufficient;
do not: tt les, and le li qu'stons themes is it the bone or. It is through but one of the seven causes:
That is to say, by the smallness of the blood or body; Or due to its evilness; . When there is too much bowing. Or when it is rotten, and the material is of poor quality; Or if the medicine is not good for the treatment; by the, and healing wound medicine oll: le or ctrol and, et for s, as ugillum. Or due to the property of the area being late, digestion is slow, health is delayed, and spreads naturally. Or when there are wounds or bones:
the t s;
Or it is necessary for me to inform you of the treatment of a fistula, which is done through manual work.
Leaks occur in all limbs of the body; For there are leaks that come from large veins, arteries, and nerves, Or in the liver, or intestines, or bladder, or any of the ribs, When to the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet.
And all the fistulas that are of this kind have difficult healing, and there is only labor and ignorance involved;
 And you will examine it to know if there is a straight fistula, then take an awl made of brass or iron and so.
And if the fistula is twisted, search for a very fine awl from a lead pipe. For there may be bending near its twisted nature;
if yout. If cleansed by one of its openings,
because if moisture comes from one opening to another, and it cleanses itself:
then you should seek wisdom and power to discern if there are bones or nerves present, and they are inflamed:
And ask the patient about the pain he feels when pressing with your hand, and where it is located.
And when you know for certain the location of it, and if it's far from a joint, nerve, artery, or vein. Or in any of the veins that I have mentioned to you, if according to what I have told you.
Or in any of the veins that I have mentioned to you, if according to what I have told you. And the other bone is dislocated, with corrupted joints within it. and then the treatment until it is healed.
and when the fistula is well situated in the right place, so that you cover it entirely as much as needed. Then he applies tight bandages with medicinal powder, and wraps up to the head of the abscess.
Then he applies tight bandages with medicinal powder, and wraps up to the head of the abscess. until the medicine dissolves the excess that is lodged at the bottom.
and then he applies healing ointments with holy chalk, until it becomes cleaned.
they are they to.
When a bone is corrupted by an abscess, treat it accordingly. If veins or principal limbs are affected as we have said;
And if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, treat it until all the decayed bone has been removed. the they are t and to say:
If it is not well aligned, and returns bent as before, You must know that you shall not go beyond this point.
If it is revealed or discovered and seek to reach its depth as much as possible, byt the gue to-e and so.
If it stands thus sanely, this is well. But if not, understand that the contamination is too great, you cannot succeed there. but there is no other remedy than the bleeding by nature;
let them. If the extraction is by means of a suitable instrument such as,
and if there are many bones, do not leave any behind.
but if the dampness acts otherwise, and there is no mistake or fear, it comes on de:
If you cannot remove them within an hour, apply something stinky and putrid to the wound. and let it remain until it becomes intertwined with the bones.
then they will bear their bones more easily.
If it is a large bone, like those of the leg or thigh, if you reduce the decay so often that the blackening reaches all the bone, then restore the wound;
le t Chir Jard il est pas queme:lest so that they sond and y or; with et the main. I'll se ne bo c: ck for a ; English, as m, it; do: d (e: M: If it is necessary to sear and cover up to the decay, then heal until it is solidified.
And I shall tell you of a fistula that occurred in one's leg, if so then take example and aid in your work.
he n's; t covier les malgré the f c, so,
As long as the materials came to the leg, and there was an escape from a large abscess, with no reason for it not being opened.
but they worked so recklessly on it that they opened up the abscess too much. and there was a lot of bleeding, and it became a fistula, and so much pus came out that everyone avoided the bowel due to moisture on the body.
it; C0’l.
As long as I have been called upon, and I see his leg and the remedies with which he was treated. and what seemed to be required for its relief from great pain. and the body of the young man became red again, and had a citrus hue.
herbs is they are the puste:
And I found that one came up against the other from all parts of the leg.
Therefore, I carefully probed until I uncovered a part of the bone. and I found it to be rotten and pungent, and the decay reached the inner bone;
I saw what appeared to be of a corrupted bone, and thought there was no other corruption except that which I had removed.
And began to heal the wound with powerful herbs for long periods of time, but could not close it.
and then I resumed, and discovered the bone as before,
by: qu'fari (t.
However, I could not find it with my entire hand on the bone, and the wound was deep. Then I returned it using remedies; and it quickly became whole and strong again.
and no longer did the illness reoccur unless due to the patient's weakness who could not endure it, weist ond icrmonstra;faire ne dont he says le t s inus and iesme: For evacuating blood often caused groaning, but it was entirely cured.
For evacuating blood often caused groaning, but it was entirely cured. And in the place of the bone there emerged a hard knot, which was entirely healthy and had no detriment or harm at all, neither on approach nor arrival.
and extend the head so that you cut through the corrupted cartilage from below. Et découvrez sous le lieu où vous voyez saillir, qu'il n'ébouriffe pas les cheveux. Et placez un tampon ou une balle en dehors de l'os pour mouvoir les cheveux corrompus ; Et il faut que tu veuilles si possible voir et ressentir la corruption, et encore une fois l'examiner.
And so; (prusst ; m, for C. 1 s, that t. If you; The bone and so. This is not st/oze a ben te on the her or A – bon; an as per l's. If you expose the entire joint; then place a bundle of straw beneath it.
and then apply the remedy from one part to the other side of the decay, and let it be as long as we have said.
and if the decay is in the joint, cut away the corrupted joint, and apply it to the bone on the other side.
*
If the contusion is on the knuckle of the hand or elbow of the foot, it is a very difficult matter. But still, you must inquire about that bruise and how it appears to you. And cleanse it in all the ways you can, but let the vein or nerve not hinder you;
the ou la bout. And their thickness and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness; And therefore one must equip each type of procedure with its appropriate instrument.
and know that the work shall reveal to you the instrument which is needed, according to the knowledge of this art; ; they c:  (they’s; if you can they same, but none If you consider the instrument needed according to what is appropriate.
By fire The head aches or due to heat, or because of coldness;
When you have applied the remedy for corroding with healing by medicines, and they do not help. If it is necessary to cover that limb up to its place where the corrosion occurs, if the sick person escapes due to imminent death or illness, which is greater, from the failure of the limb.
if the sick person escapes due to imminent death or illness, which is greater, from the failure of the limb. le. Afterward, proceed with the knotting, then address the swellings of limbs from member to member. and take hold through all parts; if you hasten too much with the bandage,
and if it is due to the sting of any venomous beasts such as a sea scorpion, serpent, or similar creatures,
by the with thet; and he t so lign pleure the ploplem:
And if it reaches to the hand, secure the joint with a splint so that inflammaturgy does not reach the arm.
And if it comes to the arm, cover with a bandage; and if it passes through the bandage, then death ensues. but no remedy is effective except in relation to its potency;
the moste la b'de la. Theodore and de c as it isnt?
When it occurs on an arm or leg, cover the entire limb. And if it rises up the leg, cover the knee joint.
And if it comes above the knee joint, there's no other remedy but for the practitioner to kill the patient.
as the same. The following them: Just that line s: they what is not m the em t a peullck f (and say; Et on étend les mains de celui qui souffre la dislocation d'une extrémité vers le bas, et d'autres mains placent l'extrémité opposée vers le haut. And separate the cartilage that is between the two joints with a wide spatula until the bone is exposed.
Then cut or sew it, and place on each side a piece of linen cloth, ensuring that the suture does not touch the healthy bone. ; Doe:fe by doing so that de step.
And if bleeding occurs when you work on it, quickly cauterize there. And you apply any constricting powders; then return to your medication until it is completed.
Then tie the limb with a suitable bandage, and treat until it is healed.
And I shall tell you that such happened to one man who was simple-minded:
One night it seemed as if fire burned him.
and to the w-line byt a se bonde s patient:
When a man sees swelling, he strikes with a hot iron rod, and it becomes healthy.
And the swelling returns after long periods of time or arises from the hand, and comes to me,
I place it on things that can have an effect after body purification, and cannot cease the swelling.
et w:es t; Et I also doubted as if I were to cut off my hand, that he would not die. For the virtues of the body were weak; and it was filled with despair, returning to its own place. and took heed of cutting his hand, and became well again.
And I have not discussed further except for what one does in other cases if needed.
At no time comes an abscess at the spot, and it remains so long that it forms a large collection of pus; And then they burst and pierce, and in its flow the pus comes out, and it remains like small vessels. it the t; and they do not reach to the bone or nerve, and such illnesses are called "healed".
but if it extends so far as to the bone at its origin, then it is called "fistula";
It's. And does not move due to its corruption.
And if you have judged that the skin is darkened, and there is no infection at the core. and the skin is dry like wool, then apply the treatment of an enema thusly:
or heal; thatnnt. Et lacer par le pus to itt leu et que they iste. Then you shall use the Egyptian medicinal clyster, which is made as follows: Take saffron, and oil, and litargoyle equally, and put to cook in one vessel over the fire, until the medicines turn red and become as thick as honey;
icié: And in cleansing the sinew, tighten the passageway. and leave the medication there for two hours, then extract by pressing out.
And do this many times until the chin is fully shaped and the pore is opened.
At no time is one enemaized with water of ashes. when this medicine is not available, and you take ashes from a stick of grapevine, and pour water over them.
then boil it, and administer an enema until you are sure that the bowels are well cleansed;
it s disinq traf; bavoy:me tu: ça; and they s the are not that you see that. If the water and honey enema contains a bit of litargire, let it soak. Or if you administer the honey and mead enema, ensure that the honey has cleansing and purifying properties. and the wine will promote strength of body;
de la pepram: so youes. If from this clyster comes a stench within him,
And that thou provide an amulet of asphodelus, and make it with oil roseate and wine. or thou clysters the body with certain medicines and unguents, of whose properties I have spoken in treating unguents.
When the windfall of the breast is pierced, and air cannot enter through the bowel cleanser. If a small piece of iron protrudes, then apply a tent of Egyptian ointment. if the wound is large and fresh with blood vessels and veins running towards the head or upwards along the nerves to the ears;
If the wound is too wide, if you may leave just enough so that a clyster can enter.
And if there is an open fistula that flows with pus on the surface, place it higher or lower where you find suitable. For when the boil is ripe, do not cover it with a shirt; and so: If dislocated such that the bow moves to the lowest place where it is.
and if you cannot cover the chest without as you see. byt : And take consolidating medicines to place on the breastplate,
And stretch out a linen cloth covering the entire breastplate, Next, the more it comes forthwith force of the de drapein lessein. ici est tout lein en tient doune que li mains: draite la peine oint the ou par lein le chou qu'en les seins the lin de .i pour que lor les ceo eis a soignons les nus et le ce. Place a soothing salve on one piece of cloth according to the amount for the affected area. And apply it over the wound to soothe the pain, and do not remove the large cloth until after many days have passed once.
And those with a wound on their chest often wish to remove it, the they; if none as and so please.
And take care if the patient feels pain or numbness, and whether there is an abscess.
and when your medication has spread in such a manner that you see its effect on the surface of his chest, if you know that the breast is swelling, approach with caution.
in sofus: the pain de feuit by him tale we can be t to yout’s or herbet; sonde a mguent ket so e est lits. ougl'm li plointres la ou f. If you change another bandage, and renew the ointment.
And if the breasts become poorly digested after many days, understand that the breasts do not hurt. And if subtle poisons linger for long periods, do not despair of health,
thet they g, orlez: and sofie the in t.
If bowel inflammation occurs within the chest after many days, know that the breast does not swell.
If the breast becomes hard and is long-standing, apply with drying remedies in their nature, moist in substance and dry in virtue. if an ointment ends, because there is a significant amount of antimony in it, and that's the last remedy;
Take medicinal oil of laurel, and mix it with rose oil, and rose water equal in quantity.
Then he consumes it and uses it; and this likewise makes one more greedy when cooked with honey. When not present, medicinal oil of laurel is taken.
When you take myrrh and frankincense and incense, and grind it, and powder it with honey when placed over the fire; Then mix a cloth in it and spread it over the breast, without ever inserting an aristolochia longum. And roots of holy basil, which is like flour by weight and measure;
And roots of holy basil, which is like flour by weight and measure; the cgruz ze est il sue la t (th, for a bonniardgrids. 1 ; so far aretes by magic with t And if the wound is lengthened, and not healed by this treatment,
And if the wound is lengthened, and not healed by this treatment, Then know that the gangrene is spreading, and exerting pressure on the bones, or hard tissues, or ligaments. If it's a pus-filled wound, as we have said before.
Of the abscess of the nail
An abscess that arises from beneath the nail bed of the palm. or on the foot, or by chance it occurs elsewhere in other places;
so.  e, and is de lais; And they draw blood by cutting until it reaches the root of the nail, and sometimes they cut all the way through.
And it leads to sores reaching the bone, causing intense pain and an odorous wound, with a shoulder wider on both sides, displaying a discolored hue.
When you attempt to treat it as we have described in the section, and the treatment yields no benefit, If it is necessary to cut away from I. all excess material that has accumulated under the nail. Then cauterize the wound afterwards. The caustic is of great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is sound;
: If it is necessary to place a splint under the nail where it pricks. And bind it securely at the top, and carefully remove that nail without force or pressure. And apply medicinal substances with burning and corrosive properties to the remaining portion of the wound in order to clean it thoroughly.
And if the infection is in the bone, cutting and drilling are necessary because as long as the bone is corrupted there, it cannot heal.
and if you see the joints corrupted, then cut into them as previously mentioned. be noit is sofit byt et le ble: itle que ou lesse to se cur ould with stis de m
When it is forced out, and thrown about, causing great pain, one must first address it. Then cut the thick toenail on the big toe diagonally across.
And do not cut to the nails, and it is too long, as you would like this painful:
If this occurs, place something above to soothe.
The joints that are located in some men's hands by chance are all fleshy, it s, as thatnz est l’est he ne ce que they do not de la wight, or;
And none of these arise at the root of the joint, where the birth is in some of our limbs. The one born at any of our joints does not move. est and they is the armient il pasme:
The size of one who is fleshy is easily changed in this manner: Measure it at the root with a wide span.
He who is born in the root of the joint is difficult to treat: then hold them tightly together.
ite do not ce te le blede li de the f they are unt les bone: Then stabilize the bone with an appropriate bandage, then treat it until it is healthy again.
The dislocations that come with the joint uniting occur by birth, or from wound healing, or by burning, or similar things.
If it is necessary to treat that dislocation, so that the joint returns according to its natural shapes; if not the. Between two pieces of fine lead, until the joint is fixed as it should be.
If dislocations occur in any of its two parts with the palm, cover that swelling as needed.
Of illnesses
and other et that:
And more often occurs in legs of those who go on foot and work and carry, than others.
It is necessary therefore to provide him with a single cleansing of pus, and then bandage the wound with linen.
The treatment by iron is in two ways: one where it cuts into the coping and draws out black blood. And the other way is to lift the vein, and drain all the blood from it.
is; Then hold the leg of the patient up from above the hip to the area below the knee. Then cut the vein at a spot that is one, two, or three fingers wide.
Then draw out and strain the black blood to your hand from one end to the other as much as the patient's constitution can tolerate.
;le t much that if theyn: (sofier;
And it begins evacuation and cleansing when the veins are full, causing discomfort to the patient.
The movements of his limb follow in this manner: raise the leg gently if there is much hair. Then he places in a bath, and the leg is immersed in hot water until it turns red, and the veins swell.
by (e and you irm; the old.
Then treat the skin at the knot, and scrape the vein from each side until it appears when touched.
And when it is seen red and black, and as it enters through the skin, it seems like a white string.
Then apply pressure from below until it rises up the skin, and then tie to the knot gently,
bonstrade: c�z faire before that n’s c Then lift with your hand, as you have done before, and bend to another yoke.
then measure out another portion, or more if needed, then lift it, and cut at the two elbows.
then scrape and lift up to the second incision; then extract from incisions one by one until fully separated, then cut.
Et if you do not pull it out and lift it, then insert an arrow through all of its strong double thread. And press and pull on it, then push up a spout, and turn your hand back and forth until it slips out. And keep it from slipping, for if it slips, one cannot pull out nor lift it, and this harms the patient.
And when you have treated it completely, place a cloth soaked in wine and oil over the wound area; treat it until it is healed.
And if the vein is twisted and curled together, not straight as we have said, Then it must be cut lengthwise, but do not cover it completely; treat it as we have previously stated.
Then it must be cut lengthwise, but do not cover it completely; treat it as we have previously stated. .
When it is of a large bump, for if it were subtle, it would burst the vein, but since it is thick as we have said, this is its appearance.
Of the main vein.
This vein is located in the legs and warm areas where there are no plants or trees, and on ground with no moisture.
; That time he c colis: it s (don’s Droit the t.
If as it enters within the body like a snake or worm, lodged between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of this vein's beginning are such that it causes a very large inflammation in the leg. then the lymph changes, and the vein begins to protrude outwardly, as a plant'지대 분축 및 극성 우주의 역학적 상태에 영향을 미쳤음이라고 가정합니다.
When the head is open, it requires wrapping around with a strip of linen from one to two and a half Zs long until two Zs.
and leaves the linen on the leg, and each time it is not at fault for falling off, wrap around with the linen again and tie. and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, wrap the remainder, and do not cover it entirely at its root until it has fully come out. f: 1 as est not a certain de leur ne m s.
It is necessary to treat this matter gradually until it reaches its peak, and leave neither skin nor flesh.
And the vein should never be treated when it has been opened for five or six times long palms. And once an honourable man came to me, from whom it had been opened for six palms long, and when I touched it, he vomited a clot or phlegm, and pierced until the bottom.
they say he Otrait thece:ka ; that line; You'uld I (they ne ben ˈs. The following lines t p ne lk et m Jussi szmande.
And never to this vein hands rain, especially when it opens into the joint of the foot or toe. and there comes much swelling, and from which blood flows; then treat as we have previously stated.
Of worms that emerge between skin and flesh
This illness is called on our land "ox disease," because it often occurs in the thighs.
and it's a small worm that exists between skin and bone, traveling up and down the entire body. and he is well felt from limb to limb as long as it disrupts the skin or where it goes, and jumps high.
* so fis not the em; Theophrop cordin tjournal by the l't de.
And there is doubt about its evil nature, for when it passes through the body, it ascends to the head and reaches the brain. Sometimes enters, and destroys the brain; this often happens.
When you see it being drained and torn, one cannot flee while it is present:
mane t
Then apply a bandage and bind it tightly, and if the vein is fully out of place within the artery, and you cannot find it. If applying a fire cautery thereon until it heals.
and the greatest harm it causes is that if it runs into the eye, as we have said.
t�hrs siles with aous and: Crestt et n's
And it is necessary to use remedies for purifying the body of corruptive substances due to bad humors.
And wash with meats that are not rotten, avoiding spoilage.
From pain caused by windblown conditions the in the bole with nus ;e; And then shifts from member to member, and I see what I am telling you.
I went to visit an ill woman, and discovered some swelling in the vein of her arm;
and soon after, I saw it rising like a worm at her shoulder; the et that I dont
The pain departs from there, and spreads to the shoulder.
and then shortly after it courses through the entire body until it reaches the other arm.
then he told me that it returned around the body again as I saw.
is the way they are yout les he in: so it the the l's; s as if you le t f the I t m not the and li; blese tre (the body. Indeed, I want to convey what others have felt at another place. However, I could not do so, as I saw in the woman;
and I thought it was because the woman had dry skin and exposed veins, s can be said:
And it is not seen in those who are paralyzed for this reason, nor do they have wet bodies or veins replaced.
And when you see healing this illness, and the patient feels that pain as we have described, And if it has swelling, and then bind tightly at the location; thus hold until heal: And cauterize the place; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
If from this treatment rises that which binds the windings (like foul pills and herbal capsules), and other similar things.
Of arrows
The arrows are various, according to their appearances and according to the places on the body where they enter.
The variety of them is that there are some with large points, small ones, feathered ones, and barbed. and those that have two edges, and those that have tongues, and those with spikes. the emt.
If as with the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs. When it dies then in any place of these limbs, and the sign of death that I will tell you hereafter, appears to them. if it is necessary for you to extract this arrowhead, because death comes in various forms afterwards; When these bad signs are not apparent, and the arrow is not fully embedded, then treat the wound.
And if there are signs of a brain injury when the arrow enters and pierces the bone, causing swelling over the skull. is when there are blindness and stiffness and twitching and redness of the eyes, and inflammamon and reddening of the tongue, and muscle contractions and confusion of understanding, and bile-stained vomit. ll And the cut on the wet white wound appears like hairs, and heals as quickly as with fresh blood.
And if these signs appear to you, pursue the treatment, and extract the arrowheads if they are not removed.
The signs when the arrow falls or pierces the body indicate that it is near the left breast and feels as though it was embedded in a hard object, not hollow. the c; the same so you. Then there are doubts of impending death.
And the sign of the arrowhead that never protrudes is seen as foam bubbling from the wound; the throat swells, and the patient's skin changes color, breathes deeply, and desires cold water.
And if the arrowhead pierces near the lower back, it is close to small ribs; then comes great swelling and pain, deep breathing; and all the limbs of the shoulders move.
by that he saidd eco; c in which le ne.
When the arrow falls into the belly and does not come out through the intestines, there is no hope for treatment or in extracting the arrow.
And if the arrow falls into the bladder and it causes incontinence with urine flowing out and coming back, causing the patient intense pain; know that the wound is deadly.
The other limbs, such as the arms and neck and throat and shoulder and hip and spine and chest and thighs, and any similar limbs, are safe according to various conditions. When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not poisonous, as I will tell you what happened to me, so that you may do likewise.
It happened to him that an arrow struck the base or neck at the root of the nose. I tried it, and pierced from undernee the fat of the ear, and was almost unharmed without wounds.
; t. The wordt: ça s is, but et so f. If their the they cann the When the arrow is reset, it cannot reach further than the tip towards its end. And it was the arrow of a Turkish bow, all made from lightweight iron for ears; the joint was sound, and no unfortunate incidents occurred to it.
And wounded an arrow to the throat of a Christian, and it was an Arabic arrow with ears:
lf; t line de the.s
And thrust an arrow into his side, where it lodged near the belly, thinking he would die.
and after thirty days had passed, his condition did not change. I cut the arrow shaft, bent it, and pulled it out forcefully, with no harm occurring.
be and ne so.
Et il reste longtemps à l'intérieur de lui, sans changer les positions naturelles. Il ne trouve pas d'avantage dans aucun de ses actes naturels.
Und ein anderer Mann, an den eine Pfeil sein Gesicht traf und die Wunde blutete stark aus.
And thus there is great suffering with intense pain; and many other similar cases.
And treat an arrow that had lodged in one of the prince's houses within his back. and was slightly inclined to the right side; and the arrowhead was fully protruding.
and li
The subtle test, he does not feel it at all. And he felt neither pressure nor pain on his right earlobe. I thought it was from the tip of the arrow.
1, for.nge et the they aret as a. And I saw the ends of the arrowheads.
And I saw the ends of the arrowheads. In the morning, I placed the plaster and bandaged the wound directly, and thus the patient remained for a long time.
until he felt the arrow within his knee; and he told me so. it the de: ougter tre c-d ond's as.
Et you try it, and feel the head of the arrow moving back to its place. Then I attempted, using the method of medicine leeches for the wound until the head of the arrow appeared visible.
and it passed very well over a period of four months.
the s in and the so the text to ons.
Then I ceased to subtly scheme and engineer various methods of traction until I successfully captured it in a day with well-made pincers. According to its final form as described in this chapter, as long as I treat it, the wound will remain closed.
And the physicians judge that the deformation of the nose cannot be restored. in an; so: a and le 30s.
Or have I told you about the quality of extracting certain arrows. If you apply your care as I have not mentioned here, because the book cannot address everything.
But wise masters compare to very few things, and on what is currently present and failing. True work involves nine operations, and nine instruments, descending to foreign things that occur in this art.
I say that arrows are embedded in limbs either by two ways: Or by their entrance through the skin, or otherwise.
And those which jump out where they enter, are arrowheads entering into living flesh, and will never jump again.
And if it does not jump now, leave it so that the flesh is properly cured around it, and be mindful of its exit.
And likewise if it is fixed into the bone and cannot come out, leave it so for several days, and change its dressing each day.
By: the same as: isss ond.
J. And if you feel it, then guide it with any suitable instrument.
and if you cannot by the extension of the wound, and by the deepening of the arrowhead, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein, so that it burns as long as the wound remains large. empixtare as he covs ond;t that c n’vad; puis: so scpros, and, and you to it de la.
empixtare as he covs ond;t that c n’vad; puis: so scpros, and, and you to it de la. If a bone is fixed by two parts, so you see it moved. and then break or snap the ends of the arrow shaft as much as you can pull.
and then break or snap the ends of the arrow shaft as much as you can pull. and be careful not to break the arrow, but rather extract it more firmly.
bye t s they are they should you m the to be in nt iste et so and de laisso par g; And if the flow of blood changes direction as previously mentioned, apply the treatment we have discussed in this chapter.
and beware of incision near nerves and veins, and employ methods as you know to extract the arrowhead without danger.
immediately or gradually, firmly or gently; and position the patient as they were when the arrow fell on them. ones that la ou le t: regrge malese; and tot maynus,no date the s form by using:
The arrow that comes from another direction, or opens any wound on it, or where the skin is swollen if seen or felt abnormally:
Thus cut there, as long as pincers can grip it, and then extract: if the arrow is protruding now.
And if it is lodged in the bone, rotate your round hand, until it enters into the bone and widens it, then extract it.
line ttide they scurrent that: (prsivi: ga mane, for the son les text est not ce se te ou mort. That leme;
And if it is of the arrow, there it is, if you remove the entire thing.
And if it bleeds, and then administer bandaging; if I apply a special instrument for cutting. if the tip of the arrow enters into the hair of the instrument; and then remove it forcefully,
can be spr. This but also:
And if an arrow is grazed, it must be that you scrape all the flesh around where the poison is, if you know. Then treat the wound as necessary.
And if the arrow falls or pierces the belly or bladder or ribs, and it is recent, and you know how to scrape over it;
And guard against cutting the vein or nerve, then extracting it, then suturing the wound, if necessary. and perform the treatment until it is healed.
The form of the pliers used for extracting arrows resembles a bird's beak, and here is how it looks:
et he s c; and li King Louis Farah so yout les they are the oum tisla pas;
and so ongis. Of veins from which one draws blood are 31, of which there is head 16.
It is as follows: ii bellows that are behind the ears, called "herbich." and the ii arteries which are visible in ii temples. by yt is nixt: not t. And the veins that are within the forehead; and the vessels at the crown of the nose. and the two tendons that are in the neck; and the two vessels that are on the lips above the mouth, and these are called "aigue-rich"; Two veins are those below the tongue.
The veins that one commonly sees are five in each arm:
One is the cephalic, and it's on the left side rib, and they call them "veins of the head." . And they call it "the vein of life"; and it is found near the lower rib. And they call it "the vein of the belly," which is located near the hip bone. fire de e fuy are by them to the ouliant f, puis, and the smoke; and was du cerve fors, then they o'nt est of it is not thet by lign ete la flame is bles, and, which sus teint sus, the feu, li.
And the vascular is the vein which lies between the little finger and the ring finger, and if there are two heads.
And in the leg where three veins are: one is below the hollow of the left pocket bone, and the second saphenous vein which is at the right ankle joint, and the vein called "nasse", which is in the left ankle.
Et on the other leg there are three veins below those.
The drainage of veins that are behind the ears helps with old catarrhs and migraines; And the quality of the drainer is such as I have told you, and it consists in raising the patient's head.
And the quality of the drainer is such as I have told you, and it consists in raising the patient's head. and t, soe de the to s and: As long as the two veins appear behind the ears, one on each side depending on whether it is the top or bottom. You shall touch them both with your thumbs, and where you feel hair rising from below your thumb, that is of significance.
Then take the lancet, and insert it from below up to the bone, then lift your hand along the entire vein towards. and cut and expose flesh and veins well. You shall cross twice with it and let blood flow until you see.
then bandage and secure, as long as it is cleaned.
the they ne:p refort se que vacc er's. The main lesle p, too that youn;  (b.
The sap of the two arteries which are in the two temples, if old wounds occur. and scurf, and habitual inflammation, and with tears resembling those of eyes on their own bodies;
and the quality of this swelling is such as I describe: the de la b should be nots they go tose f s dis sections and c 3*; and so it're : (or either: And feel pain from under your elbow joint, then securely bind it.
Then lift the skin above your elbow joint and insert the lancet below it. And elevate the vein on top, and the capillary (cap), just as you have done in two other veins, and make an incision according to your needs for bloodletting.
heal.
And then it is bound firmly, and left to heal as much as possible; and we have spoken at length about their coping and extraction, which begins the book.
The healing of the vein on the forehead is just as much for ancient facial diseases, and migraines, and redness.
And its quality lies in that the patient bends their neck until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called 'hooker', whose form is as follows:
And place the tip on the vein, and aim with your hand or another object, allowing blood to flow out according to the amount you see. Then apply a tourniquet to the patient's arm and tie the vein so that it is smooth and not crossed by any prominent artery.
the blefore lasche f crotain.
The sweat from the two veins found in the temples helps with eyesight, and on glare, and redness, and swelling of the eyelids, and face illnesses.
and the quality of their sweat is such that the patient twists his neck by disconnecting any ligaments, as before.
then heals and may be the sweat from the crossing of the neck, a little long, slightly wide, as there is no itching.
And if the veins are subtle and sometimes burst; then treat thoroughly with bloodletting as needed, and afterwards bind it tightly on a cloth.
The cleanliness of the vein must be maintained to avoid fever, and excessive bleeding, and facial illnesses. as it turns into a migraine and reddening that comes on the face, especially when it is old;
c. ça bardse t not ce; juste: (O bon leurs plust aussi. Turo to let the c girt ce cont se l'suest et sofarment. And take the fine thread long, and insert it into the space between the two nostrils. because the veins do not open easily at first, but now the blood will begin to flow.
and do not bleed too much at once, allow the blood to flow as needed, then let it rest for a night, as it is quickly restored.
The tissue of the two tendons is helpful in extending the elbow joint, and at the beginning of melee, and for many diseases, and impetigo, and corrosion, and herpes, and itching.
and the quality of the tissue is that the patient pulls his neck away from both, as we have said. and be with the master standing over the head of the sick person, while the patient sits on one seat,
Then cleanse the vein thoroughly for a while, then drain the blood as needed; however much is necessary.
Then remake it on the other vein, then relieve the ligament, and restrain the vessels moderately, that the patient does not strain; and let it be until morning, so that the wound can heal.
with allas the same as t f ie (i will: bon. The dryness of vein lips above assists in stitching within the mouth, and gum decay, and splits in the lip, and sores and ulcers.
And the quality of stitching is that you must seat the patient in front of you, and straighten their neck as I have instructed. Then turn the lip, and examine the two veins; one is on the right lip and the other on the left. And they are recognized by being black, and by having small dark veins around them. therefore both of them (referring to the conditions), and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt.
therefore both of them (referring to the conditions), and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt. if the larger portion of each is present, and also make two veins that are above and below it, for they appear in a similar manner.
de t. The condition of veins that are above the tongue is aided by after treating the headache, and it's related to throat stretching, and diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth.
and such that the quality of the treatment is that the patient slices between your hands in front of the sunlight, and lifts the tongue, and looks under each side to find a black vein.
then heal both sides, but do not cut too deeply, as these are the arteries.
The veins of which one commonly treats by two methods:
When puncturing with any of the following: A wide blade or a slender scalpel as sharp as you desire, and is called 'anisyl'. , and his. The form of the spermatic vein is highly reputed, and it is wide as you see.
And has need to open the easily accessible veins filled with clearly visible blood that contains much blood and impurities. and here is the form of the olive-shaped vein:
It is more subtle to locate, and used for draining fine veins, where there is subtle yellow blood.
The drainage of the basilic vein, which is one of these fine veins, helps with illnesses that are from below the throat, and the neck, and the arm, and the belly.
And it is customary for the drainer to drain well, and that they cleanse from the artery which is below. uj# t. Ms. I telle (marir mon; If thema[* d, as a ça ben sont ple: byr ore bon: And it must not be grasped by the flame, but cut as if with a knife.
And if the bladder does not open clearly, you must extract it and replace it with another. If you want any part of it or you feel its pulse in the arm near him: it opens clearly; And the cup at the fingertip is held still as we have said.
And if you know the place of pain, then similarly as to how you would remove an arrow from the arm, touch the base until you can feel the hairs. then signify the place of puncture, and then bind the arm, and cup the vein at the fingertip.
And know to not strike the artery when you see it swelling, for it is an artery; avoid this then.
And if you see it protruding upward like a child's urine, and the vein is red and fine, know that it is from an artery. Hurry then, and extend your arm for a while, then remove the one where the vein is tied up, as it often happens.
f; they must: Ca loin the text by S's pas cefort ; sa: golder et n's acme :
If the wound is not closed and it bleeds, and there are no medicines present, tie off the artery if it is open, for the head of the vein retracts; and close the wound.
Take a piece of fresh ivy bark, break it, and take one half and bind it until the next day.
If the wound is closed, that's good; if not, treat it as we have said with powders that stop bleeding.
Et les étincellements ne sont pas toujours dans quelques positions pour le petit endroit de la plaie, et la possibilité due à l'articulation du bras.
The sanies of the vein serve well if it drains blood from above and below the body. because it is composed of the diaphragmatic and cranial parts, as we have said;
e. And it swells and the nerves are strained, and sometimes cannot heal.
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any home due to its subtlety, then you must cleanse the instrument with alcohol; and avoid touching the nerve as much as possible.
And if possible.
The headache of the skull is present, which draws blood from the head, and assists the eyes.
It is fitting to apply treatment by pricking at the point of the olive or myrtle, for it is the most effective among all venues because there are no veins or arteries within them.
Nevertheless, one must seek the more accessible place, and not press anything during the first time, then resume again. Oudt s.issula. The quality of health depends on your thoughts.
The first thing you must know about healing is that health cannot be achieved solenly by maintaining wellness.
and to avoid future illnesses;  And one must begin treatment with prayers in the beginning of spring and autumn after eating, when signs of fullness appear.
And healing should commence the first day or third, after 2 or 3 hours.
The healing for diseases does not have a determined time but should be done when needed, whether in one day or two days, at all hours and times.
le t D: C-s Do not dare to lift those old men who have passed sixty years.
And when some wish to lift, in whatever manner it may be, it is necessary that they purge the intestines with a light enema. if there are much feces retained, such that the veins do not draw out excess from the intestines harmful to the main limbs.
and:s: it s so thatt et çm bet: The t.
When inflammation of the testicles occurs after colic pain, vomiting, abdominal distention, frequent urination in women and men, staying awake and having intercourse, or from any wound or blow to the body.
Then delicately extract the fluids if it is swoln without cause from meats and drinks or medicines, for you have the power to do so.
Then enter a bath unless anything prevents it, in order to extract the blood delicately,
et cleanse the vein at the site of the wound near the third rib, as we have said;
And observe the day for work, and strain, and lust, and similar things;
, or, d dislocation, it is not that et leucides tis bon, et s are and est de the tein a lese cuir et of youre soire à vous eise, fortie ande p'5. Andres infection ou cte li du de l’est, qui que f, plus de isi et, with a quid whatso dure or they are dislocation, est the.
First straighten the ligament gently, for if it is stretched too much or not enough, it cannot be corrected without causing harm.
and then rub the area with your hands until the veins swell, and they become warm to touch.
then moisten the sinew with a little old oil, and place your finger from your left hand over the vein below the bone for a short while as desired. the first: For there are veins fleeing like strings in a purse, and some that are flat with swelling. for when one applies heat to the wound, if it retracts and cannot open the veins, then these are such cases.
and if it opens the veins, if it is a wound too narrow, then it requires that surgeons be knowledgeable in such matters.
the s:  the most and so that they: Howe wui ert: est know de f
When the lice are swollen, and the patient becomes restless, let them go for a day or two without tying up their arm: In case of abscesses appearing on the legs, do not bathe them, then resume cleansing if it suits him:
And if the abscess is small or cunningly hidden and you doubt that there isn't as much blood as you see, beware of puncturing it directly through the entire membrane.
And work somewhat swiftly, so that the wound may swell; for this often occurs when the injury is small.
If you see the wound swelling, do not reopen it again, and apply a little bit of oil, as it soothes the body with blood flow, and dissolves any debris in that area.
and thus administer oil liniment to each vein you treat, so as to stop the flow of blood;
f: 1. I; do contign la mo sont son's; don . And so far.tutor are the dur est. This g-so, and; n/d, and that you for to.
And if it comes to large abscesses that occur many times, especially when the opening of the vein is small. If you act quickly, place a damp sponge soaked in water and salt warmed slightly on the affected area, and keep it applied for an hour.
And after draining the blood from the vein, if there is any darkening or greenish coloration remaining at the site for several days, it does not harm. by and do:
And often there is an abscess and appearance near the temple of the skull; so place your hand on it, and if you find the spot tender to pressure from your hand, then that appearance is harmful. Refrain from placing anything on it as we have mentioned, for there may be an artery involved in the joint; however, make a dry splint to harden the area and then apply another treatment until it heals.
And treat each blood loss according to its amount and color of blood.
If the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see swelling, let it go until it subsides; and if it's too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for those who are pale and weak, and need bloodletting, to make them an incision that's wider, so the veins are wide.
And for those who are weak, do the opposite and make them drink a little often, and it should be done by cutting across, not deep.
And this manner of injury is safe from blood deterioration and nerve compression, and it heals whether the injury is long or wide.
And for those whose bodies require the treatment, give them wheat bread soaked in juice of red apples; if they are feverish, bleed three or four times.
And if they have a cold complexion, give them soaked bread in syrup or sweet honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and cloves, and fragrant syrup.
If it becomes infected with pus after the release of much blood, then it is necessary to apply a mixture of vinegar and a subtle fragrant syrup.
And utilize other remedebeans mentioned in the section on fainting, for bloodletting purposes.
And if the patient desires to vent their arms and be bled again, it is necessary when they are greatly infected, for them to bleed slowly and steadily according to the quantity of their potency continuously.
tt are not; and segues.
And if you wish to heal another part, do so on the second or third day.
For there is much blood within the body that has been exhausted, and it causes fever; therefore, one must extract a large quantity and dilate the veins until they empty. after you have treated all the wounds, and place your hands on them when they bleed, that death does not come into the area of emptiness. s. And: Tale ctude with no If you le by: The  (and t': a g English lines allus to C-9 an example so de l've the same and it.
And it is not necessary when you see dislocating the arm, to make blood issue a second time, and if the vein is closed, apply pressure continuously on top. If it is cramped, extend the arm quickly, for this would be very bad.
but let it rest until the blood flows again; or if there is not any bleeding at the wound site, continue until the vein's opening has ceased to flow. by:e line.
If the vein is inflamed, leave it alone and do not bind it, until the abscess is calmed.
And if it is necessary again to bleed the blood a second time, let it be done in that same place or in another vein, or on the other arm.
The vein within the arm is bled at the top of the head because it is composed of such kind. (Note: This sentence seems to be somewhat unclear or possibly contains a transcription error, as "leu" might refer to an incorrect term in this context).
The manner of cleansing is such that the patient dips his hand in hot water until the blisters are red.
Then tie it neatly so that the vein appears well, then cleanse it thoroughly across and not too wide or long.
And have the blisters be wide open, and close to the joint of the hand, without any leaking out. If it doesn't resolve, reset the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough.
And if it is so, do not push back the hand into hot water, for it should be placed more in winter than when well.
And the healing of this vein is better than others, with neither artery nor nerve present.
The healing of the little finger's pad is good for all diseases related to the liver, and this is how it works.
Straighten the hand, and apply hot water, until the vein is emptied, if it can be seen. And if the vessel crosses or twists, and you correct it completely, do not cause any harm.
And go carefully without going too far, because nerves are easily torn from their sheaths.
theyn
When you have treated the wound as needed, apply oil and grease to the vein area for quick healing, doing so with each cut.
The bandaging on that in the left hand is for treating mouse disease, and do as I have told you regarding the right one.
The bandaging of the sphenoen is good for all diseases that are under the body. line;
The quality of his health is such that the patient should blow on wet stones in hot water, and rub it over the vein until it withers. And place it above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, with numerous branches.
Heal any vein that appears wider or near the ankle, which needs to be moved.
And if you shave the area around the foot, beware of nerves that are below it, and cut through as with scissors; let the breezes become equal.
And if no blood can exit, reset the foot in water, and ensure the vein drains well.
If the bandages need to be changed for the first time, start again slightly above a bit later, as the wound is salted. if thi Colsjue; and by se lesme with:
The origin of the sciatic nerve is at the ankle and its sensation corresponds to the pain in the thigh when it's blood-heated.
And its quality of sensation is such that the patient feels between pain and numbness, twisting four fingers above the ankle.
because otherwise it opens up completely; and if it does open, the sensation is felt in all ways that you can touch, and across. les man: S.
les man: S. And if you do not succeed, take any cloth from it that is wide or long as the back of the hand and elbow, and wrap around the little finger, ensuring no nerves are harmed.
And apply enough pressure to stop the bleeding that you see, then tie off the vein and place cotton and bandage it; now it is healed.
Of suction cups
the sct Far (thought le bente t l's or.
This inflammation which is somewhat like being struck has two ways: it can be with intense heat or mild heat.
And two others on two ribs of the neck; and the bursa beneath the chin; and the bursa of the two shoulders; and the bursa above the elbows; and the bursae between the two arms; and the bursae of the two legs; to-t;
And therefore not all men can endure it, as with healing of veins. And it does not suit that she be administered with any kind of fire or heat in any illness caused by excess, as long as the entire body has been emptied.
and the li.
For there are some who, when they need to vomit, have heavy heads.
and those who experience fullness and redness on their face, in their head, and neck, with darkness in the eyes.
and those who experience a drop of blood in their mouth, have a swoln tongue, and bleed. If there are those who think so, and see through painful blood loss and suffering, and deaths and similar occurrences.
And when we see these signs, especially when it is within the month, after three hours past noon, we order to vomit then.
The medicine of the muse helps with the great pain ... which comes to them, and it is not necessary that this be after the evacuation of all their body;
mold. And the s; igne by lineme:l'fa (et; The fact;
And it is not always necessary for those of cold constitution to use it or who have catarrh, as this causes them much harm.
And therefore it is not advisabler that watchmen or those with cold head diseases use them.
of the t often;
The inflammation extends into the neck from the sinus and base of the skull, causing pain in the pharynx and lower jaw. and to rupturing of the carotid canal, and throughout, and swelling;
and it requires careful handling, because if held too firmly, it may cause obstruction or stomach issues and distress to the body.
that:. so:
And it is in the location of the sanitary area of the basilica; and it is necessary that you instruct the surgeon to extend his hand for insertion, so he does not cut the artery, nor allow bleeding.
The windings from below the chin indicate a mouth disease, and decay of gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth; and it is in the location of the sanitary areas of the two lips.
The windings of the shoulders indicate a disease that comes from heat and filling.
The inflammation of joints is as much as from three veins of the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins;
and commands the healer not to make too deep an incision, for the flesh is tender here and contains veins and arteries.
the vair hirse they are the untoulet
The blisters of the legs heal openly because they attract blood from all over the body, and are effective against ancient pains of rain, of mares, and of the bladder; and they rejuvenate the two sophene areas, and the two ankles, and generally weaken the body after long use, bringing paralysis in various disposed conditions.
The way to apply the blister is that you first place it on an empty area, and do so promptly, and set it hastily, and move evenly, and continue this action until you see the reddening and swelling of the location, and it appears with a slight flow of blood; then peel off, and reapply the blisters, and take care in observing the condition of the body, for there are those who have thick charred skin, and clear pores: if necessary, you must puncture only once, making wide and somewhat deep cuts, and drain gently.
And if the blood is thick, you must puncture twice: the first time to thin out the pathway of the thick blood.
When the blood is very thick, one must strike a third time; and when we wish to draw out little blood at a time, it suffices for us only once.
And if we wish to draw out much blood, let us start often; and if the blood is thick, pierce it widely, and the endings so that the vessels are quickly severed.
And for those who have wounds and sore; it is necessary to bandage them with dressings: apply the. If it is thus, of violet oil, or almond soft oil, or pumpkin seed oil.
And if it is in ointment, of watercress oil, or of lily, or chamomile, or other similar substances.
And if the excess is large and cold, take oil of myrrh, or balsam, or aniseed oil, and other similar things.
And if one whom you treat has a tender and wide chest, there is no need to put oil.
However, it is necessary to wash afterwards after ventosation with pink water, or cold water, or henbane water, or squash water, or porcelain water, or similar substances.
the li h; ce:
Those who have large excesses rise from old wine or water of elderberry, or a concoction of anise or chamomile, or similar things.
Et il ne convient pas de saigner par ventouse avant ou après le bain, mais une heure après le bain environ deux heures; et ne dort pas après la saignée.
And it is necessary for him to rest when it needs to be cupped and after being subjected to cupping. And let he who has a cold sweat and whose blood is too thick and inflamed rests. If it is necessary to apply cold things, such as green apples, endive, lettuce at ease, and similar things.
and fresh pork, and roasted meat, and moist meats.
And those with a cold constitution should take honeyed syrup, and fragrant wine that is neither too old nor new, along with small portions of fresh meat, young beef, chicken, and partridge.
the:�; they word' ize so that: 20187.
And it is proper to give certain individuals triacle or musk on the dislocated joint before or after, to strengthen the main limbs. And be made subtle through it, but one should only drink those who are hot in body.
The cupping vessels that are placed without striking are those placed on the liver, and kidnewery, and podagra [gout], and on the belly, swelling, rheumatism, and hip, because those members do not tolerate being struck anywhere.
by ; that cannot; You's, but, although l’s are all; c d in. And so ous the ou rente of : when he ben:t et t, for the arta: this est them, even la peu and; S uccur line; (et ac untura; As we have seen with the eyelids when they are not healthy; to remove the swelling that is in the limb, as we place pouches on the belly and groin to reduce the size of the member.
And remove the pain, when there is obstruction or stone, and draw out the obstruction by its attracting power, perhaps removing the stone from its place.
And thus it is done when placed on the liver and spleen where there is retained windiness;
Et les vessies sont disposées vides pour aspirer autant que possible ; et jamais ne sont utilisées ensemble avec du feu, ni simplement de l'eau chaude.
If to treat diseases of the pleura in such a way as to fill the bladder with hot water or with water in which certain healing herbs have been boiled.
The form of applying the bladder by fire is as follows:
c; t  (these;
And it may be of a strain or sprain in front so that it does not bother the patient when placed on the limb.
And if there is a splint of metal or iron that crosses far away, to put on an encircling bandage.
and let them be large and small depending on the diseases and the nature of those who take them.
For children's blisters are different from those of old people, and lean ones like fat ones.
And this is how one should place the blister on the limb:
take a candle of wax or ointment and place it amidst the blister towards the tip of the penis that is in the midst of the blister, aD.
And then place it under the limb, and tie the cloth as mentioned around the joint when desired, so that upon application heat is applied, and a bladder placed.
And press along the line as before, and repeat often, if necessary.
In the bladder which is used for treating pleurisy, without any rod or string, and it's only applied when filled with water, and placed underneath the limb.
byt.
Dislocations are not treated by applying cupping unless in limbs where one cannot apply cups due to their smallness, such as lips and gums. and in parts of the body cleansed of hair, like ears or noses, and similar areas.
and the quality of the patient is such that when you encounter soft water-filled blisters, if they are without impure, take them.
t: he celebr: O fact. And then let it bleed with a vein and compress, then rub the limb until it is red, and apply bandages on top.
And when they are healed and hardened, if it is possible to place a compress there, then apply the compress, as this is very useful afterwards.
If not, raise the level of ease, and then pour water on it, plenty, and then squeeze out.
the C1, such and so c; if you by n's.
If there are multiple abscesses, apply crushed vitriol or scales, and similar things, until they have been absorbed.
Or apply a paste made of powdered leaves on the affected area, and let them dry at that spot, now absorb it.
And if you have more need for it, then take other medicines.
by the c. The text they don: 1 (you go if the old so that; 9 Do you said I'ulon trementceze but en. And then place it back, and almost immediately as they feel blood flow, they heal.
And when you see them bleed, apply a little powder of alum and silex crushed, or ash, to make them stop now.
Here begins the book of fractures.
These treatments are often necessary in the art of medicine, and are for repairing and replenishing.
Learn well, dear pupil, that the foolish student immerses themselves in this treatise without ever having seen any of the ancient books or read their letters.
And for this reason, the knowledge is rare in our land, for I have never found any good.
and I know nothing else, because of the knowledge from ancient books that I have studied so much to master, and by experimentation, and through my life's habits.
Et je vous ai dit dans ce traité ce qui est contenu, et j'ai abrégé à la fin, et montré clairement les formes des étreintements que sont amenis, comme je l'ai fait dans ces deux chapitres précédents.
Therefore, we must say that the purpose of this book is to speak of words and chapters in which the wise man applies his understanding, staying true, so those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
I say that when any fracture or dislocation or twist or contortion occurs in anyone, it is necessary to support the sick person on both sides and parts if nothing holds them completely, as with weak limbs of children or elders.
If the tension is not too strong or too cold; and if you eat fatty foods such as cold soups, poultry and veal, do not drink wine or consume any greasy meats, nor overeat in ways that fill the veins with blood until there are doubts of an abscess or discharge of matter from a limb; then it is appropriate for the patient to return to their normal diet.
And when broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with meats that produce a healthy appetite and are like cooked wheat in fluidity, such as veal, lamb, beef, chicken broth, eggs, fresh fish, red wine, and similar things. Because proper nutrition represents the muscles' quickness and soon after, the fracture is set right.
And know that broken bones of old age and frailty cannot be well reunited or fused according to their nature for the restoration of limbs, nor those as supple as children's bones.
But attend, reset on the broken bone with a large tenon that is strong and joins the limb together, until it strengthens as if it were before; do not leave any part unattended, and for this reason, one should nourish oneself with hearty meats, as we have said.
And know that fractures occur in various ways.
When a fracture of the head is different from a fracture of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. The feroit li cheint qui tu all the la manier: les ceste fait: le mone riguez de tesme ce. Et l'a estropidemane loron les pois congne et en telle, car il li prise est l’en tout li onques:
The feroit li cheint qui tu all the la manier: les ceste fait: le mone riguez de tesme ce. Et l'a estropidemane loron les pois congne et en telle, car il li prise est l’en tout li onques: When there is a break with a wound, and a crack as a tiny split.
And each has its means, and its proper instrument for restoration, according to what memory brings forth in its place.
and is known the bone fracture by that the shaft is twisted, and opened widely on one side, and lies under pressure of the hand.
est s with thems as it is p.
But it may have a twist, or split, or small break. However, do not just move the hand, but apply with medicine that comes here afterward and then gently stretch it now.
And be aware that the break which goes into view, and are the two parts disconnected, they must now be brought together evenly, as with abscesses come to pass.
sisle: Then make it equal to movements that you can easily and gently perform, knowing that the restoration of it is easier than those where there are fractures; then tighten as necessary later on.
And if in the bone there are broken pieces, if you extend two parts, whether hands or feet, or to your hand if it's small members, or to two cords, or to one cord and your hand;
and set the member according to its natural form. If the broken parts of the limb are disjointed, align them using all possible methods by gently moving them into their original places, and ensure that through your work no injury or pain is inflicted upon the patient.
And properly align the two heads of bones according to their best forms.
And he feels well in the hand if it seems to you that it is not moving well: dress him neatly and do not restrain or press as those who cause abscesses to come out quickly and contractions of the limb, as we have seen many times.
When the limb is at a standstall, well punish the patient so they do not move it, neither in wakefulness nor sleeping, nor turning, or otherwise. And watch carefully to ensure that the limb is secured enough that it feels no pain. For when it feels no pain, if not at a standstill, then you must put it in partial rest so that it feels no pain.
For when it feels no pain, if not at a standstill, then you must put it in partial rest so that it feels no pain. the I.
And the nature of the fractured limb is as follows, according to what I have told you.
It has been said that the broken bones are of various sizes and shapes.
For there are small members like straps and loops; it is necessary to use fine and delicate ribbons.
And those who are large, like thigh and leg: it is necessary to encircle with a wide and sturdy bandage, for the wider bandage encompasses the entire limb evenly, so there is no uneven pressure.
Then place light poultices three or four turns around the limb, and wrap your hand slightly along the entire bandage, then move up above the fracture and apply less pressure there, gradually moving away from the break.
And gently loosen the bandage bit by bit as you gain a larger portion of healthy tissue again, then take another bandage and wrap around just above the fracture site once more.
Then return to the part below the fracture and restrain it gently, not too tightly or loosely, as we have said in the first lesson above.
Then place between the splints strips of linen or fabric so that they are all evenly aligned, then bind it firmly with a bandage above, and then apply well-made straps below, unless there is an abscess or swelling.
And if there is an abscess or swelling, then apply something soothing to the abscess and that removes the swelling, leaving it as such for a few days.
Then strain the affected area and wrap with a piece of linen bandage or wood strips, or palm leaves, according to this shape.
However, it is necessary that the bandage applied over the fracture should be slightly larger and wider than the rest.
And also as long as required by the size of the limb, whether small or large.
t: 0t et s.
When more narrow it is, less painful it becomes; and one must ensure the thread is of medium width, neither too thick nor too thin, and be made of flax.
For if the thread is thick, as I have seen from works of fools who make their linen cordage too tightly wound, and it is a great error because if the cord is too fine, it cannot be even between each stitch; it should not have less than two inches space.
And if the patient is pained by the edges of the stitches after being tightened too much in healthy places, they should place lint or ragged cloth under them to prevent chafing.
When the wound is with a fracture, and the bone is broken, I will tell you the treatment for this hereafter.
And know that it does not suffice to extract all splinters from injured limbs on the first day. Because when the limb is swolled, it does not suffice to insert splinters that are too big after 5 or 6 days, or more depending on the severity of hot boils arising.
Et here is the manner of ancient emplacements to restore fractures, dislocations, and torsions: take flour that clings to the walls of a mill, mix it with abundant egg, and make this concoction, not too clear nor too thick, and use it; this is the common way of using an emplacement to repair breaks in various positions, especially among women and small children, for it is neither too warm nor too cold.
Another way of an emplaste to restore fractures and dislocations and torsions: take abareis and ladani and enule and asafetida and gum arabic and mugat, each X; myrrh and aloes, each V; alechil VI; and make powder, and the honey with egg yolk. If the patient's constitution is warm, use this emplaste because it has a good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, benefiting many people.
Another way of emplaste for torsion: take mugat and vismalve, each X; myrrh and aloes, each VII; acacia VI; bolingarmenic X, and grind well, and confit with water or abundant egg, and administer.
Another method for resetting dislocated joints and bones out of place, relieves the pain occurring, and repairs the bone: take new linen, treat with milk and oil cooked, and apply to the area. These bandages do not heal but are good for soothing boils, and properly alleviate pains.
Another method of bandaging to restore broken bones: take dried fig leaves and earthy parsley leaves, grind them together, and make a poultice.
Another method of bandaging for the restoration of broken bones and to alleviate the remaining boil: take viminal root, chamomile, violet flowers, wheat flour, each in one part; grind it and mix with wine. If the limb is cold, soak the poultice in moist coriander water or ordinary water, then apply.
Another way to treat more effectively than the first when abscesses are ready for limb restoration. Take roots of wormwood, and seed of flax, balm, honeybread, mint, and without sauce, and flowers of violets and chamomile, all together in equal parts; grind and mix with salt water, or fresh water, or wine, depending on the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras states in his book that one should not place anything other than wax and oil on a broken limb for restoration, and it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
And it seems to Galen that on must place dry and slightly warm things, such as myrrh, balm, frankincense, and similar substances, as we have said.
Another method of incision for injury and pain: take mugwort and horsehair clippings, or bird feathers, and wormwood, all equal amounts, and grind them, then make an ointment with the powdered mixture.
Then lay it on for some time afterward and take care that the patient feels no pain, nor is his bone moved from its place; do not reset it too often.
If pain comes to the area or itching, swelling, or irritation occurs, then hasten and reset, and remove the ointment now; take a light bandage, and use a damp sponge, and soak in water, and lift up the wound until the itching stops, and the pain is relieved. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then apply a dry bandage, moistened with rosewater or oil, and secure above a knot, until you are sure of pus.
And let the inflammamoin of the limb rest, and if there is bone pain, then gently reset it again, apply a little opiate, and do not strain too hard as before; and delicately until it is stable.
And if you see pus and redness and pain and swelling of the whole bone, and you need opiate and bandaging, then reset it as before.
And if nothing of what we have said comes to the limb, do not reset it until after three or four or five or six days; and never leave it for twenty days, according to what is seen, as long as the breaker hurts and approaches the joint above.
Then you must reset it more than before, and the flesh will swell as I have said earlier; and if you see that it dries too much when necessary is not, know that inflammation cannot come. Then arise the pus from warm water every time you reset it, and do this each day, and wash it slightly.
By this procedure then cut the tendons of the limb, and quickly mend as the wise men do, who restore the misaligned limb: it is bad, and such procedures are fearsome, and I see no other way but to be diligent and work directly.
Of various ways of fractures Many kinds of fractures are, and diverse forms, and the causes are distinct.
When there are fractures made by the blow of a sword, and the neck bone breaks through all the bone up to the suture which is below the bone, as if caused by an axe or club; hence this manner of fracture is called "hachure."
Where the sword cuts through the bone from above without being pierced, this manner of fracture is called "absolute"; and there are wounds from these two large or small fractures.
And if there is an embedded blow, crack, or stone in the bone, or a fall on a stone, or other similar things.
And if there is an open wound that reaches up to the skin just below or above the bone, where it lies on top of the bone, and this wound is large or small.
And if there is a wound that is deeply set into the bone as subtle as fine hairs, and it has a small tear, so this breakage is called "capillary."
And if the wound is made by being struck with a stone, or falling, or similar thing, and it allows entry of a piece of bone within, and the edges are as hot as a blacksmith's when they touch the heated iron; then there will be heat inside [the body].
And this happens more often to those whose bones are moist like children's.
And it happens in all cases of fractures where small parts are dislodged as described here; and I will speak about this now.
And we know all methods of fractures through traction upon them, and examination with touches, and by the corruptible cartilage that is thereon.
The appearance of hair is known when the bone has been discovered and rubbed thoroughly upon it, resulting in a clear break.
The cure the on the vint la pere maude, and discomfitur, douleur l'apostrement de les tement, et is not fie, and of les semblue.
And if you do not see an uncertain sign of hope, yet expect healing, then begin the treatment.
And when the pain first comes to you, and it is in winter, one should remove the bone on the fourteenth day at the time which you can.
And if it is summer, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue around the bone is not spoiled, and come the accidents we have mentioned.
by.
When bleeding persists and the bone is exposed or an abscess appears, use what is necessary, and it is that you fill its cavity with molded cloths soaked in oil. And let the wound rest until all abscesses are soothed and bleeding is ensured; then begin to work around the bone by removing. There are two ways of treatment: one way where you cut a narrow slit at the front, and this is the method.
And then make another incision larger than the first.
The second way is that you have various thrusts of different lengths, some narrow and others wide, with points, and made of iron rods; and in lighter work, do not strike the head.
And if the bone is thick and hard, it must be that you pierce around it so as to make thrusts with taps, not too deeply lest they penetrate beyond the bone of the skull, and there should be a margin or circle above the point that does not allow the point to go past the bebone; you need several of these, enough for each section of the bone's thickness, so have taps for all tests; this is the form of the three ways of tapers:
The quality for piercing around the bone is to place a tap on the bone and then turn it until you know that the bone is pierced; then move the tap slightly elsewhere, doing this all around, then cut with incisors the space of the balled which is between the pricks, and do this more delicately than possible, lightly, as we have said, so long as you work on the bone to your hand or any one of the tools that you have like pincers. And be careful not to touch the brain or the sacrum.
And when you have pierced the bone and cut it, it is necessary that you remove the protrusion which has been held by the bone from all other similar instruments like an incissor, but it must be more firmly fixed and finer than the others.
And if it holds nothing of small bones or scales, then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
And another method of treatment is what the Galenists say, which is sweeter; and you must boil it very strongly, as they instruct. It is necessary first that you expose part of the bone where the fracture opens up, and once you have exposed that part, place it under the top edge of this lens-shaped incisor, which has the following shape.
And do not cut off any part, and the piece is on two sides flatly, so that the cutting edge faces towards the bone; then strike with a small mallet from above, so that you gently chop the entire bone while carefully guarding against the skin underneath.
If it is flat to the bone, gently press against the bone, for one may harm the bone too much and cause fear.
If the bone fracture does not pierce through to the skin and is neatly cut slightly above, resulting in small pieces, then you must address the roughness again, removing scales with a subtle razor of which you should have various quantities to treat each area as most suitable according to the work involved and the nature of the fracture.
If there are many large razors needed, then after using finer ones as well, continue to do so until it is done properly.
In each of the other hair trimming and delicate fractures, it is necessary to treat them according to their direction; and this is something that cannot be reversed for those who have studied in this art.
And if the wound is exposed, it is necessary to take a linen cloth as per the size of the wound, dampen with oil, and place on the wound. Then take another doubled cloth of two or three layers and moisten with wine and oil-soaked olive oil, placing it over the first cloth; do this gently so as not to burden the wound, then apply a poultice above the other linen, without stretching it too tightly until only the wound is covered.
And leave it thus for a day or two until the abscess has calmed down, then remove it and apply medicines such as lily roots, wheat flour, incense powder, and aristolochia, etc.; mix these ingcuents, place on the wound, and thereafter apply unguent medicines without burning.
Ensure the wound is clean and free from pus or sores, as when scabs assemble over a brain wound, they cause itching and trouble, leading to great distress; because when something with teeth touches it, one can be harmed above all else.
Therefore, take care that if anything unfortunate happens to the patient, as we have said, it is uncertain but without doubt.
And if the darkness does not come from the medicine applied to it, then take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil mixed with cloth, and apply it on the wound. Then provide the proper treatment methods as needed, until it is healthy again.
It is said that the two parts above do not break if only one moves at a time, for they are bones; and the joint below is cartilaginous and does not break, but rather swells or twists before healing.
And if one of the two parts is broken, then you must bandage your little finger or wrist above it and align the break inside your index joint, and at the forearm below, until the nerves regain their natural form. :
And if the fracture is in the part above the elbow and cannot bring the arm to its place, it is fitting that you set it level with a small branch.
And if the fracture is in two parts, do similarly and hasten to restore it on the first day if you can.
If not, after the seventh or eighth day when the abscesses are calmed, then cover it with a head bandage of linen cloths, if the fracture is in one part.
When you bind another with a band on the other side, if there is a breakage present; and let the swellings be such that they fill the nostrils completely.
And the restorative advises that one should bruise the swellings with a burrow, and change each day. I do not think it is good, but it seems necessary to bruise them in an oven ash and powdered meal; then leave the swelling until the bone is healed and the cartilage hardened.
And never should one place goose feathers in the nostrils instead of swelling treatment, and if there is a .i. piece of cloth near it, this causes dislocation, and blows the illness upon them; rather do what you see fit.
When an abscess is found near the nose while you work on it, then apply a poultice or cotton wool soaked in rose oil, or use a small amount of diacron.
And if the abscess does not appear, apply an emplastre as before using millet flour and powdered incense mixed with egg yolk, then place it on light gauze, but do not cover the nose.
And if it istrie, and when the ouir trisies tet, et ne brise que il est riuite dure, qui espris le. ici ence tu mis de eire s’en, puis lou vient emplestre.
And if there is no wound within the veins, he treats them with bandages and applies compresses until they are healthy.
For a dislocation of the jawbone
When the jawbone is dislocated and there are no resulting wounds, and the fractures are minor only, it should be examined lightly for complications inside.
by and s1
If the fracture of the jaw is dislocated into two parts, it must be managed by adjusting the extension until they are even.
And if dislocations of the spine occur or lumps form, then bind with a thread of gold or silver or silk; place on the broken jaw ceramic paste and a double cloth; lay over the cloth a large well-made stele or an equal piece of leather long and wide according to the mandible, tying it where you want, and instruct the patient to rest and consume light meats.
And if you see that the figure changes, dislocate again after three days and then set it back as it is changing; place a poultice on top, with powder from the mill or wheat flour mixed with plenty of egg or sesame, after you have removed the ceramamoist; place a light linen over the poultice, and if the poultice hurts, let the position of the patient remain unchanged until it is healed; many times it has been healed in three weeks.
And if abscesses occur, treat as we have said many times before.
And if there is a break and wound together, no bone fragment remains in place; gently remove the splinters as we have instructed before.
And if the wound is narrow, expand it to an appropriate size according to your need.
the ne:
Of great strength The fractures break several times in front of the shoulder, and the breakage is in three ways: where it is broken and separated into two, with fragments present, and easier to repair; or there is a breakage with an accompanying wound.
And the treatments are when there is a breakage with an accompanying wound, so that you have two assistants; one who washes the shoulder affected by the fracture, and another extends the neck towards the area; then aligns the break to your shoulders correctly, such that there is no appearance or unevenness.
When you need to extend further, place under the patient's shoulder a round stick of cloth or woolen material, and make it thick according to your necessity; then stretch and release the tension, hold the stick in your hand, placing equal breaks as required.
And if you cannot pull the top of the stick with ease because it comes out at the front, then it is necessary that the patient lies on their side, and places under the shoulder half an iron bar; place the assistants' shoulders against it, until the bone in the forearm is raised.
And then you reach for the break to your elbangs, and if it is still broken, so that you cut underneath; gently extract the pieces, and if the bone cannot join due to any splinting, apply with a copestone from one of the incisions you have made; but place this instrument under the forearm to prevent swelling.
And it seems like a spoon, and not pointed, and may be as wide as necessary according to the size of the bone and strength of the flesh; and have two heads, as you see, with one being wider, and the other narrower, just as dictated by the shape of the wound when you cut through the bones.
And when you are sure of an abscess, if the wound is large enough, or if there's doubt about a hot abscess, cover the wound with cloth and bandages according to its size.
And if there are multiple abscesses, apply an oil-soaked cloth and linen with wine, and place it on top.
The extraction of bone, when it is without cuts and deformities, is to place the waxed paste made from finely ground powder and egg yolk on the bone, and place light stoppers over it, and a spindle underneath if needed. Then take a very wide band of about the width of a palm, then put double cloth over the stoppers and waxed paste, and then take an extremely thin rod three fingers wide in length and breadth, and wrap it around that band so that the top of the band remains suspended. And place the rod over the fracture, and turn the band around the collarbone, and under the healthy shoulder blade, and under the dislocated one. Check each part of the ligature, and when you see that the lien holds the fracture properly, and you can clearly see that the rod does not move over the broken bone, then replace it every day, and when the bindings loosen, re-tighten them.
Lay the patient on his back and when he is asleep, place a small pillow under his shoulder to raise it up; this will relieve the fracture of strength by aligning the shoulder, where you tie the arm to the neck, until no ill accident occurs again within twenty days.
Then restart the splinting if necessary, and keep it fastened until restored; it is usually restored in twenty-eight days or less for some people.
Of the shoulder fracture
Sometimes the shoulder breaks or is displaced without external force and cannot be moved; it should be aligned according to the nature of the fracture, and relocated as per its natural form in all ways possible; then apply fine powder made from crushed oats with plenty of water, along with light bandages, and place a double layer over it; next, position a wide and thin board slightly wider than the shoulder on top, ensebeneath which are supports everywhere around the shoulder, so that the head of linen bandage is cut evenly; then bind tightly with a large strap to ensure the board does not move from its place, checking the ligaments every day; each time there is increased movement, re-tighten and adjust the board if it has shifted from its position, and allow the patient to rest on their side. After 20 or 25 days, remove the bandages carefully, as bones do not regain strength easily.
If a bone fragment is sticking out and not covered by skin, cleanse the area, and treat the bone, following what we have said in treating fractures of strong animals with pus-filled abscesses.
Then pour l’os, seize et sutet a painful-soient lepour les sting that are you and swelling to the wound and if it. Et sirop-tie os. And also have-cours-se tion, which cauter que la ploose with un-done or infection and l’os de lien ete ou malaidez les pricking:
The fish is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; it often breaks when turning over. And when it is broken in the middle, it bends upward at the base, and the patient feels great pain, weakness throughout, and sometimes vomits blood, exposing the joints in the broken bone, and they feel very unwell.
The restoration is to make the patient lie on their back, and place a pillow between their shoulders, then press the shoulder blades, and join the two ribs with hands, adjusting in all ways possible until the bone's shape is correct; then apply bandages and cotton over the fracture delicately, wrapping it in a cloth so that it does not move. Shape the strap roundly on the back, stretch it gently, loosen every hour as needed, and if it softens, tighten again; and if you need to remove it due to corrosion or itching at the site, pain or abscess, do so quickly, remove it carefully, cleanse the wound area, then follow the usual treatment methods.
Of rib fractures
Know that the fracture of the ribs occurs mostly on their sides after the back and within the head, and they do not bend easily because they are gristly; and they feel well at the inquiry with fingers.
And the healing is such that you set the fracture evenly as needed. Then apply a splint, and if necessary, use a stabilizing strap.
And if the fracture of the ribs is leaning towards the head, it causes great pain and swelling to the patient, just like pleurisy, because the bone has no flesh; they also have fever, vomiting, and a large amount of blood loss, which is a serious illness, and the ancients used significant remedies for it.
And of those who say that it should be treated with meats that inflame the stomach to drive away the obstruction quickly.
We do not cause abscesses to appear in vain if they have not come yet. And if it has come to pass, so he is whole.
And some say that one places cups on the limb to draw out humors, and it seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the cups may attract excesses to the limb due to its weak condition.
And some say that one should cover the limb with moistened linen soaked in hot oil and place tents between the ribs to evenly distribute the heat, then proceed with treatment of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
by un accleton on m in that the other; but main t (s cont
From a fracture of the neck
Never comes a break to the bone in the neck, and rarely does it bow; likewise to the spine of the back. And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be healthy or not, if you see their hands swell up and become lethargic and numb, and cannot move nor extend them, and when pricked by a needle, they do not feel it. Know that in many cases they are fatally ill, but if they can move and feel well while being restrained and without pain, know that the joints of their bones are safe, and the patient will be healed with proper care.
s.
And if this accident does not occur, it is a more manageable condition.
And the treatment is to apply oil of rosemary or olive oil if there's an abscess, until it's soothed; then place it under a supportive and dry compressor, bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; they should not sleep on the part where they feel pain until healed. And if any bone is dislocated, apply heat to the affected area; then set the bone, and stitch together the two edges of a large wound with a sealing stitch, until healed; and if the shoulder joint of the arm is fractured, also known as "shoulder blade," place your left hand's pouchet on it, holding it equal to your right hand at full strength; then apply an enhancer compressor and cooling cloth over it, if needed; then hold firmly, and if there are dislocated bones, correct them, and treat the wound until healed.
Of the breaking of the bone of the thigh
Occasionally the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it happens, there has not been a slight narrowing at the top; they become longer, slope towards the foot, causing pain in place and swelling where it's broken.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it, until you are above the fracture; and determine which part of the bone and its shape; and if the breakage is only at the top, then match the fracture to its natural shape.
by;tum Tes words: Mbui corre ceformte t; Don’s the acit; (or les tre estl'estra (th<brlement le ou . So nde n’dn a, and the resacue et a. And when you have set it evenly, place it on the splint, then put a wooden or iron bar underneath, and strain the breakage so that it does not move; and let the limb rest beneath the ribs until they are aligned again.
And instruct the patient to lie on their healthy side or on their back.
And if an abscess appears, do not touch it until the abscess has calmed down; then apply what we have mentioned before; and then proceed to restoration, and strain as necessary, unless there is any further injury; this is the method.
Of the breaking of the shoulder
The shoulders are what is between the collarbone and the top of the shoulder blade, and if it is broken, then you must restore according to one of the two methods; that you take a piece of soft leather in this way.
or ise l'enem :
And the other method is that you sway the patient on their forearm, and tie the hand to their neck, then command two assistants so one dyes the part above the break in his hands, and the other dyes below with wax all around; they stretch each apart.
And if you see that the extraction is too far, tie a ligature below the break and above it; each assistant stretches to their part. And if the dislocation is close to the head of the shoulder, it should be put one ligature below the socket, and another toward the elbow below the dislocation; similarly, if the dislocation is towards the elbow, a light ligature must be placed carefully until the dislocation is even above and below the joint; then place the break equally as needed, and reset, unless inflammation occurs.
And if inflammamoins occur, do not reset it until after six days, and apply a cloth soaked in oil or ointment to ease the inflammation; then reset, and the way of resetting is that you place the plaster on the dislocation, then assemble the arm over the shoulder, and put your hand under the shoulder or near the breast; and wrap it, and hold firm at the joint above the shoulder, until the limb is straight if nothing hinders, unless the bone is not moved.
If you suspect the bone is not moving, use splints, and place on the fracture a wider and stronger splint than the others, with two spaces between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it passes beyond the fracture three finger-widths from either side; then strain across the splints as I have said at the beginning of this chapter on treating fractures, applying greater pressure while gradually reducing.
If you see the swelling from the splints and the pressure as we have said, during the time when you restore the fractured limb, and doubt that the wound is still hot, then let it be bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then examine each of the three days, ensuring no itching or swelling occurs at the site, or any numbness comes to the member because it is too tight. If so, as we have said.
If no such events occur, then do not loosen the bandage until after three days or more, and let the patient rest on his back, with his hands over his stomach; and place one piece of linen evenly, and observe every hour during the day or night to ensure that there is no movement in the fractured limb does not move or become softened by the bandages; if soothsaying by medicinal power, and give him the meat we have put before likewise; and when it begins to eat, let grow. And it is customary for the shoulder and leg should be loosed in forty days all; and then afterwards may on give baths and ointments with medicine of balms at the place.
Of a break of the arm
The arm consists of two bones called "phalanges," one small, holding the palm, and one large, extending above to the little finger; sometimes only the large phalange is broken, or only the small, or both together.
When the small phalanges are broken, the restoration is easy, as is the healing; when the large one is broken, then the sanation [healing] is poor and more painful than if both were broken together. If it's only the small phalange that is broken, a little extension may be sufficient to set them equal again.
is.
And if in the breaking into pieces, place each one back to its place, and if any are misaligned that do not fit their socket, then straighten them as we have said before.
And if with the breaking into pieces and wounds, I have spoken to each individual surgeon; they take up the treatment.
t. If any accident occurs in the limb, as itching that comes to the limb, you should wash the limb with warm water until the itchiness is soothed; and let the limb not be left at complete rest. Then resume tightening, and if the bandage is softened and the bone released, along with similar matters, proceed accordingly.
And if the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, you must soften it a little and let it be so for several days until the swelling subsides, then resume tightening.
And if none of these things that we have mentioned come to the patient, let them rest until 20 days or so. Then place their hands on his neck and make sure both sides are even, and beware of movement and digestion; they should sleep on their backs; and know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 35, and by chance in 2 cups, according to the compositions and complexions of the substances.
of a hand fracture
He says that on the back of the hand there are few fractures, but they occur many times bent.
And when the sole of the hand is fractured or bent, it requires that the patient bend his knees crosswise and stands erectly straight before him; then he places his hand under the extended thigh, extends the ministers over the broken bones, and sets them in alignment as long as they are well joined; and applies a bandage and stitches, if there is an abscess, then he puts a splint according to the quantity of the fracture, and it should be wrapped in a linen cloth.
If the fracture is around the tooth root near the sole of the foot, make a splint out of linen cloths and instruct the patient to press it against the broken area; then stretch from a long piece of cloth, making sure the support is as wide and large as the palm's breadth, and hold in place appropriately.
And if the fracture is in the forehead, it must be placed with a splint above and another below on the sole, ensuring that the hand remains open and straight, then tie the entire area around the hand, securing the joints between them.
And if the fracture comes to any of our joints, if it is a dislocation, position it equally as needed; and hold with the sole, and see if you place a small straight splint to lift the dislocation without movement; and if the fracture is at other joints like the index or others, position them equally, and bind with the healthy bone that follows; or bind all together in one tie so they may move as needed, or place a splint above it, as I have described; and pay attention to restoration and abscess treatment, and dress any wounds that occur, as I have said.
Of a broken hip
The bone of the hip is often fractured, and one can see when it turns forward and backward; and its restoration consists in using a ligature above the break and another below. The patient lies on their face, then extend each of the ministers to his respective part equally; and it is when the break is within the bone.
If the fracture is close to the hip root, one line goes towards the wrist and the other away from the break. Similarly, if it's near the groin, then make the line next to the groin, followed by an extension; place the mirror so its two hands are equal in length, as naturally fitting, and then place the cast, ensuring no sores develop.
If there is an abscess present, allow it to heal first then return to your craft and care; the lithotomy is done in a particular manner. It is necessary that you wrap around the break with a double bandage made of .ij. or .iij., and leave enough for extra material; then turn the leg until the heel reaches near the knee's root, and put a long thread between the hip and the leg, below the groin, and let the end of the thread hang over; then twist the leg and thigh with the bandage, and place an iron at the bone of the leg; then insert leather strips of soft cloth to evenly tighten it; then start tying three or four turns above the break; as you move more up from the break, tie less tight. Then return to the two loops of thread that you placed between the leg and thigh, and put in there are .ij. points, then go back to the top part of the thread, until reaching the foot's size; keep it still if it does not move from its place, then leave like this, then no abscesses or swellings do not appear again.
If it occurs and the dislocation happens again, do as follows: if there are pieces of bone that can be felt, then one should widen the opening; if not possible, break into the joint, extract the bone fragments; treat the injury as we have said many times, until healed.
At no time is the thigh broken in this manner as with the shoulder and arm; however, such a method of restoration does not cause harm to the patient.
And know that the thigh is restored in 1 day or less or more, depending on the variations of constitutions.
Of the groove of the knee joint
It is known that in the groove of the knee joint there are few breaks, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it's not just a crack or a fissure, and it leads to all kinds of wounds, feels like a cut, and this hurts quite badly.
And the restoration is that one puts equal pressure where there are depressions on its sides, until they can be moved - then place the splint, and if necessary, put a round stake (stele), and strain it as needed, then follow all the precautions we have described for other breaks such as hot boils and similar things; apply to each accident what is appropriate, until healed.
f crap ses que et tir ma peu: s :
It is said that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called by right "talus", and the other is called "fibula"; and all fractures occur as they do in the arm, and for this reason the restoration is done just as with the arm equally, and the procedures are all the same.
And if both bones are broken together, then the leg twists in every part.
And if the delicate bone is broken, it twists forward.
If the large bone is broken, it feels great pain and one can see it clearly; then turn it back. Then make the extension, set it straight, and bind the fragments evenly; however, it must be tended to if the fracture is ugly, and there are multiple pieces, so that the setting of the bones be minor and lighter; and do it according to your virtue.
And when you have completed your work, take two strips of dressed wood that wrap the leg from one side to another, and are as long as the leg from the groin to below; then wrap it in two layers with a band above and below, and tie them tightly together so that the leg does not tilt to either left or right, thus making it well-set; and no one should administer any other treatment for the length of the leg if it is made of wood, and they place it as a splint to prevent movement, properly applied at the fracture site where there is an open wound; each day move the leg to check for pus or any other accident, and care for it until it becomes healthy.
From the bone fracture of the foot
To the ankle there is no fracture, but to the bone of the foot comes no break and to the bones near it, and nothing occurs that causes concern or various conditions.
And if it occurs that the bone of the foot is fractured, and you see these bones protruding from each other, place such poorly set feet on the ground as though they were about to walk, then put your own foot under theirs where the bones are elevated, press until they return to their places; then apply a splint and stuff it with cotton at .ij. chiés (two fingers) thickness, secure it again to the affected foot, then wrap with bandages around it, and other things as needed.
And when three or four days have passed, you may remove the splint, for you will find that the bones are aligned and fused together, either broken or set correctly.
If any of the bones are broken, repair them as we have said with arm bones; then put a splint on the injured limb according to its length, and make it slightly wider, then place the board I mentioned under the leg, and quickly straighten it; if there are two or three, or more, breakages, place a splint for each one according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and secure the board under the foot so that their upper edge is above the abdomen.
And it is necessary not to forget the other things I have said about other fractures; and treat each injury as needed.
Regarding the bone break in the wrist
When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, she should sit on an elevated seat, then lean back onto her side and be supported behind; then fill her womb with cotton, adding as much as one straw; then have the woman stand up, and lift her back little by little, so that the cotton jumps to the entrance of her nature, and restores the bone with the straw; and when she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and once she has urinaturi.e., reattaches it: do this for seven days or more; then the fracture will be restored, and if you wish, take a pouch of goat's wool, tie a rag at its mouth, fill the whole pouch in her nature; then blow into the rag until the air fills inside: her nature will restore itself. Then it should be filled with cotton again, and left as such for several days until healed.
And when the bone of the arm or woman is broken, restore it as we have described for the hip bone; and these fractures are not hidden from those who apply their knowledge and use this book. For a fracture signifies various conditions in restoring the right way: therefore, thus.
When the fracture is to be reculer l'endroit li plixque lesditees: si tuet li estraie i d’en qui plus que le boute la, et de li nus vergete, ne do il est ront; puis quittere mourme.
Of fracture with wound
It is for those who have fractures with wounds, especially if they are large like the hip or shoulder bones or similar ones, that they should be well-aligned now, as indicated by the splints we have mentioned.
And if the wound is healed, and there's no inflammamoin of vitriol, then if you have nothing else, continue to restore the fracture at the same time as that day or next, unless pus comes.
When abscesses appear, leave the restoration until the new moon, as long as the abscesses are soothed, and do not touch or bandage it either on the second or fourth day, lest you bring about a bad accident.
If broken bones are appearing near the skin and exposed, it is necessary to gently realign them with your hands, applying slight pressure.
If it is difficult to realign extensions with your hands alone, take the iron instrument which has six or eight long claws and the width depends on the wound's size; thus, the doctor should grip three or four (depending on how many are needed for each fracture treatment); they should be round and slightly larger, so that it does not buckle under pressure to the member at work, and have a thickness in front.
The dislocation is called "palainche" because it requires that the shoulder joint be placed under the visible head of the bone; and push once until it returns, making them equal to each other on both sides. And if there is a subtle breakage, and the tissues cannot properly grip the bone, then one must cut off the top of the bone so that the tissues can have power over it.
And if you cannot bring back the bone as we have said, then with an instrument suitable for this, whether it be a saw or chisel to your ability; next remove whatever is lodged in the hardness and small splinters of the bone.
And when the bone is brought back and the patient feels great pain afterwards, be sure that it is not in its natural place. Do so until it is in its rightful position, then apply a piece of cloth soaked in vinegar stained black; and properly if such is necessary; and do not put any cerote or other substance with oil on the wound, lest it causes rot and decay; then provide dressings when you have restored the bone, leave the wound uncovered, and cut off all coverings completely around according to the amount of the wound, and make sure that the wound is not strained by the fracture; and many times this has been done by the mad doctor, causing death or rot in any case; the pressure should be less severe and softer than other fractures.
If the wound is bad or large and you doubt that an unexpected event might occur to it, as we have said, and if there is pain at the site, then do not place anything on it; but wrap around it, in the area of dressing, with hard bandages, and tie them. And when after one day or two days a swelling appears near the wound, remove what you had placed over everything, and apply healing ointment to the wound, as tetrafarmacist-like remedies.
It is necessary for you to loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it becomes firm and healthy.
heu, and thet des le temps et thou chest ifst de la gis tre est les;
And if this continues for many days, it cannot be joined but returns repeatedly with a bowing motion, as there are small fragments of bone, so you must carefully open the wound and remove all these displaced pieces which cause that pain.
And if a fistula occurs at the location or any other form of decay, it must be treated as described in this chapter before. And when bones are broken and exposed on the limb, similar to the hip or shoulder bones, among other large body parts, do not attempt to set them, for many times death comes from it; instead, leave it until it heals, perhaps removing it after 12 or 30 days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, just let it be.
And for bruises that occur around a swelling.
Many times after the healing of the break, especially when it is near the joint, the unsightly appearance of the limb can be seen; and by chance, it may not be able to perform its natural actions.
Take note then if you use any medicines such as aloes, frankincense, and myrrh, gum arabic, acacia, or similar substances; whether you take none of these things individually or all together, mix them with astringent wine or an abundance of honey or spices; place it in the stomach envelopes well, and do not loosen them on consecutive days; then remove it, and start again another one until the inflammation is gone like bone; you strain under a piece of leather well made; because the property of the leather is that it removes all swellings above the limbs; and if the inflammcuation has turned as hard as stone or similar material, and needs to be removed, so do the excess clearly; then take it to any barber shaved off completely until gone, and treat until healed.
When the broken bone is restored and remains after weak and delicate limbs for many causes: one because it was tied too tightly, and not loosened as it should be; or because there were too many ligaments, which did not allow proper circulation to the limb; or due to excessive bleeding; or because of very large movements at inappropriate times; or because there is little blood left in its body, so they are weak.
And the care is to make the patient eat well and keep his body supple, until the blood multiplies within him; and give him baths, and bring him joy and comfort; then apply heat to the limb so that the pores draw great nourishment, often cleansing it with water frequently until circulation reaches the limb; and he returns to its natural form.
The member becomes twisted after health is restored.
When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bone broken openly, and the shape of the affected limb appears ugly, yet it does not deviate from its natural course: do not believe those who say that one must entirely break down a member anew, as many foolish people have done in our land; such practices are blamed, leading to great harm, and sometimes death. However, if the dislocations and twists are recent, it is necessary to treat them with warm water or softened herbs cooked like wormwood leaves, roots, melilotus seeds, and similar substances; apply a mollifying plaster as well-made diaquilon, take wormwood muscatel juice, mix with goose grease or sesame oil, then place the plaster on it. Alternatively, use fatty figs crushed with flaxseed flour, and other medicines that alleviate stiffness.
And never is the dislocation of bones treated by continuous and prolonged rubbing with damp hands. Instead, facilitate movements in the limb every hour.
It is to be put on the bone of the sore it with care and diligent, immediately apply, as prescribed by leprochee de pains au dret les l’ostee, et si a le mieux teneur ou se, et si bon est la plaie par.
Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, so it cannot move, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation comes to any part, one must now return it without delay.
the is there. And remember to ould he haste as ite d, and dis-ce mon doux la bone ce losse de la ple des cudres le t s.
In any case, when this occurs, make a bandage for the patient, then leave it until the inflammation is soothed; then raise the limb with warm water and oil, then gently exercise each part as needed according to where treatment should take place.
And I have ordered the sections on shoulder dislocation up to fingers.
Of the lower jawbones.
Sometimes the jawbones are dislocated outward, and the dislocation of both is by two ways: either they are slightly ossified from their places, and softened a bit; or they are completely dislocated, hanging toward the back, causing saliva from the mouth that prevents it from being held in, unable to close its mouth, and wrapping its tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, they return by various arrangements.
And if it is entire and complete, it must be reset quickly and precisely, without hesitation or doubt.
And in such a manner that the minister dyes the patient's hair, and inserts the point of the mirror with one hand into the root of the dislocation at the jawbone within the mouth; if the dislocation is from two parts; and the other hand should be ready to set it equal; and instruct the patient to soften their mandible, move them in all directions.
And places the mirror evenly, until it returns to its place.
And if the repositioning is difficult, especially when they are both jawbones together, with warm water and oil, until they can be gently moved; do not force them to move as we have instructed.
When they are equally realigned, and the wound of the patient heals well with softening sensation, then place a cloth moistened in a mixture of rose oil and wax on it, and lightly bind it together with soft ties.
and the patient sleeps on their back, with their head between two cushions, ensuring they do not move to either side or strain themselves by turning in bed, but should gently consume small pieces of meat until the pain subsides, and the jawbones are thoroughly numb.
and then feed them whatever they desire lightly, ensuring they do not open their mouth to eat or drink until the jawbones are well numb and healed.
And if the two jaws cannot be reset to their place within an hour and are not returned to their original positions, then fever and familiar soreness come, and perhaps intestinal perforation, and sometimes they vomit clear phlegm.
And when you see this, then say it is peritons; and many times death comes to those who have it, in seven days.
Of the fistula.
The strength cannot hold within itself along the ribcage continuation and the buttocks, and it is not dislocated at any time by chance, and this can be felt well.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms; then firmly presses the point with your palm and it returns; then place a plaster cast and bandages, and secure them.
and the chin which is towards the throat cannot dislocate; if it does not, and if it dislocates at any time, then reset the joint back to its place as we have said; then apply a plaster cast and bandages, and secure them, and instruct the patient that they rest until they are healed.
And similarly, bring back the head of the shoulder when it is dislocated from its place.
Regarding the dislocation of the shoulder.
It is said that the shoulder dislocates in only three ways: one where it dislocates to the lower part of the arm; and the second where it occurs at the upper part (the elbow); and occasionally it dislocates upwards, but this happens rarely.
should not ce est liest line tre benue Tudie l’s; they are the old with theta; if: M f: (tch and the c. If he Ben: it is the Sont-number but I.
And sometimes it happens to certain people with a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells from a hot boil, and they think it is dislocated by this.
It is therefore necessary that you test it, until you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And sois que lepireuxet sache it is the. ici. At the head of the shoulder you will find a hollow, and below the joint to where the top of the shoulder touches, as if it were some ears; and the patient cannot bring their hand near themselves nor move in any way.
And similarly, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you can see it clearly upon touching.
And this manner of dislocation cannot be corrected if it is new or the child is ill-disposed.
The manner is that the minister lifts the patient's hand upward, then removes the shirt under the elbow, and lifts the joint forcefully upright to its place; then the minister lifts the hand and extends it upwards, placing it back down gently, which will happen swiftly.
And if it does not come as we have said in the days following, it is necessary for the patient to be bathed in warm water; and apply an emollient soothing mixture, such as an infusion of altheae and fenugreek and mellow melilotus in water, and then apply.
then lay the patient on their back, and place under the elbow a strip of linen that is neither too soft nor too hard, then put the physician's hand over the heel onto the bandage, and gently lift the shoulder blade while moving the injured hand.
And other ministers wash the patient's head downward so it does not move further; that shoulder is now back in place, and if you watch as the resetting occurs in this manner:
and it is that you make present a man who is taller than the patient; he should be directly towards their side, and lift the shoulder of the afflicted person's saddle, and raise the saddle upwards so that the patient hangs in the air. And other ministers pull the patient's hand downward toward their belly. And if the patient is too lightweight, attach something heavy to them, and now the dislocation has returned.
And the joint is also reset in another manner: and it is such that one inserts a long stake into the ground so that the head of the shoulder is similarly aligned as a peg, neither too large nor too thick. Then it is placed under the patient's arm but with cloth beneath them, and the limb should be long and slender; then their hand is extended away on another side properly, and the joint will return to its place promptly.
and if it does not return due to all the things we have said, then do this treatment: take one stake of two arm lengths and four palms wide, which has its head shaped so that movements can enter from front under the seat, in this manner:
Then place the fur on the patient's head covered with cloth so that it does not slip and cause pain to the patient, then put the shoulder underneath the patient; extend both arms over the length of the fur, and attach the shoulder to the fur, and bring the arm to the front towards the hand, then place the arm under a wide shelf's edge, let the hands hang downward on one side: now hold the joint in place.
And when it is done in any way you see fit, if necessary place a spoon of wool under the elbow, then apply the plaster with powdered substances, incense and frankincense to the entire shoulder area, then stretch the joint quickly, turn the bandage over the plaster, and wrap the hand around its neck, allowing the hands to remain thus.
And it is necessary that he eats little while the limb remains comfortable, for it will heal faster; and then eat more after five or six days, and move it; if it becomes firm and not softened, then it is healed.
And if the dislocation is severe due to moisture or another cause, it is proper that you provide three punctures there, as instructed in the chapter on cauteries.
And if you do all this, and it remains dislocated after six and a half days, and the joint cannot be lifted or raise the arm forward, then know that the nerve at the shoulder blade is pinched or stretched or weakened; and know that the joint will never lock into place.
The dislocation that occurs towards the back and limbs, or behind, is caused by a blow and extension of hands, and you must treat it with another remedy; and care until it is healed.
And if after healing comes stiffness to the limb, and tardiness in movement, often does the patient suffer greatly, until that stiffness is alleviated, and returns to its original state.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder blade
It is said that the shoulder joint dislocation occurs at points and returns to them; if it is dislocated in all parts, especially front and back, and the dislocations are not repositioned, as one can clearly see and feel; they occur according to each configuration. And when you join the dislocated limb with its counterpart, if it appears clearly. For the joint is raised, and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its shoulder at all.
And it is necessary to reset as soon as abscesses occur, for if they come, the repositioning would be difficult; and sometimes not all can be reset entirely, especially when it's in the back; this is worse than other dislocations, causes greater pain, and possibly death.
The restoration is, when it can be reseted, that you stretch its hand to your two hands; and the arms are spread wide, and the fingers according to the bone around, above and below, place the joint back together or at the root of its palm until they return to their original position.
And if dislocation is at the front, it returns when the hand doubles over to itself, and the root of the palm's hinge that has become dislocated.
And if it does not return to place, strengthen with strong extension; and have two ministers extend the arm, and they hold the arm from both sides, so that there is no movement in extension; then turn the arm each way, after you have wrapped a long, wide piece of cloth around it.
and when the physician joins the joint with its hand, if you anoint any oil to soften the joint, then fill the joint so it returns.
And when it is in place, then apply a dry poultice with egg yolk, firmly stretch the area, and support the arm against the affected side, leaving it for several days before releasing.
And if the joint is firmly in place, release it and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not tighten properly, reapply the poultice and bandage, leaving it for several days until it is securely set before releasing.
And if it feels unsteady after the realignment of the joint, and it moves again, then bathe and rub it well, applying pressure until it is soothed; or place a fat sheep's wool on the joint, leaving it for one day and night before oiling and immersing in a bath. When it is swollen, rub the joint promptly, then reset it in place, and then apply a bath; do this twice or thrice until it becomes healthy again; if you see any bruise from moist heat, warm some butter with fennel, and strain onto it; it will return to its proper position.
Hand dislocation
The dislocation of the hand occurs, and its return is lightweight compared to other joints. It must be hastily brought back to place in the same hour it becomes dislocated; thus when the finger swells or if an abscess appears hotly.
And the repositioning is such that you place the patient's hand under a table, extend their fingers, and align them properly so they can put their palm over the appearance of the joint, and hold it until it returns.
Nevertheless, you must check to see if it is properly placed; then place the patient's back of their hand under a table for extension and repositioning. And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, place the patient's back of their hand under a table and align your hand to that appearance of the joint. If it returns now, it's fine.
If this is not so, if the strain of pain-soothing balms eases abscesses and he allows them to begin again in such a manner.
And if it cannot be endured, and you are unable to place it back in its rightful position after any days have passed, the misaligned joint persists.
and does not respond to any treatment so that the hands remain yellowed, and cannot grasp anything at all: then say that the nerves or arteries are severed; there is no other remedy but to attempt extraction near the case with a fire cautery, and perhaps nothing else works.
When the hand is in place, put on the splint we have mentioned, then strain and leave it for 5 days, then release and let it be like this.
If it cannot move well and there is no cracking sound, warm the area with hot water, and rub until smooth.
Of thumb dislocations in the hand
and: Zubons t. If Ingh
Then they are the elbows, and place the dislocation into the cuffs until it returns, then support the head of the elbow, and bend towards the part where it is dislocated.
and let it be for two days, then on the third day make it even as before; and after that bind it as we have said, allowing one day's movement, and again binding, and making it move, and unbinding; do this often until it is straight.
and do the same if it is dislocated at the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it becomes straightened; and do the same when it is dislocated on another side.
By dislocation of the spinal column of the back
When the spinal column of the back or neck is dislocated, if there are several dislocations and no treatment, for death quickly approaches to harm the patient.
And the signs are that the urges run without control and cannot be held back, and many times limbs become softened or both buttocks or one arm or another.
And often the spine is dislocated by four parts; that which dislocates at the rear is called "gilbotomy":
And if its treatment involves restoring after 'gilbotomy' has occurred since childhood, there is no cure or healing at all.
And that which comes from a fall or impacts or similar things, the old methods of healing by lengthy speeches say there is no great benefit in any way.
However, I have shortened it according to my intention, and formed extracts in various ways.
I say that with the inflammation that comes on the penis forefront, there is no remedy or health.
and similarly to those that occur directly in the two sides, and cannot be treated except for that which precisely comes upon the back, as I say;
in the ouz mettie c's such that: es ce et lesse ond not fail and so I s; 9. That yout ben tre t que to pas they are f que le t, forment de le pe la manje; Probile: it is: there: a can be an.
Then insert a thick iron rod at the top in the ground firmly, and another on the sides, and tie a leather strap around the patient's shoulders or other areas like hips, knees, ankles.
and two ministers hold the straps - one at the top and the other on the sides among the two rods.
And they should be tightly secured as we have said before, and the ministers place their palms firmly on the spine until it returns to position.
If it does not return by this method, take a rod three arm-lengths long and chevroned on one side, place the patient to one side, rest their head on the rod near their shoulder, then insert the other end of the rod into their spine. and position the ends of their feet under the other end of the rod, pressing firmly until it returns to its place; if you see this, twist the rod towards the hand.
And insert two tines at the top of one side of the patient's head, and towards their feet on the other side, with about an arm-width distance between each prong above and below.
And it shall have in each bundle one piece of cloth or linen soaked, through which the inflammation turns, and let the bundle be firmly pressed into the earth so that they do not move; and between each pair of bundles there should be a returning piece of cloth, on which the inflammations turn, and it shall have in two returns two small pieces of cloth as long as your hand, to turn the swelling.
And then tie the ligaments among the bones at the swelling towards the head, and the other ligament towards the joints on the opposite bundle, with each assistant turning their respective bundles to all the ligaments, and the master aligns the spine equally as we have said.
And when they are levelled, then place a drying herb with abundant egg on them, and then the poultices, and then the plaster of a tablet three fingers long, which will purge the lump of the gibbus (kyphosis) and the healthy part of the spine; then bind it with a ligament as we have said, and use subtle nourishment for the patient, until they are healed.
If anything comes in the end of health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines with the spoon we have mentioned before; and never once do I administer a piece of lead.
and never does the appearance come in the lower spine of the back, and one believes it to be dislocations; and 'tis the bone that is protruding, so there should not be any assumption: lest perhaps death would result from it.
regarding hip dislocations
Joints of the knee and shoulder joints only come from dislocations alone, not like other joints; the knee joint is dislocated in four parts: within and without, front and back; more within than outside, less in front and behind.
And the knowledge of dislocation within is such that when one joins the injured leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer, and opens more on the side of the patient than on the healthy side, and the injured cannot double its knee joint in a fire. And there is heat swelling of an abscess nearby because the head of the hip comes close.
And the sign of those for whom it occurs with delay, is such that this accident is opposite to these before.
And the signs of those who suffer in front are such that their leg is well straightened; however, do not double the knee without pain, and if one wishes to make it walk, it cannot beforehand, holds in its urine, swells with anger, and when walking, passes over the heel.
And the signs of those who suffer in back are such that they cannot expand their knee or double it, and that leg is more crooked than the other, and the anger is softened, and the head of the hip reaches to the level behind the ribs.
The recurrences of this type of dislocation are such that it must be relocated promptly, and its duration depends on its nature, there is no remedy; and one must not have the slightest illusion.
In those whose dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, quickly return the joint, push it inward and outward, and move to right and left; perhaps it will return on its own without needing further care.
And if it does not return in this way, one must summon a strong assistant and support the leg strongly with two hands, or with a strap above the knee. and another assistant extends their hands over it in such a way that they place their hands under the thighs, then grip with a soft strap above the buttocks; and yet another ties with the cord.
And they extend forward and backward all at once so that the patient stands up straight once, and then hangs suspended.
This method of extension is common in four similar cases, and if the dislocation has been reset, as we have said, it is well.
If not, you must provide care for that case. When the dislocation is in the jawbone, it is necessary to tie the patient on his uninjured side, then place a ligature at the hip joint root, and the part below the angle, then extend the ligature upwards towards the shoulder and towards the neck;
t ac they are t
And if you cannot hold it in the manner we have said, then you must bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong swollen ligament over both heels and knees, and let the affected leg be extended two fingers more than the other.
Then let it hang from a staff over the head and be two arms' length above ground; then command one attendant to hug the waist of the patient, and have another attendant also hanging with the afflicted one, who will fully embrace the waist, for the joints return swiftly now.
And when the dislocation is on the underside, if you lay the patient down as in that of hernia, and properly draw out a ligament over the affected leg, and at the hip also.
Then place two fires, one at the head and one at another spot, then insert a fire between the thighs in front of the patient near the form. And surround with wet cloths so it does not harm the patient, then extend each minister toward them, and mirror correctly places his hand to align the dislocation.
If it returns, that is good. Otherwise, place on a table and press as we have said in the bandaging, and lay the patient's sore side down.
And when the dislocation is before you, it must be hastily extended by hand, and according to what I have said; then place the mirror opposite the painful limb, and press with the other hand, extending down towards the groin.
And if the dislocation is behind you, it must not be extended downwards or lifted from the ground, instead it should lie as a hip would be dislocated backwards, as we have said for lying on two legs raised. and placed face-upwards, the limb extended as we have said beforehand, and it must be pressed upon the joint to the table;
When the patient extends their legs and they are equal in length; then place the buttocks, apply the spatula, and bind with a bandage so that the hip does not move.
And it rests for three or four days then reset, and apply the spatula on top; if you see they are equal as before, bind with a bandage again, and leave it for three days; then reset, and let it heal well, until the limb is comforted.
For dislocation of the knee joint
The joint is dislocated in three ways: that is to say, forward and backward, and not sideways.
And the signs are such that you command the patient to bend their leg at the thigh, and if it does not reach the thigh, know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit upright, extend their leg if they can, and place your back to their face, placing your feet under theirs.
t.
And apply the plaster over it, and raise the leg to the thigh, keeping them together strongly for iii or iv days, then release; and do not allow the patient to walk until the limb is comfortably supported.
And if the limb cannot be straightened completely, strengthen it as we have said in treating the hip, until it is sound.
Regarding ankle dislocation
The heels are at times numb, at times not fully dislocated, both inside and out.
And the signs that indicate the ankle is swollen, and it tries before reaching the part where it was dislocated.
If the movements are slight, it must be gently extended by its hands when only slightly touched.
And when it is dislocated completely, you should make the patient sit upright, and support them with a servant outside of their leg above the ankle.
Then grasp the foot with your right hand and then with your left twice, then extend it upwards gently and place the foot firmly above.
le asudulukber that n.
If it cannot return thus, then lay the patient on his back on the ground and place a firm stick between his thighs, wrapped with cloth so that he does not move.
Then wash the thigh and another minister extends the foot with hands or rope so that it is tied around the neck of the foot. Then extend each minister equally, and the sticks be firmly between the thighs of the patient to hold the patient when extended.
Then align the mirror correctly with the dislocation in your hands, and other methods soak the leg below, and the dislocation will quickly return.
And when it reaches the point of healing, place the poultice and apply pressure there, firmly bandage it, wrap the cloth around the leg, and watch for the veins behind the ankle to ensure the ties are not too tight.
Then leave it for two or three days, and loosen the ties if necessary, re-bandage it; then remove the bandage on the third or fourth day, and instruct the patient to walk by foot for four days. And if it moves beyond this point, it is not secure and may dislocate again.
And if an abscess occurs there, it is necessary to soothe it, as we have said elsewhere, until it is healthy again.
And of these two:
est les bene de la; and sof ;
And if the dislocation is in any part of the back or foot, you must make the patient sit on a plain seat or table straight, and place your foot under where these joints separate, then firmly press with your foot until it returns.
And when it is evened out and there is nothing separating, place a table under the base of the foot with two chairs, then firmly press, and leave for three days, then release; let them rest until they are healed.
Of wound and dislocation together.
When a wound comes with dislocation, and one sees it needs to be restored, many times it happens that the patient dies.
If you are not experienced in the treatment, if you do not have expertise in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and patient, then do not be presumptuous.
And begin with the treatment of calm abscesses that are hot, and leave the patient in God's hand if you do not see hope for health. also de lignes that, which les autres m eco; then f n’s; s.
And when the limb is in place, administer soothing substances to calm abscesses and treat the wound as it should be with dried ointments.
And if there is a dislocation causing fractures, and you must remove small bones, follow what we have said in simple illnesses.
And guard against entering a state of fear, as I have said, because this is in accordance with your Maker, and for the health of your soul and body. Amen.
