Oh you dear son, I have accomplished this book which is the tail of medical knowledge and included its completion through explanations and statements. And it came to me in a vision that I have completed this treatise with this topic, which is part of the "currygy," or surgery.
And because the art of hands is fortified in our region and is established throughout, it means that the science will perish, and nothing prevents us from delving into the small writings of ancient books that have been made by hand. And this has given rise to errors and arrogance, understandings are closed, and the knowledge is distant.
Or it seems to me that I have revived this treatise in its entirety according to the path of presentation and statement, and will gather together the forms of cauteries and other instruments of the work with the juxtaposition of declaration and preparation as is proper for the craft.
And because there are no worthy masters in our time of hands, the art of medicine is stretched out. And it requires one who will immerse himself in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so long as he knows the judgment of limbs, and their forms and connections, and has knowledge of bones, nerves, joints, and veins, and the number of fingers and toes, and the movement and resting points of their paths.
And for this reason Ivory said that it is not much without the book and with the work is little; and mainly in the art of hands.
We tell you in the introduction of this book that who is not familiar with things previously mentioned, will guard himself from error and harm; so I have often seen many more of those who engage in this science and abandon it due to lack of sense and experience.
For I have seen a fool who performed an abscess incision on the scrotum or nape of a woman and cut into her arteries; because this way so much blood comes out that the woman dies between her hands.
And I have seen another man who betrayed a thorn from an elderly person's foot, and the thorn was large; he took it along with him for three years.
And I had already been called for his treachery, and I saw the dislocation of the patient's leg and its size, and I knew that he would likely die if left untreated.
And I have seen another man who treated Duke of our country, who had a broken leg and with the fracture there was a wound; and the doctor's ignorance prevented him from healing the break on top of the wound as it should be done by great force, and left no relief to the wound at all; and so left it until: then his leg was completely broken and his thigh fell into ruin.
I am called to come to him, and I hurried to come unbinding his leg; and when I unbound it, at once there was peace and he felt no pain.
But all the paths of decay were already confirmed or related to a limb, and it could not be healed; and the corruption continued to spread through the limb until it was entirely lost.
And I saw another man whose abscess burst open, and then it swelled up greatly due to the wickedness of his reign.
For a sore, when it is filled with black bile, it does not need to be touched with iron if it is only in part open and can thus entirely destroy what has been corrupted.
And for this reason, treating children, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: it is as follows, namely, head or neck injury in several circumstances; and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
For that you must guard yourself so that the foolish man does not speak ill of you.
If you take your weapons in hand and engage in your dangerous and forceful ways, use the better way so that by the grace of God you may be saved and honored; let loose curable diseases from grievous treatment; and arm yourself to the point where doubts are dispelled, and make it such that you can come out of this world into another of glory.
The Galician added in his warnings: "Do not take bad care of illnesses, that you may not be called the foolish man."
I have divided this treatment according to two chapters.
The first chapters are about fire cautery and medical incisions, and they are organized from the head to the feet; as well as the forms of treatments, the methods of caustic cauterization, and all that is necessary for the work.
The second chapter is about dissection and incision, as well as the use of traps and wounds, extractions of arrows, and similar things; and this chapter is also organized with regard to the forms of treatments.
The third chapter is about treating dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it orders the head of a pin as soon as possible, and the forms of horseshoes.
And so it is that our memories from the past tell us that one must declare the quality and harm of each configuration.
I say that the assessment of aid's quality and harm is lengthy discourse and subtle science and its secrets are revealed by those who have dealt with similar cases, and they agreed on this; and it does not trouble them to speak much, for I fear excessive detail.
I say that fire cautery helps with all conditions as it has to do with two types of temperatures; namely hot temperature sensation with matter and dry heat sensation with matter.
In the case of mixed hot and dry conditions involving matter, no one decided on it, and they said that fire cautery is very helpful; but others said otherwise: that cautery is only beneficial for diseases caused by heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot and it should not be used as a remedy for diseases caused by heat or dryness; but those who said otherwise claim that cautery does great good for diseases characterized by heat and dryness originating from our bodies. For when you compare the body's form and its moisture to mixed hot conditions, your joint will improve (dislocations).
And I agree to this word. For I have found it through experience.
And in every way, we do not venture far without those who have tested it and know the master of cauteries, as well as the variety of conditions that affect humans, their predispositions and causes for illnesses, and remedies and interventions over a period of time; whereas other types of conditions are beyond our concern, especially cold and moist diseases. And all of them agreed that the more there was to it, and they agreed on caustrement.
And you must know, son, that fire cautery is a secret of the remedies, and greater mercy than burning medicine.
For the fire is simple, and does not cause wounds but only to the part that is hot, and it harms no other member if properly named.
Hot medicines arise from another part by separating it, and bring diseases to the sick member that require serious treatment; and perhaps cause the illness.
For its height and mercy of its nature, fire cautery does not do this unless there is excess.
And this I have found through experiment and the length of service and study that I have devoted to the art, and it is on the borderline of things; and for this reason I apologize for the long speech, because I do not like to reveal the secret that has been restored or by fire, as well as the quality of the work, how it removes diseases from the body, just as the philosopher says in demonstration; receive it into your thoughts.
And you must know that they agree on what time the cauteries should be performed and how often.
And I say that cautery is agreeable in all times, because the nuisances resulting from its aid are spread throughout due to the use of cautery; and mainly when the cauteries are for necessary but urgent pains which cannot wait until greater maladies do not arise in the limb.
And you never think as the foolish son; for a disease that is healed by cautery does not have any recurrence; and they say so in this way; but it is not like they claim, because cauteries are not medicine that changes the constitution, or dries out the humors which cause pain, and its value lies more in quickly alleviating pain rather than strengthening health with its virtuous work and authority.
And there is that the disease does not grow according to the constitution of the malady and its body parts and virtues; and it accumulates in it excesses through the acquisition of foods and similar things, as long as cauteries are administered on time or with little excess and moisture, just like cauteries for pain caused by density, and wounds do not recur often. However, this happens rarely.
And many people do not understand that fire is called the backbone of medicine, and it's clear; but they believe that fire does not apply to medicine, although their understanding is false, and they call fire the backbone of medicine because whenever we administer any treatment for a disease and they are not valuable in themselves, then we use cauteries as well, and they are worthwhile. Therefore it appears that fire is the backbone of medicine, contrary to the understanding of people in general.
The old ones said that fire is not made from iron, but gold and the quality of its substance, and they do not cause wounds to their members; I have tried it in some men, and found that it is true, and fire of gold has more value than iron, just as the ancients say.
itin: ieu secrete à la terre aoutre chaufere esseuillustre chate andes lou, tuo[20s. Whatmeventillement of theude aiment le caste thees inlu'reste toast. (pice :en:entire.
And for this reason we use fire cauterization because it has appeared useful to our work.
I have ordered this chapter on the subject of pieces, for the sake that it be easier to find.
And for this type of cautery (flambeau d'olive),
These cauteries are useful both for moisture and cold on the brain, and due to the cause of a disease known as "soda" (a historical term potentially referring to various conditions), and because of many humors descending from high in the head, ears, and by multitude of dreams and pain in the throat and chest, especially all diseases that come from cold so like paralysis, tuberculosis, apoplexy, similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the bad humors are purged by a medicine dissolving the head, which varies from three to seven neats or three to four times, according to what its virtues and efficacy allow; then it goes again to purge the head's bad humors.
And then it is to fit between your hands and place them on the body; after that, put the root of your palm upon the root of his neck among his two neats; and when you come to do this treatment, if he bleeds from inside, remove the cautery called "olivaire," which has this form:
And put your finger in the blood sign, and withdraw and dislodge it little by little turning back; then lightly touch your hand again, and reward the spot if you see an ossicle of such small size; but if not, repeat using the cautery as I have told you; afterwards take some silk, and put it softly in cotton inside, and place it over the spot; let it stay for three years; after that, cover with waxed cloth; and allow it to rest until it is healed. The treatment of this ointment they call "tetrapharmacon" until it is sound again.
And the old one said that as much longer it is pressed upon the wound, the more it purges; and for this reason it helps move.
And they said that one should make the cautery softer as much as possible until a part of the bone is dislodged, and then they do that which is dislodged from the bone; treat it.
And the other advice is that the cautery should be softened, and push against it forcefully from the bone as large as an ales they place women put in their clothes for this reason those humours come out of hide ito acheve long.
And these two kinds of cauterization seem to me not very good for all purposes, except when there is fear in no man's heart; and I think it would be better if I left them off, because the shoulder joint has been weakened by continuous moisture solutions as we have observed in other parts of the body; and myself when the patient's shoulder joint seems to be feeble by nature, and the first sign of cauterization is more salutary and less painful for me, so I do not use this method.
From the burning oil pain at its head
Where in the main pain comes chronic and long-lasting, and it should be used by the patient's feebleness and "cochie" (referring to copper salts), and washing out the head and oil and bandages; and if we do this cauterization that we have mentioned before, and it is not worth.
Be mindful that the patient's feebleness is of strong nature, and it should not be overcooled; however, let us cauterize him with that kind of cautery we have mentioned above.
After performing cauterization at each joint of the bone, as we have previously stated, and doing one kind of cautery also called "vaselas" (possibly referring to a type of heating instrument); and place your hand in such a way that you do not see it near the bone: the patient feels much more intense pain with this form of cauterization than with others, which I will discuss further; and it is required that those performing cauterizations on joints be subtler than those who perform cauterization on the main part, and its form:
This refers to the two primary types or forms of cauterization applied in medieval medicine: one involving direct application at specific body points like joints and bones, and another potentially more general method. The text hints at a distinction between these methods based on their effects and appropriate usage context. It implies that not all cauterizations are equal in terms of pain experienced or suitability for different anatomical areas. When part of the pain is sore and prolonged, and the disease spreads to oil, and the shoulder joint is treated with medicines as I have mentioned in our division of diseases, and it does not benefit anyone: sovereignly do such cures by .ij. manere, which are
nature of
After the purifying treatment, as long as it is healthy; and if you see any of the many incendiary remedies that I have written about or treated in relation to incendiary remedies.
The iron cautery is done according to this manner. Heat the iron cautery so that its shape is like this:
And it is called "close" because its head is made in the shape of a clover or has about one centimeter of curvature, and it appears in a small way; and place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand tightly, moving it slightly until the edges of the stump are ashamed (as if they have been burnt), and let your hand be so that the artery does not burn, but rather flows abundantly with blood.
After applying cotton wool to the vein and placing it for two years; then I apply moistened cotton in burnt wool, and afterwards treat the purified spot with this remedy called "cultivating," at every point of its tip, and be careful not to cover the artery in this abscess which is still alive.
regarding the abscess
When you treat the abscess as we have described in divisions of diseases, and it does not profit; for the "cultivating" iron which is called "cultellare," heat it until it's white; and then lay a half-line along the dry spot on the bone, and hold your hand once, and that you do not cover the artery with it and cause movement in the bone; and warn me of the jaw which remains quiet when touched, and let the nerves neither have trouble nor spasm as related to painfulness, and advise about the removal or collection of blood from the artery once cauterized, or great fear for whom he knows nothing and who is not a student; and leave it in your way; but I will tell you how to collect sinew when the artery has been cauterized, and show on this page where the spot is marked as it appears.
And if you see that this iron cautery does not soothe the malady and the patient suffers, then treat it in the same way as we have said before, and heal the wound until it is healthy; and if you see, administer with the "extraction" iron cautery which we mentioned or that of the surgeon who extracts arteries, using an iron cautery with two knives; and these cauteries are better than this one and more helpful.
of ear pain from cold
blecteuxsecsurgenthefefecthoutilame achelethevelavery:sicheximente,udexthefyngre.gusture that t rnarectiforceurs :kete,santifferenches
liferransqueuse,rainsekants aucongeuses ieveurentheuangeuxagermephanter soangledesqueusiveiuages:naryre inciemeantuelueture. thissiclexinimesauraintemensherdges depeintiature
Of the mouth torment
The torture that must be treated with cautery is only those caused by phlegm, as we have said in the sections of diseases; and not to apply cautery on signs that come from bile discharge and nasal mucus.
When you treat this type of phlegm-induced torture and regurgitation from the head and gargling, it must be that you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one in the root of the ear, another a little farther back along the temple, and the third at the alignment of the two lips; place the cautery on the part which is still open, and you must make the cuts above the prominent tip of the ear, and another similar distance down the temple as for an incision; let the cautery remain in position until the bleeding stops; and this is the form of the cautery.
And it is the cuticular instrument that we have mentioned before, but it is somewhat more subtle and must be that your sword be slightly larger; after curing the wound as I have previously said, until it heals well.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have mentioned before, there will be no benefit, and the patient won't suffer fever; however, you must perform three cauterizations: two on each of the prominent tips of the ears, one remove from the head (which are called "vaslets" as we previously stated), and another directly under the jaw, and then apply a cautery on the stomach area below the mouth; and treat it accordingly as we have described.
This Old French term "de litargie" refers to the ancient practice of bloodletting—a common medical treatment during medieval times thought by some practitioners to cure or prevent illnesses by removing bad humors from a patient's body, particularly in cases where it was believed that an imbalance existed within. The term "litargie" derives from the Greek word "leitis," meaning "to bleed." Bloodletting could be performed using various tools, including lancets or cauteries (burning instruments), depending on the method and severity of treatment desired by the physician.
This Old French text pertains to the treatment of a long-term disease, which requires giving years and large doses of medicated powders to purify the brain; afterward, it treats the chief of the malady throughout, and places the cautery on the back of the head (occiput) atop the nutmeg plaister, as we have mentioned or described in plasters. The method of cauterization is as follows: heed how I have said.
If it is sound then good; and if not, he does. And for each of them, two cuts are made downward from the top of the head to its ears, leaving an interval between each cut of one finger's breadth; and they treat him as they do others, and if you find him suitable, and the sickness is severe, then for each three cuts he makes in a circular motion around it, and so much that they call them "olivares", as I have said before.
From the coldest head It is required that the patient's head be cleaned for years and everything we have said before; then he cuts the sick patient's head, and makes two cauterizations on each horn, and one behind and three above the spine of the neck; and if you have more knowledge, and his hair is moist and the sickness is severe, then he does four cauterizations on the backbone; and he leaves it so that the more painful parts become arrows, and treats it with a gentle hand; afterward he cures until the patient is sound, and uses the "olivares" as we have said before.
*Note: This line appears to be unrelated to the provided medical text, which discusses various treatments for injuries and ailments in medieval medicine. The term "epilepsy" is not mentioned within the context of the Old French medical text.*
The epileptics should not use fire cauterization on those who are phlegmatic, and it is required to first cleanse the brain for years and other curing methods that we have mentioned in the division when the sickness is great and they suffer from severe pain due to medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot suffer, then for him he performs gargling and chewing that cleans the brain often with bones as we have said; afterward he re-cuts the chief in a circular motion, and makes one cauterization on each horn, and two under the shoulder blade, and if the sickness is severe and the suffering patient, then he does cauteries as I have said before. To that person who has paralysis and softening of the muscles, four cauterizations are done: one on the backbone and three above the neck spine; and since the sickness is great and painful, and such cauterizations called "olivier," as I have said.
If the sickness is that of a child, then for him he makes one delicate cauterization in this manner:
When the cause of black bile is excess or corrupted humors and heavy phlegm, then for him he makes two delicate cauterizations as we have said to that person who has paralysis.
And if the cause of black bile is excess, and his hair is moist, therefore he cuts him something to be cleaned, as we have said before.
:.
Or if you see the patient being cauterized with many points throughout the caustic. This method of cautery softens the brain greatly; and then it is placed on cotton moistened in lamb's wool and fat from a sheep.
Of the fear for the eyes When the signs of fear come first by those that I have mentioned in the division, then it begins and causes the patient to drink warm water many times without food; and it is warded off from all moisture, and blood or bathing may occur several times on an empty stomach.
After he commands to reopen his head and performs the caustic on the head, and he applies .ij. cauters under .ij. temples where there are signs of fear; either in one or two locations depending on the signs; and for all the caustic, every vein and artery that run through the skull is affected by it along its long width; and you must prevent blood flowing out from the wound, and if too much blood appears to be coming out, then squeeze a little bit of time as per your judgment.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incision, as to how to squeeze them; and not once made a caustic or cut into those .ij. bones behind.
The lines "dou cors des larres" translate from Old French as "two corners of tears." This phrase could refer to anatomical or medical terminology related to the eye, possibly indicating areas around tear ducts or glands in relation to cauterization procedures involving delicate ocular structures.
morcegrafs coloule lapsesmeasurement.i: fromage.
sence of course:secreatimejourgeace, it:naturel encelege (itage :deme facire :faire.sach l'avocrections ;naclame ape cures dexentifere.cete.
When you apply the medicines as we have said in the division, and it does not profit at all, for indeed giving a drink to the patient with injuries of three cochies; afterwards, the doctor applies fire cupping or milliard cupping; and makes two cuppings called "clinches" on each thigh, a little above the knees; and warn you against the artery that it should not be pierced. And this is the form of cupping which is called "clinches":
When the parchment of oil is softened by illness and dampness, accordingly the cupping of this kind, called "olivaire," for such cases it takes this form:
And if you make two cuppings on the thighs as well as on the shoulders, and do not let go of your hand until three-quarters of the parchment is charred according to how I have described it.
For hair that causes the oil. Never have the hairs of oils turned to dirt and cling to them; they receive oil, and then we perform cuppings according to two methods: by fire or with hot medicines.
Or the fire cupping instructs the patient to let the hair grow long and even when it is curly; if they cling to his body, then he must restrain them so that they do not move until they are born.
(13th. Adonaignes lache desor douleins aureaigne. quant il estans comestres de ceu que le mongre le roght en un fielement en tainte uolatges lefine :n theu devisaoudermeil.
naturel. A:carne, andr negat[sic:gere. The end itent.
And if afterwards the hairs come back, and the paper is softened again then I will cauterize it there myself, as you have done before; and if the hairs are gone, then I will cauterize until the paper has lifted off its natural place, and become even, and do not touch the hair with oil.
The fiery cautery in medicine is that you command the patient to let their hairs be long and even; then make a parchment shaped like the leaf of miruete; take French soap and lime, one each; grind them well together; do it hastily so they don't cool down, then sprinkle on the shape made from the miruete leaf onto the paper with the hairs; if the illness is in only one oil, then you must treat it in the same way and also both of them; put cotton soaked in soft wax above the area where the hair grows; and let the patient's shoulder be at rest in your treatment and show me a small piece of that medicine placed there, press on it gently every time the patient feels irritation from the medicine, because they feel the same as if burned by fire. Once you have done this for a long time, then apply the medicine to your obligation. And when the irritation is not present, lift up the paper as if it was lifted by force of fire or incision; and if so, that's well done. If this is not the case, reapply the medicine on the hair again or if the medicine has already been applied, keep applying it until your operations are equal, and your skin is smooth; then put cotton soaked in soft wax onto the area where there is arsenic treatment (also called "dyafenis") or other treatments, after curing the affected area until it is sound.
And if you know that you must carry out your work with great care so the hair does not reject the medicine on its surface. If the paper becomes soft after and the hair sticks to the oil, then repeat the treatment where the paper has been properly dissolved; as you have done before; after curing it until it is sound; and that's the form of the leaf of miruete:
And take into account that people are diverse in size and shape, and according to the extent of these constraints; do not apply the same method to each patient.
about the treatment of furuncles with cautery
When you treat furuncles as we have described in the sections of diseases, and your treatments do not work, it requires that you perform cautery according to this manner. This sentence highlights the recommendation for a specific approach to treating certain conditions using cauterization, which may be based on traditional medical knowledge from historical texts.
Commandes au malaide quinche demeurant en toutsavoir queulz ainsare:et .I. Ensiet liemainne :el (13these, et leves. Causaintens I'mauge neuf. En107th thelepovocenage
After pressing the fistula it is overturned, and then remove the pus, and dry it; if it is closed, do the work and drive out the stone with a bow; after that place on the hot cautery plough-shaped, and hold your hand at the part just below the oil, so that your hands don't make a mistake; and put the cautery in the fat of the oil, and corrupt it.
If you come at the beginning of the cautery on the bone, it would be better. But if not, then resume the cautery again once, and if you know how to do so, let it stay for 3 years; afterwards place cotton moistened with wax on burlap, and treat the open sore until it is healed for 40 days, after which apply corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered; and then proceed according to what comes in your chapter.
And there is a method of cautery for abscess that none of the old ones mentioned. For an abscess, and then break open its side; after placing in the small slit where the shape of this cavity lies: and to the quantity of .III (3) parts; and hold your hand firmly so that the molten mass does not move, which would corrode its oil; it is necessary that you place cotton moistened with wax either on a white piece of cloth or in an alabastron, where the mass forms the lid of the fistula, and the healed part becomes very beautiful.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery we have mentioned, that's good. But if not, then it must be administered into the nerve of the neck, and return the fistula to the core of the nerve according to what needs to be done on its own in the end.
cracks in the lips Often, cracks in the lips are called "poils" and primarily occur on children's lips.
As you treat these cracks of what we have said in sections, the treatment does not benefit at all; instead, place a small round-shaped culture according to this form:
And you must apply it to those cracks as soon as they form; after the treatment, heal its surface until it is sound.
from the abscess of the throat
:secrevicture aster le: ouldre:escription,leu lai'savent. Leafere,later: iterration. Foro devisement. A.: and to-coment. Andor se;. Insect:sangledeface.
And when there is a displacement of teeth due to motion, and they cannot stay still, and are deformed members, and cause great pain and injury.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine, but that is of no value; afterwards apply a hot cautery to them so that you place a cane on top like this after applying the cautery quickly, and heat your hand there until the patient feels the heat from the root of the tooth; then release your hand and repeat the cautery according to your desire; afterward fill the mouth with warm saline solution for an hour and rinse away the foulness.
And in that manner the tooth which was moving is confirmed, and the softened gums are restricted, and the moisture becomes corrupted and separated.
of the pain of the teeth.
When the pain of the teeth comes from coldness or heat, and medical treatments are not effective, then it is necessary to use caustic medicine according to your methods: and hot cautery made with wax and fire cautery.
Cautery made with wax is such that you spread the wax with a spatula or iron; after applying cotton and wrapping it around the tip of a tent, then molding the wax into a ball, and place it quickly on the painful tooth while keeping your hand there until the tooth cools down; this is done often enough for its virtues to penetrate the root of the tooth, and if you see that melted wax and cotton in wax are pressed onto the adjacent tooth, and placed on a heated iron such that the feathers burn at the neck of the second tooth.
The caustic ensemble of fire is such that you spread a metal or iron cane and make it large so that the feathers do not burn in the mouth of the sick person; after heating the caustic, as soon as it forms from heat, place it on the tooth while keeping your hand there until the caustic cools down; this should be done often because the pain will last for that day or the next. It is required that the sick person fill his mouth with good wool in the hurry of applying the caustic and then rinse it out; and it is the form of the caustic:
:cure isaorse, etiquens: ices laide, andé: thepare tolé soothandent.i:
When the moisture conquers in the channels of the porter, and immediately when it comes from a cold constitution, then the patient with great pain must be relieved first by curative medicines; afterwards I burn at the root of the throat, and let it not come back to the throat again, but only warmth; after that I do another cautery on the joint where the neck meets the spine, and there should be the one called "clavicle" since we have its shape beforehand; and treat the wound as we have said so much until it is healed.
From the mouth When all and porter's diseases are cold moistures, and the patient with these diseases does not have fever or chill, and it is an ancient disease, I do two cauterizations on its neck in the places where they used to; another one around the area between the breasts; and there should be the one called "clavicle" according to the shape that we mentioned before.
And if you see, perform cauterization on the entire one called "punctum" since its shape is here in front of us in the disease of the ears; and these punctums are just there at XXX or slightly deeper. After curing the wound as we have said before, and that cautery should be done on three stitches according to this form:
And because these cauteries are lighter in that you do three for every quarter (as indicated by the context 'a cop').
From the dislocation of the shoulder When the shoulder joint is dislocated due to moisture and put back into place but cannot stay in position, repeatedly becoming dislocated with slight movement as we have experienced, then it must first be reset of a dislocation. After having soaked the painful parts of his back and chest; after warming up what is inside between the ribs with your left hand; if the joint dislodged within, heat should be applied to it using one or two needles as indicated here. (Note: 'Douqueil' may refer to a specific type of treatment in this context.)
and heat the pain as much as it pierces his chest, and with this instrumentation comes the fracture of three stitches; and thus is done the cauterization with the instrument that has three needles, for which the figures of the cauterizations are these three stitches; and the nerves correspond to the subtlety of a tent and it is the form of the instrument that has three needles:
And sometimes are applied to this one of the nerves, as it has in three stitches; et pour ces nerves:
sesarexel:xentropene laire. Forstrivel. Herepeacexure. Andres. Itisarte:
And if they are dislocated above, which little happens in that case, nevertheless make a cautery upon the thick cautery on the clavicle, or take many of such cauteries while pinching. For the joint is referred back, and the moisture is bone and is sane the painful diseases.
Cauterization of pleurisy
The old said that for pleurisy one must make cauterizations of plant roots, and in this manner: take the longest root you can find, either dried or quite large and long; and rub it with oil, and burn it, and then perform .i. a great cauterization between the chest wall and the collarbone, and .ij. small cauterizations slightly descending into the part below the beard; and .ij. another one between the fifth rib and sixth rib, leaning backward a bit; and .i. another on the navel, and .ij. between the opposite sides of the pelvis, with .ij. the ones between them moving further apart than the previous cauterization which is between these two sides; and do not press your hand tightly but apply as you would in perfuming.
And none of the old ones said that no home used fire cauterization resembling to a barber (a term which could imply a less aggressive treatment), and they shave it off and place it between the ribs, as long as it reaches the apical cavity; and leaps forth its pain like in the apical cavity of the liver. But in this practice there is fear or the painful diseases die immediately, or an abscess comes which cannot be cured.
From mouse - This line seems to be a fragmented phrase or an incomplete thought that doesn't provide much context on its own. If there was intended to relate to the previous text, it might imply using something from the mouse (perhaps referring to rodent tissue used in medieval cauterization techniques), but without further information, this is speculative and cannot be accurately translated or explained within the given constraints.
When you heal the disease of the mouse as we have said in the parts of treatments, and it does not profit at all, rather they apply .iij. methods of cauterization that are beneficial for everyone.
Of which one of these ways is that you make .iij. cauteres or .iiij., according to the length of the mouse, and according to the shape of the heating coil of the liver we have said before; and do not press your hand at all during the entire cauterization, and sometimes it falls on its back for the painful diseases.
s :sure:2nage. Thearre anding, thews:thefeiode:cumpleueuksake. Andrepresentime itcuteximpleseblewseculiscribes without itafe cite apejacres:screase:represences (accuruparticke itesse.
After lighting the two joints on fire until they are clearly seen from the other side, and then burn the cautery, and so he will have three of them; if you see that burning is applied to all parts of the cautery for three joints. After curing when it has obtained pus for a long time, and this proves that the treatments mentioned before are no longer sufficient.
Disease.
Cautery is not effective for disease, but by the stirring of "asclyties", as we have said in divisions. When you treat it according to the methods we have discussed, and your treatment does not yield any results, it must be that you make three cauteries under the belly, and one on the stomach, and another on the liver, and another on the kidneys, and eight behind the back on the spine, and at an appropriate place in the thigh; and let the cautery well penetrate into the depth of pain.
After leaving the cautery over to stir up pus for a long time, and not letting the treatment of the disease after the cautery rest; and recovery would occur, and all nine conditions would be together with God's help.
The form of the cautery used for the belly is the clavicle that we have shown before; and that one used on the back is ovate, according to what has been mentioned here.
Of swelling in the joints. When the joints are swollen due to disease and covered with yellow discoloration, it is necessary that you perform a cautery on the back of the hand between the little finger and the ring finger; and move your hand along with the cautery. And do not go too far in penetrating, otherwise there would be furos acute yellow spots, and you should perform the cautery according to this shape:
After performing two cauteries in each leg at the tip of the hammerblow (cutellare), and let the cautery be long, one on the kneecap forward and the other behind it inside the thigh; and leave the cauteries lying over to clean for a long time that the discoloration subsides; after treating the other treatments we have mentioned.
Of lameness.
When the solution of the belly comes from coldness and moisture, so much that it prevents the retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines, and cannot be treated by any curative methods; and you see the malady is suffering greatly with great vigor, make one cautery on the stomach according to what has been mentioned before, let the blood circulate at that cauterization, and three cauteries underneath the belly in a subtle manner, and eight cauteries above the hips.
And if you see that the moisturizers and the malady suffering, make one cauterization on the columne, et siens: Et seure, et .iij. Et desmeitre de laisse enuiiij. Siil : Iij. La matiere que il a lignsis in forementes leuin :le maunder aide.
Of the treatment of ulcers
When ulcers are the foundation or one or more, and are ancient and composed of large, cold, and moistly corrupt humors, and they are treated as we have described in sections, there is no benefit if you perform these cauteries: III on the backbone along the spine, which is completely detached from its origin and moved to and fro like a triangle; I on the head. II: do not perform them inside the mouth.
And if you think his stomach is cooled and the meat does not cook, and you see his face swell, then there should be a large cautery on the stomach as mentioned before; I: also on the liver; II: and another one on the entire cauldron of cauteries; let the cautery remain over the wound for a long time until it heals. After curing, the wound should be fully healed.
Of the charnosity which is named "Thélul"
When you apply Thélul, there appears to be a scraping cautery that is ignited all over the area where Thélul occurs; then let your hand remain until the cautery becomes weak at the birth of the vein, and it will not cause pain; do this once or twice, depending on how much Thélul there is; if you cauterize each one as we have mentioned, after curing with ointments they should be fully healed. And when you apply a large cautery under the cataplasm, it will give more aid.
Of a poorly treated wound
When the painful dislocation cannot bear cutting or piercing, let us describe it in its place; there comes a disease that can't be healed except by cautery.
When there is no fistula present and it is old and filled with corrupt porous moist materials, let the doctor treat it thoroughly within its foldings; then cauterize as if a raker would do upon the fistula according to how much has been entered into it, and re-cauterize these pores and corruptions so long as they remain in that state, either one time or two times or three times, depending on the amount that is needed; and warn you of nerves therein are present, and great bands. When the fistula extends to the bladder and intestine, and guard these cauterization, so it doesn't make any wounds in the flesh, and see how long, and then one shall know that tissue is healed completely whole; and after curing of lesions.
Of kidney disease Pain from frost comes, and heavy winds, and takes no toll on women, then you must do bloodletting on one side of the rain and on the other side of the clavicle with the lancet we have mentioned before; and if our cauterizations are done in moderation, there will be about three lances along a line, providing greater assistance.
The original Old French excerpt does not discuss "de la vessie" (bladder disease). Therefore, providing a translation for this phrase is outside the scope of translating from the given text since it's unrelated to its content. If you have any other related lines or context that might connect with bladder issues within that medieval medical discourse, please provide them for an accurate translation. When the bladder is soft and weakened by frost and moisture, if it retains urine, then you must perform cauterization on the backward part above the bladder where the hair begins to poke out at both sides—one on the right and one on the left; and for each lancet used, make an incision as much as your finger. Perhaps also apply a backward lancet or two, if necessary, depending on the size of the puncture wound; and perform cauterization with a backward lancet on the back, or perhaps two, if you have need for it; then carry out clavicle cauterization according to the form we mentioned before.
The Old French text does not directly mention "de la marris," which could imply a condition like mastitis (inflammation of the breast tissue). However, as with previous translations about unrelated medical topics, without specific context from the original text regarding "de la marris" or related procedures in that period's medical practice, providing an accurate translation is not feasible. If you can locate lines within this medieval medical treatise that discuss breast-related conditions and their treatment, I could assist with a relevant translation. When the breast is cold and moist, not allowing for conception, and the flowers are corrupted with their ends delayed; and when they come forth, if there is great pain: then it must be that we do three lances internally in the breasts as we have said concerning cauterization of the bladder or two on the backs—or clavicle cauterization according to what has been mentioned.
In this case, without specific references within the Old French medical text about "de la hainche" (hernia), a translation focused on historical hernia treatments is speculative. Medieval texts may not have detailed descriptions of such conditions or their management in terms we are familiar with today. If there were lines discussing hernia and its treatment, the text might involve procedures like cauterization for reducing the risk of complications from a hernia by possibly using lances to alleviate symptoms, following medieval medical practices. However, without clear context or reference to "de la hainche," an accurate translation is not possible here.
Comune: "coment. If the mounseslal (2015 century. Celtic French, soventre.measures. 3emeasurement in English lai leatient. Thisjacute. Iones. Whatunle tiare meaute. 5n.
And if this cautery is not present, then he makes two large cauterizations of the vineyard, and performs them similarly to all other physicians; and he treats it until it becomes healthy.
Pain in the back of the neck. When pain comes in the throat of the back of the neck, and it is due to cold and moisture, and this malady corresponds with what we have mentioned before in the division, then it must be purified from the thick humors by taking foul-tasting pills or other similar healthy pills.
After making the cautery; and the manner of performing this type of cauterization is as follows: it involves mixing medicines in containers, and fire cauterization according to various methods, among which one person may perform three triangular cauterizations on the back of the neck following this shape, with good depth and a large amount between each cautionary stick, leaving a significant distance between each cauterization sticks; otherwise, it is done in the middle of the neck to avoid .iiij. (23) according to this form:
And if you see, if the cauterization is performed with the double-circle that we have mentioned before in dislocation of the neck; but make it such that the circle contains the entire neck and all parts correspond to its size.
And it is the manner in which they do it for sciatica when the pain is located in the neck and does not reach down to the thigh or leg; but if it comes to the thigh and leg, then he performs .ij. cauterizations wherein the malady says that the pain lies, and .i. cauterization above the ankle .iiij. times, a little on the left side of the joint; and whether they make cutaneous cauterizations or perform the thickening at the area in question; and if the malady feels that the pain extends to the two feet or proximal to them, then he cauterizes it when it feels the pain .iij. times or .iiij. on the cautery called "points".
And if it is done correctly, then he does more; and when the pain is on the jawbone toward the thigh, then he performs cauterization with a cutaneous or circular cautery, and in all his cauteries be careful not to burn too much so that the cautery doesn't damage nerves and large arteries, and cause further harm and contraction to the patient.
And I have seen several who performed cauterization above the foot of a fracture and they kept it all night long, and the ankle also was examined and corrupt at every joints of the foot. After a stomach treatment wherein he died.
And if the pain is in two joined parts, perform cautery on one and the other, according to this method. // The surgeon said at the lancet of the hernia, from which way up such a piece of iron should be, as big as a nutmeg or maybe even less, and it should be between spikes or in gaps between them, with the distance of an inch; and the spikes should face each other over two parts, and they should look like nuts, and there should be one handful of iron well made; and that is the form.
And they should be scalded until all are red and tender, then place them on the patient's malformed hernia belly, and turn it upside down along the healthy side of the cost; let the cauterizer perform one lancet twice and leave it for three years; afterward make an embolization with wax, allowing the wound to heal over a length of ten days; afterwards perform a washing treatment until it is sound.
Albuzasim said that we use this cautery very little for the sake of its reputation, and since few people do it; but in all, this is a good cautery because it can withstand suffering, and it will heal well regardless of how it's treated.
Of the two-fold pain.
When pain comes to the back, or from falling, or by percussion, or due to too great evacuation, or because of seemingly extended cold material, none of these semblances is worth cauterying; for chilled fluid should be used instead.
It is required that the maladies are void of putrid pills or other similar signs, which must be placed on his back, whether it holds pain or not, three lines with six signatures per line according to its strength and quantity that the disease can endure; and make the cauterization as per the name "pincers" - and if you see, do .i. or .iiij. cauteries on the clavicle's knob following this shape:
This disease often comes in small children and the signs of its onset as it is:et desus. Siensemble deus, ou il neuf dame de partis devisiéngleurs et leauke tolphilmeur. Cauterre à pece vices deure estor. Thewespremerentraly laxime, augeatitgere isombreiter 12074200thief offerreversaïlls ateit'ou:
When you see this and you heal it, if you burn it with this cell's fire according to this form.
If you burn each part of the spine equally; and if you see it, burn the spine along lines or three lines, and align the points with one another after curing so that it heals according to what we have said, and warn you not to apply cautery in a manner causing nerve fluid spray.
Of the joint pain
When the pain in the joints is caused by moisture that spreads over each limb, and when it comes down to pressure points, they are called "gout" properly; and when it's due to cold causes and cannot be cured with medicines, then such care must be taken: apply fire (cauterization) around the joint of the foot according to this form: make the fire touch around the joint, and use an olive oil-based caustic substance in accordance with this shape.
And if it is necessary that you strike beneath the joint of the foot, where they call "point" (likely referring to specific pressure points associated with the treatment), and if the pains arise again in other joints as well, then many times he made cauterization under each point; making an olive oil-based caustic substance for every part, from a single to three or four cauteries per foot according to this form. And if you have further knowledge on the subject, do it more, but never hold your hand there longer than until the healing has arisen.
And if the pain descends to the back and you administer that cauterization which we have described in this chapter; and if the pain is in the hands, apply points along two lines in the fist; and if there remains no more pain on any joint or hair of the hand, then make points at each joint and also at every hair on the hand. And if the pains come down to the knees or hips, cauterize each part, and take good care with the patient and medicines. For if you do this well and purge the humors, it will be healed by God's help.
Of the route of the sinew (likely referring to nerve pathways or muscular structures)
Celt siens.
sure commande: theyre ait:s :  it:nile (only:upredre apeople of thet:gallus only. Butfere andsuele tocelle. Anderitexte. Theese.
And you know that when you do not bring the bone to the cautery yet, your work is of no value. It is required that the cauteries on children be subtle according to their size, and great men also large according to their measure; after 2 years he heals the wound with a burnt caustic until the bone has cooled down; after other ointments are applied, and for 40 days resting his painful areas so that the bruises do not pop up when he gets up from bed to go to rooms.
And after 40 years, when he wants to get up, he dresses himself with a well-made bandage and wears it for another 40 years; and has a good rest so that he does not work too much and avoids excessive drinking and eating, and high grumbling; and when he follows this teaching, he is completely cured. And I will say this after the treatment in my chapter on tailors. from abdominal pains
When other pains come to other parts of the body and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then he makes 3 caustic according to their quantity, and either ash or salt; after this treatment as we have said; and none of the ancients said it should be cauterized with a caustic at 3 angles in this manner:
But the first sign is on the edge of the wound and makes a line above it for wide healing from above; and another further down, and holds your hand in every part of the caustic. But these first caustics are heavier and more twisted.
ancient pain in no limb When pain comes in any limb, or from a fall or injury, and this pain lasts for long time, then the treatment of medicine is not valuable; therefore it must be cauterized with the caustic called "pounds", and make the caustics according to the length of the member, its smallness, fragility, weakness, location of twists, and soreness. If it has healed after the first caustic, that is well; but since this custom requires change in the members near it, then it must be made so you make the cauterizations as long as the pain remains unhealed.
from melancholy or malaise
cestarre le: the 2se develastra. Il apeart, andres enamorfele fecexentures (greface.
And if the dispersal is everywhere; and it appears clearly, so it indicates that you must cauterize these burns which we have mentioned or main ones, and one near the neck vertebrae, and another on the back vertebrae, and one great under the crucifix and another beside it, and some on the elbows, and some on the tendons of the fingers, and some in each joint of hands and feet; and warn against nerves that are under the abdomen calcining, so they do not burn. And nevertheless there is sometimes made a cauterization on the bone of the buttocks, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And you know that the more I perform cautery, the greater help it provides, and it benefits him; and you know that the maladies do not feel pain from cauterization as they do when healthy, for the body is now entirely degraded. Therefore, the cauteries must be large or small depending on the limbs and joints, according to what you find in iron instruments. Afterward, treat his flesh with flour mixed with honey and other curatives until he becomes sound again.
From within the fold or crease
When the fold does not occur in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters; yet it remains unhealthy, so a cautery should be applied to the affected member depending on its size, such as one slightly entering into the knurling of the backbone. Then treatments with ointments continue until healed. However, there is never made a cautery and in the hand or palm or backside at the nerve endings where the limb remains immobile, thus confirming that it is osteal; and accordingly no one should intervene unless they are familiar with the limbs' structures and their moving nerves.
Of albaras or armpits (assuming 'albaras' is a typo for 'albares', which might be meant as 'armpits')
The maladies of albares sont enmant.et desent siens, adoncte. Liere cautère dexpremerchief tien togeat ceintracter. Celtic com esmeanc ure, apele lice.
chascun ententire laurence.esme entera fe's itels thefaire: entailte rekt: Asterre:cetat heir laurent, il,reira.compreisentreces, theorenture carrere. Thewentures oulden: entrails.
When the sore appears at its beginning, and you see to arrest it, if you burn with fire where it seems like a circle, all around the spot of the sore; and everyone said that they also did cautery in the middle of the sore; and I don't think this is very good, because I fear it will become ulcers and rotten, and I have never yet seen anything similar; and more rightfully it should be burned around with the fire which we call "circle", as we have said in many cauteries.
Of the swelling that cannot die
When some have a disease called "adubelati", and it delays in dying or due to the superfluousness that she makes, or because of the pain of the sore when he is decrepit (meaning too old), or for its strength; and you see her delaying from dying: therefore, cauterize around much small cauteries with fire-holding, and then let it be. For it will continue to postpone death.
And if you see her piercing all the way through with it, if the fire burns because of its shape:
And put your hand in the midst of that disease called "adubelati" as long as the cautery has pierced it, and be such cauteries that the suffering is divided into so many parts that the course of the poultice becomes dispersed accordingly; after the treatment until he is completely healthy.
The curative fire by iron
Another way of disease is called "corrodens," and it's essentially an inflammation or infection affecting the limbs; since iron burns similarly to flesh, if you see this ailment on its surface that can suffer cauterization together by fire, then heat small and strong claws according to what fits the location of the lesion or illness; after you cauterize all parts until no trace remains of the corrosion, so everything corroded is set free. Then leave it for three years, and with oil let it breathe after healing from these burns while fire has ostected (set), and if within 3 years healthy limbs have not arisen; this is good; but if they do not regain, then reapply the cauterization to that part of corroded flesh which still remains. This kind of inflammation was never before treated with medicine in the wound caused by fire (cauterization), and after three years have passed let it breathe. And this is anointing has been said about its division, as much as you know.
of wounds that come from fractures, and they are quite painful.
Often happens that the fractures cause a disease we call "closed" according to our intention, and it is a very harmful thing that wounds the skin; and for this disease, both the heat cautery and cold caution are ways. Heat cautery is done as well when scraping with a sharp object like a quill, made of good iron in size suitable to hold the nail firmly, it is heated very hot and then turned your hand all around the nail until it wobbles at the nail head; and left for three years so that it begins to peel off. Then you make an embolism with known crushed herbs tied with a rope, and leave it on the wound throughout the night, and cut out the embolism. Afterwards, cleanse the ulcer by massaging until it is healed.
And if they are converted by dislocations of the joints, and often occur in joints and wounds; it is in this manner: take a hemp thread or quill shaft, or pen feather, place it on the nail, which will then form callus around its circumference; put the hemp thread so that it can absorb moisture all around, and apply some warm water to it firmly, holding tight your hand while turning it until the margin of the hemp thread reaches down to the root of the nail. Then allow you to find a path for the warmth deep into the root; then leave it for so long that everything dislocates from its roots. After this, make another one in the same way for all those located at the joints, and cure the ulcers with charcoal.
The treatment involves applying gentle vibrations to the area being treated. This is done by holding or securing a warm object against the affected tissue while gently shaking it back and forth. The purpose of this method is to stimulate blood flow, promote healing, and reduce pain through the mechanical action of the trembling motion.
When any patient shivers from cold or fever or other causes, it is required that you perform either three to four spinal adjustments along the lumbar vertebrae, one between each vertebra; and one on the muscles near the spine and in front of them; and one on the stomach with an olive cautery. This will allow for shaking as a part of the healing process and help to release the health from the cold malady.
For developing purulent sores, it is necessary to use specific treatments such as warm compresses with medicated ointments, antibiotics if indicated by a medical professional, and proper wound care including cleaning and dressing the affected area. The goal of treatment is to reduce inflammation, combat infection, and promote healing. It's essential to consult healthcare providers for appropriate diagnosis and management of such sores.
Whenever the joints are discovered to have purulent lesions or large and corrupt materials appear, it is required that at every chief of each pustule: a gentle cauter with firbrush sticks either made of fennel brushwood in charreture; andaude. And sachauteur quatrieme, si lai deffet vase unt desemalat ceusilier que, ence elescoin l'enfee leuant.
when the artery is pierced Many times occurs great bleeding from the artery that is pierced at the wound that approaches the parietal pleura, or during the incision of an abscess, or with cauterizing a limb, and similar things; and it is very unfortunate to be obstructed.
And in every case where this happens, if you delay putting your index finger on the vein wound, and strain it very much so that the blood is not flowing from there anymore; then set the fire cautery many small and large ones until they are all red; then proceed to do so, or little depending on the wound and the location of the artery in it, and place the cautery on this vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there as long as the blood is not clotting.
And if it jumps out when you hold your finger above the vein wound and the cautery is extingrande, then immediately take another fire cautery.
And continue doing this one after another until the blood is not clotting; and beware that you do not burn the nerve next to, and prevent any other malady from affecting the inflamed area; and know that when the artery is outside of the vein, it cannot well remain unclotted immediately as long as the artery is large, unless by one of the four methods we have mentioned: or with cautery, or through extraction if it has not been treated yet, or with a strong binding of thread, or with medicines placed on which there was hope to clot blood; and apply and squeeze evenly.
Who will tightly bind the inflamed area with a sheet or something placed on it, or do other similar things if there is no benefit in doing so.
And if this occurs and there is no observation or medicine present, then put your index finger on the vein wound as we have said before, and squeeze it so that it remains clotted above the wound and the vein; and do not move it, but sometimes make it cold enough so that the blood becomes frozen and congealed, and harden these kinds of cautery and medicines.
We have told you that in such diseases it is necessary for fire or medicinal caustic treatment, and the openings and causes and irritations and forms of these treatments; and I have placed this chapter on head pieces stuck to their feet, and I will go through this chapter by my own way so that one can understand more easily what is used there.
And so I begin, it is necessary to know that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first treatments, and therefore greater care must be taken.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incision at an abscess site, and treatment of wounds, and extraction of arrows, and cutting into bones, and similar cases; where doubt and fear exist, and many die.
And I warn you not to undertake such folly. For many methods come in healing from people who have suffered so severely due to their illness that they died quickly because of the forfeiture caused by it, and the great cunning of their sickness; therefore, one must beware. And of these who give meaning to this saying, and say: "Wait, I am guarded"; and the disease is spiteful. It does not require you to consent to those who come to you with such a manner, but place greater concern in your honor than in your cure, refrain frequently from fussing over what you are certain of, and have taken care of; and use prognostication and indication for the treatment of your ills so that their health may be converted into this good name, fame, and memory. And such will help you achieve this well-known renown, glory, and remembrance.
And truly our Lord teaches us good understanding and rightness, and if you wish to receive the holy inspiration of his hand, amen.
Or I have ordered this chapter to be discussed by chapters, according to what it is before as a causticist, which I have determined on the chief topic that you will find more easily understood.
full of water
And it comes often in the children at birth, and when the baby's head is restrained too strongly by the child; and sometimes that issue is retorted from.
saint:esme en iton lai.
And I saw a child whose joints were swollen with water, and the head throbbed every day so much that it could not bear weight; and he thought so much moisture there was that it became flesh underneath the bone above the sinew, between the bone and the sinew; and the operations are such that the moisture is between the bone and the sinew, and the incision is small, and you make a large cut through the head; and so long as the moisture flows, then the shape of the spatula-like part:
If the moisture is more swollen, and the incision is larger, then you make two incisions shaped like a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is between the bone and the sinew, and you see signs of cracks at the edges of every part, and the water shoots out when pressed in between with your hand from one side to another, it indicates that you must make two incisions in the head in this manner:
And after the incision you pull out all the moisture; afterwards, you draw the fissures with draperies and powders, and apply vinegar and oil, and leave it for five days; then dress the wound by bandages and ointments, and allow the head to be stretched evenly, and feed the patient dry meat from a little moisture until the limb is strong and healthy.
And another way to make an incision is by observing the size of the abscess or collection of moisture, and its connection with the surrounding tissue; because it has never been done in front; it has never been done behind; it has never been done to the right; and it has never been done to the left.
Now you make the incision in the abscess or collection of moisture and drain it, according to what is necessary; and watch that you do not damage the artery; and let a fistula form so that the patient's bleeding decreases over time from blood loss and evacuation of moisture.
In return
When there is no cataract or pain in the eyes or elsewhere, and the disease has been longstanding, and medicine treatment does not help at all; rather, it's the cautery that heals by cutting these two arteries.
Then it is necessary that you cover the wounds so that the patient's head rises again; after cleaning his forehead with a rough cloth until arteries are visible, then straighten out the patient's crown with one linen napkin; then look at the ears of both sides and see if they have healed, and very little remains; then mark these marks, then pierce each ear with a sharp spatula-like instrument of about two parts, enough to penetrate through the skull until it bones are visible, and this is done by its breadth.
Anderres de tes ceste oint, siens queur sanzure quarrere desormainzour ailk Ion theurs acoit isent.sangrainer. Sirol.
saintement.
And if the artery does not open with a sense of touch, it is necessary that you measure the distance of II points, then pierce and hit the bone; and as for the blood to be let out at such a rate, VJ. cubits are enough, and perhaps one little more or less. According to what the patient may suffer, and the fullness of the artery; then look at the wound: if it remains on the bone without any sore spot above the apophysis, then heal the wound and sew it up, and care for the heat treatment until it is healed.
Emigration
When emigration is ancient and cataracts are caused by moisture from tears and heat in the temples, for other old things, and they are treated with medical methods and all of it does not benefit the patient, unless we extract the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have described.
And the method of extracting them so that they make the patient's temple hair grow back, and listen to the artery in the temple, as it opens well with its beating, and few stitches are enough for anyone who is not too cold; and if it is re-inserted, he straightens out some of his drapery from the shoulders, then rubs a smooth cloth on any rough fabric, and raises the bone in warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the syringe with this form:
Then scrape the loose skin gently as long as you are with the artery, then take it up in pinches, and remove well-woven fabrics from each part; and if the artery is subtle, turn it to the point of the uncinate process, then cover that part according to the quantity of II joints. Because if it is not covered, it will jump out with every movement.
And take the .viij. cubits of blood, then lay it in II leather bags strong silk double layered, so that no dirt will not cover the cauterization wound; and cut off the cautery knife from the os as long as his hairs are pulled; and if you see, the above-mentioned work, and then cope.
naught untoilletilecristrevaillexsecale,senteures,santhecques ifherifoldde injeves.erifere, eteve 2 lurange for It is required for the extraction of arteries that one fills their wound with much cotton and places it well made upon it; and when you remove them, take care to use dry medicines that cause healing and bandages until they are healthy; and if there is no constriction in this artery as much as you do, then hasten the cover by cautery, or apply vitriol with your hand so that the obstruction does not relax; and if you do not have this present, place your needle on it until it freezes, and raise the wound of cold water until it constantly thaws, and keep it as required; and who is more difficult and lighter in artery extraction than you cauterize its vein cutting off .ij. millimeters deep, but the cuts be well spaced to guard against prolonged heat there. When stirrups are too tight, they hold less heated air. And it must have between the knives .i. a large space of .ij. millimeters, and when you seal these joints with iron hot as long as they bend to the bone, and close the vein in these spaces; and separate them from each other because this cautery is not uniformly applied throughout; and its shape is:
Of tears
When the tears are draining from veins under which there is a strong test of iron force, and it does not benefit from medicine that has been applied, and you see the malady turning redder, and feel your forehead movement as if in pain; and such hands are held tightly and moist, so that the hairs on the papers become wet, and they dried these papers, and scorched by the heat of tears, which is needed for this cure.
re les cuite aure lestire dexentures sié, theorice tolere (tox. Ifragre:rise.a, without themesure:re lege, but not.
From the incision that extends from the temple just to the second incision; and scrape all the clotted blood between these two incisions around the bone underneath it, then make another treatment on this first incision up until the other second one, and then extract this cautery point.
If you insert in the first incision the instrument called "cultellar", and it is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other, and this is its shape: And turn the sharp edge towards the clotted blood in the center of it, and the blunt edge toward the bone, and insert it as much as possible into the next incision until the incision continues to this which opened the wound; and then make another treatment on that incision up to the other one afterwards; and extract the jointed arrows evenly, and press down the flesh with the arrow removed; and put a tape in each incision with white cotton, and wrap it with linen moistened in wine and oil and wax, and make sure that the edges of the skin don't move; and after three days straighten the line, and then treat this wound basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil, and other cures for treating wounds until it is healed.
Two drops of blood
When anyone frequently comes down with a hot cough and you see the eyes holding tightly and small, and impairing vision, and burning papers; and hairs fall out, and at the head there is great pain from such accidents that these materials and cough do not come from many windings, but rather the treatment of this.
And command the patient to pull their forehead backward, then make a large cut on each side of the forehead, and about one inch deep; and start from the temple's left side to the right side, making the incision just up to the bone; and keep your hands away from the temple joints that move during breathing; and when the bone is exposed, wash out all the blood with a sponge, then squeeze cotton between the flaps of the cut and put linen over it, and drape above and below clothing in oil and vinegar, and keep from aspirating heat; when the bone is set, it requires that you rub the bone until it begins to grow again, then cure with things excising, which cause stiffness to return.
In another way: take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of chaff, and mix them together; then apply it to these wounds in order to loosen stiffness throughout the entire area.
Of the eversion of ears
All that causes earache is one of four things: either grains, or animals, or mining stone or similar things so like as water and sandy things; or seed, if like hay or wheat or peas; or something flowing such as water and silk-like things.
When there is a stone in the ear or any other manner that does not fit into the ear, and it grows within the ear, you put your ear to the sun. If you see the stone, draw out no little violet oil or olive oil; then perform the extraction; make an eustressure; bleed the nostrils as the eustressure comes about, and place pieces of linen on the ear; and keep the ear above. Often this cure works well; if it does not work by this method, then extract with a subtle pinching: here is where the shape lies.
ses,sive: heurechief:sacre. And if it does not leap from all these things that we have said, hurry to cut the ear so that the abscess appears in front of the incision, and spasm; and the manner of cutting is such that you make first a small healing wound on the head of the patient from cephalic side, and extract the blood according to the amount of its strength, then let the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut in the root of the ear where it depends; and make the cut as a moon until you reach the wound, then let the doctor do so according to his desire, and suck hastily from your mouth; and treat him so that he is sound. And if it's gravel and it swells up, then carefully extract it; and if it cannot be extracted, then gently make a small incision following this shape:
And make an incision in the grain. But do not do this when you think that the grain is moist from the moisture of the ear; as long as you have made many pieces, then extract it gently with tweezers and suction, if so we have said, that the extractions be light.
In the wetness that the patient uses forceful coughing from first-degeat conditions, and plunge the ear with many cotton balls in it. And if it leaps through that way, that's good. If not, take several small stones according to the length of your fingers held tightly and quickly, and roast them a little at the fire; then place the patient one or two punctures on his ear, and let him jump from there. From other pieces in another part, and strike with fire from another piercing that is in the ear; and do not cease doing this piercing into the ear until the grain has completely exuded, and then it will be fully expelled; if you see, take a branch, and push one of his fingers into the ear, and take the other tip on fire as long as the bone is hard enough; then make another piece of jonquil in the piercing until the grain completely exudes.
In the extraction of the best thing, if it's small, like a pea and so forth, treat it as we have said in division; but if it's large enough to be felt, then make an incision for extraction by pinching; and this is lighter to remove from the ear.
In the extraction of ticks in ears, when you treat it as we have said in division and distillations; but if there is no tick, gently make a small incision, and if they are present, take the thread that this form has.
.
sangermeant severi that partout ¬gean:lume :icgione,reviable,udexan.nilexcribe a. benthecoldesques  clecelle.cius, theifles to craconjanno.dezany if
Of the dislocation of the ears
No child is born with any deformity in their ears; and this same thing happens at the dislocation of a wound or when a piece of bone grows inside the ear, which never occurs in the ear unless one can see it well enough; and it rarely happens that there is little displacement to the deformity.
However, when it occurs and one cannot see it, there is an agreement for several remedies, and in this case it is required that you put the malformed ear to the sun; and look inside: if you see any obvious operation, this work has no such small space as those spaces where the shape lies.
Or if it is cut or torn straight before and behind, so that the ear does not bleed; if the operation involves bone or cartilage in the ear, you must make very subtle pincers and hold them gently until those pieces are completely bone.
And if the operation is in the ear, take a very subtle razor and hold it for a short time to the fire, then you put back the cartilage of the ear. If you feel that the malformed area sends a grating sound when touched, press gently, and make sure not to bruise the nerves on the ear; then place an ear tube according to the size of the deformity, and cover it with Egyptian mud.
Do this for as many days as the wound is sealed, or take a tube and cover it with rose-colored water mixed with vitriol powder; if you see fluid in the ear, make sure to remove the tube and move another cotton-filled tube made of rosette oil and beeswax until the fluid has completely solidified. Then cure it as long as it is healed.
And if blood comes from the wound, dip a sponge and cover it with cold water, place it on the ear, and use other treatments that help stop the flow of blood which are related to distillation therapies.
from the bone fragments of paper
This is the kind of fragments that come from the paper when they are moist and dry; it requires you to stretch them with tongs and pinches, and coat them with a small space like roots; then place them on wet vitriol.
And if without decortication, then the delicate caustic in the cauterization of a round incision is done; and many times repaeved, there is no longer any movement from their roots; and when they are burned with fire, those roots do not return again.
sesme cestinferre itume le :130048: "démerence, ásoldes aentire onseverraly thet3rdose. Thekingsaure fromage, andrespect asciveutil. Ijaccent (thereum; fromcause,itk, 3005:nagust. All:
Many times come sheets with things that seem clotted in their shape and hardness, and for this reason the disease is called "great blizzard", and its treatment consists of: take warning if the great blizzard moves from one side to another, and it's a light thing to know; then make the cut large, afterwards scrape each part quickly, then with pincers, and bandage. If you cannot cover this spot at all for piercing even slightly, it does not hurt the patient at all; and if the fissure is big, assemble it with a suture, and cure until it's healed; and if it's small, there's no need to apply force, as ointments will restore it almost immediately.
And if the great blizzard is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, turn it over, and apply bandages to the great blizzard; and hold it with pressure from one side and another; and when the paper is separated by an incision, it does not hurt; and when the clotting is loose, treat it with boiling water, and cure the wound until the patient is healed.
of the fat of the hairs
Exinach is a fat that hardens into sheets on the paper above, and it occurs more often in children than in adults, and causes much pain to their hair, and they bring the cataract in the morning, and cannot see the sunlight because tears run down their hair; and for this reason they lie against their backs and sleep, and rest with their papers moistened by themselves inside their skirts. And when you press on your head between both hands and feel the exinach oozing out of it.
And the way of the work is that the patient places his head in your hand; and then take a linen cloth, and make it into a circle according to how much exinach there is from each part, and place it on top of it; and press with both hands onto one side and the other so that the exinach is gathered inside the circle; then open up some moisture in the middle with a sharp blade, making sure it's not wider than the wound made by the needle; and make the skin stretch until there is no exinach left; and in various positions the exinach comes out of the fissure, according to the form of an irregular piece of fat.
Extract it then to a piece of cloth between your two hands for later, and turn your hand toward the right and left so that it's spread out; and be careful not to stuff in the fissure, do not let blood flow down from the entire suture, that you will not bleed.
And if the exiting does not open at the beginning of the fissure, push it lightly to open it; then extract it as we have said, and pull downwards and forwards, and place on the joint, and bind tightly.
And if there are such houses that burn rope and place them on to corrupt the moisture that is delaying; then treat it until it becomes healthy. And if it comes to the incision site hot, then treat with emollients enough so that it becomes healthy.
of paper hairs
When from paper hairs are adorned other than their nature, and they become yellowed, if they harm the eyes, and bring about manners of illnesses as frequent tears and softening of the paper hairs and swelling, all because it is caused by damage to the hairs; and the cure consists in four methods: or with a bundle fire, or with hot water according to what before me was written, or the instructions of the physician regarding fire treatment, and whether done through incision and suturing or via bandaging, as I will describe.
It is necessary that you put the chief part of the malady in your healthy state; then turn the paper oil to your left hand, if it becomes soft, that's good; if not, puncture one thread above each filament above; and whether this be near the edge of the paper or from where the hairs grow there, place a thread over all the paper, turn the paper shaver there; then make in the part of the paper, next to those adorned with hairs, covering everything from the large margin down to the small one; take out the thread, and place on the paper a little tent of cotton and fabric; then position a figure above the paper like an earthen lamp, as you see when you lift the paper up, and it is necessary that the figure be according to the size by which you raised the paper that has been fixed there.
And if the part has a great quantity of paper according to what the paper is moldy; then make all over the spaces where you have marked lines, and take one of those fissures near the natural hairs's circumference, and push an abscess in one of the angles of these; then scrape it out completely; then assembled with a silk thread lace from a needlework of such things thin filaments, and sanc. If you see twenty years ago; but if not, then healing, and the hairs, and sixty-fourteine, etienne:
:i.comme parler. What iti fromage:iage. iii. Theesme. Inj.ai. It'st. 105. All togetherne. ould, aout ascribe. Thenique thei: �iurexures. A:c.
Then he who has little strength must, likewise according to this form:
And if you do not have the ability to hold tongs, and the object is not equal in shape, then take an awl or something similar with .i. wire, and insert it into the figure; and put another wire next to the large groove, and another near the small one, and align all of your wires evenly; then move your hand evenly over the skin that you have marked out, as we have told you, then join the two ends of the wound by stitching, and treat it until it heals; and when the abscess appears at your incision, calm it down with various ointments soothing soreness.
And there is no occasion when the paper hair becomes converted: it must be that you use what we have said about the incision; but the stitching in both cases is more artificial.
The treatment of wounds if it is according to this form: and you must convert the paper hairs in such a way that I have said; then make .ij. stitches by art, and also .ij. sutures as long as the large space between them like the paper and the small circle is; and hold on the .ij. ends of .ij. parts or where you are holding the threads; then assemble these thinly under what has been mentioned above about the paper hairs, and stretch the stitches from the two parts of its form; and let it remain for some years, and the skin which has been tightened will harden and become brittle until it heals.
If it takes a long time, then heals until it is healthy again; and when the wound has been sealed, and if you lift the paper hairs, and they no longer have any hair growing on them; and this is the shape of the stitches that you will make according to this figure, and in accordance with this quantity both long and wide:
The tasks are such that you must use a fine needle and thread silk thinly, then join the threads subtly, and position it so that the length of the threads is about one palm; then order another finely spun silk thread lightly, and thrust into the root of the hair in place, and pierce through the paper as fast as you can; pull out the hair to above natural skin texture; then draw the hair upwards towards the stitches, and continue to do so until all the paper is cut open. Then withdraw your hand as much as possible for the hair begins to grow again in place with its natural skin texture, and hold the thread lightly by pulling out toward the straw that you have pulled from the wound; then pull the paper.
And if the hair grows and does not accompany the nail with it, then you will cut the hair along its entire length as you have ordered; until the nail is pushed above the surface and you see it through the eye; therefore, you will cut the hair and thread, and let the oil remain for two or three years so that the hair regains its place in its socket and grows up from there; and if the hairs are small, accompany them with a long nail from natural branches, and hold them together while they are elongated and then loosen it.
This instruction refers to "the rust of oil," which could be interpreted metapromptically as an issue related to the corrosion or contamination that might affect oils used in medieval medical practices, possibly suggesting a precautionary measure. However, given its brief nature and context-dependent interpretation, it may also simply imply instructions on handling rusty materials within the broader scope of Old French medical treatises without any specific treatment mentioned for "the rust of oil."
As this disease called "aleacrati" or rust appears in the oil, if it has two methods for dealing with it: one natural and the other unnatural; and it happens through wound healing, cutting, or cauterizing, as well as similar occurrences.
And the method of this work is to break up any soldering or plating done, release the mouth from it, and place linen tent around it until it's healed; and you must not use in the treatment anything that dries and restricts. For if you do so, the illness becomes worse than before; but using softening substances like fenugreek; and roasted water or aged/cooked flaxseed meal, and acai oil melted into no other oils, and enveloping it in a tent, and curing with this treatment.
And the treasures of your cure are that you must take care it does not harden again in the same form as before; and these works we have mentioned do not fail to heal this disease, but return it to its original state.
This instruction refers to "the hair" which appears in oil, suggesting an issue or condition where hair growth occurs within a substance like oil used in medieval medical practices. It could indicate the need for specific treatment regarding this phenomenon but without more context it's challenging to provide precise details on its historical implications and treatments.
char defface: ofler (faire fromage aitère: ilgustre char. lexagger :charger and commenter. Celtique.char, allergues:le char. Ifromainement. Larmeenture :en.
And if the paper figure returns as it indicates, that is good; but if not, then take a razor and put it in the crack, and turn the paper, and make two holes or lines within the paper; and let the shoulder joints be at the angles of the incision you have made, and make some angles so that when they are joined together, the figure is as the figure of a letter without the dot «.j». Then remove this piece according to the amount by which its edges extend from the edge of the paper, and then align the two lost parts, and fasten them with linen thread; then proceed with what we have said about soft medicines and bandages, until it is healed.
And if the illness comes from a fissure or tear or cautery, it must be that you cut a flat incision among the hairs of the papers, and according to what has been said before; then open between the two loops of a bandage as I have said; and one should perform the work in accordance with the shape of the illness because it is very varied in form, and the master's skillful arrangement can bring back the figure to its natural shape; and the patient's pain according to what must be done in many treatments.
And when setting or repairing the paper, it is as follows:
And when making this repair in part, the repaired paper remains firmly attached to the backing parchment and cannot move or perform its natural functions, so it is necessary that you insert a razor blade on the surface of the paper, and lift it gently; and make fine pincers, being careful not to be too tight nor too loose, so that the patch does not cause pain to the patient's skin, and when making your stitches, which join the repaired piece, apply them lightly, allowing the paper to return to its natural shape; and afterward ensure it is completely dry in water, and then wash it with soft, clean water, and lay a linen tape moistened with wool on top of the water. After one day use fine thread and other preparations until healed.
And from the backing parchment's edge or border:
iveuissauruelaure and to thisaiusseignes
And the way of cutting so that it puts its head in your healthy body, then he does his work on them; and let you hold the skin with small double pincers, and lift it above; then take an awl, and put one hair from a horse, or cow, or ox, and a strong thread; and slightly bend the tip of the needle in the nail, and pierce through all the needle, and tie the nail with a thread and lift it up above, and scrape along the edge of the nail towards the prunelet and silk to the hair from the root down to the small line underneocurly; and never let the incision cause the tendency for tears according to nature or little curves, so that by cutting alone, without threading, as we have said before: then scrape all along the silky part of this form where it is located.
And keep that the silk does not touch the tender flesh and break it, and that the prunelet is not perceived; after the incision pour a small amount of linen to be soaked in lint, and then let the wound heal for another day with this treatment as needed until it becomes healthy.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot push the awl, and the nails do not enter, there are many times this treatment of a nail with medicinal substances; as I have told in its division, if you see it covered, then apply linen soaked in lint to the nail, and take the silk slightly tightened according to this form:
And lift the nail gently upwards, and if you see that it does not ameliorate or cause pressure afterwards, then drip from your mouth in a collar made of lint soaked in mercury ointment and red collar, and soak linen into this oil for another day; then repeat the other operation according to this treatment until it is completely healed.
If nothing is contrary to the oil in treating it like an abscess, then first treat the abscess until healed, and then repeat the other operation as before, until completely healthy.
And if the appearance of flesh under the line causes great harm in the oil, then suspend it from its origin, and take a part and not all of it, so that no tears come forth; then drip linen in the red collar made of mercury ointment.
And if the nail. Then suspension pouce leinceline asperse ne paragents en ignea unt l’alliance of leesmei. LaRomainces du chacqurne: Causethure ail leu, de:nge.
:escription. iaidirecte itcute. Alsopex402scrementalic and itacount.corectemon :itupois (Iesculi :n’sse,lyse ;e aitlore, ia lumes enceille. Andresse aure,fègue laisser.
And when the incision is completed and bone all around it, if you dissolve linen oil into it or distill colored wax, and put cotton soaked in sheep's blood on top of it, if they are secured with a clamp; and if it delays anything, and the sinew sprouts from below, and you doubt whether to make an incision, then let the oil and treat the incision with calming measures for an incision; afterwards return to your work until it is healed, and thus by this similarity, charred pieces are adjusted in the oil.
But in all of this it is necessary that you gradually increase the treatment for each weak oil along nature's path; and by accidental work, in ironwork treatments; and do not thrust your hand into any of these works until you see if those members are suffering from that operation.
of the veins' edges
These red wounds are covered with oil and prevent you from seeing the workings of it; hence, the treatment is then applied at once, in this case being foresightful. The medicine's craftsmayer begins by first looking at your oil, thus beginning, and not having any other disease that will bring forth such a wound as yours; however, it can be approached in part like this: command to the malaide (physician) to place his head on your sanity, then release those veins throughout the whole body according to his wisdom, and make them subtly doubled according to this form:
And be two oncines by degree in one place according to this form:
Then it will be that you apply the subtle forces to those veins and draw out the blood from them at another time; and keep in mind not to bruise the oil with points of the spatulas, and do this work around noon before the sun, and be very hot in your work so as if you only have those veins drawn; and when thou hast done it, then distill a green and red colored wax for breaking that which is delayed.
And if you cannot gather all of it in that hour, then apply a poultice on the oil with soothing substances for the pain of the joints, and leave them some days until the pain is eased and secured from the abscess, and then resume according to this manner which is before mentioned until he is restored; and this form the strength:
The fistula of the oil
The term "arissati" refers to an abscess; when they cure it with cautery and hot water as I have mentioned before, it is not healed, rather it becomes more dangerous in that way by cutting into the abscess's apex, where it must die, and drain all the moisture until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, you will see corruption and blackness; if it has all the tools necessary for this procedure, then it is called "sharp chisel," and it should be made of iron by heating at two points (which refers to tempering), and it should be pointed like a lime in its current form.
And place it on the blackened bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press down your hand a little so you can confirm that this corrosion has been removed; do this once only, and restore the bone with medicinal expectorants. This translation advises a medical procedure where after an abscess drainage or cauterization, healthcare professionals must ensure the removal of necrotic (blackened) tissue from around the affected bone area to prevent further infection. The hands-on approach described here involves manipulating the softened residue gently and only once - a technique aimed at confirming the thoroughness of cleanup before rehabilitating the site with expectorants, which are substances that help clear mucus from the airways in patients recovering from respiratory conditions. It's important to note this step is part of a broader treatment plan and should be performed by skilled medical personnel with proper training and tools designed for such procedures.
offeres (itere, andr espress : CCC iternon levre. ici. Comments faire, tolenginces. It cece. Howlere de lavé :cum ille a coudre ofccare of thewere toire:carre, in cui lesiuresdurles carnature.
Then he puts it on the bone next to the ligament, and withdraw your hand for a little while, then turn it completely around until it pierces the bone and feels its pain through that which comes into the joint if it holds his hand on his knee; and then restore the limb with dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when the flesh knots and hardens therein, so does the matter in the joint. This is a lighter thing for the patient.
The dislocation of the oil (joint).
When the edges of the oil are opened in their entirety, and it does not disturb the joint or thinning, then you must bind the shoulder; then apply a mixture of three parts aloe, one part gum arabic, some incense, and crushed stone to the joint, and bandage the joint tightly with thick strips placed alternately every three, and then place one strip on top of another according to what amount there is in it. Then strain the joint forcefully with a hard binding strap, and repeat using suction cuffs for sensation without causing injury; remove the suction cuffs and leave the bandaged shoulder resting day and night, if you see the edges coming together again, it must be re-strained. If the edges have not returned to their proper position after a week or more, then repeat the application of binding strips and dampening materials as well as suction cuffs until the joint is healed.
The dislocation of a sieve (a container or tool used for separating finer from coarser substances).
When disruptions occur in the weaving of a sieve (a filtering device), then it occurs with fine paper such as grains of resin and is easily observable; however, if you see the cloth covering over that part above, then insert an awl into the root of the part above it, and another awl or one strand double thickness at the shoulder joint; and pierce through them, and let the second thicker thread lie along the sieve fabric in abundance, and restrain well, then remove the awl and place a thin layer of linen moistened with enough water over it until the wound heals. And if any time the wound is restricted by part of a bandage wrapped around one-third of the shoulder joint, until it has healed completely.
And if the shoulder joint gives a great appearance, then pierce it with a thin spatula that moves in and out of the oil, correct the bleeding humidity therein, and descend the edges at once; then pull the thread until healed.
The work of the oil (joint) or movement of the shoulder joint.
sse thectephère it:cave de:n sofinexiaxte:mejor:s :n, andarge,cute;re aitilx.wax anarde. Andreachares,èlorex apex, ilesxente.
of oil's fire
We have seen the examples of fire in its division, and it is said; if done according to health. It says that you must place the patient between your crossed hands, fingers pointed towards the sun's rays, with their hair oiled well and tightly; then put the paper to your right hand (the one on which the patient's head rests) so that its edge is facing the right side of his forehead, then place the instrument called "almagda" near the crown by drawing a line from the front part down to the lower margin of the oil; carefully press the almagda vertically and thrust it as far into the oil's blood until the almagda sinks in, feeling that it is penetrating the void; and it says that the diameter of the almagda hole should match the measurement mark on the paper for the length up to the end of the noose. And this crown is the oil; if you look at the image with the clarity of the horned cloth, then place the instrument there or where the fire is, and press a small passage after another until now when he sees the patient's head before him and the instrument in his blood.
After it rests a little, and the fire returns along the second path, apply force with the instrument, and when it is fixed and does not rise, quickly withdraw the almagda around your hand twice or thrice; then put back a small piece of gemstone in the oil, and scoop out from there. Then spread the oil on flints or linen soaked in oil and abundant with gold dust, and mix it with the oiled oil. We, and those who are part of our group, place coins together with plenty of gold dust.
And if the almagda cannot enter the oil because its edges are too hard, for it has many patients whose fingers have become thick, then you must temper the instrument called "alberit," which is as follows in shape: It should be a flat and wide piece of iron with a pointed end.
leude.cexent pas :130:in:esq's arre quels ent. ça jurthejacuteur soin d’il levre ea demeant.e cavisque laisse.
When cutting into stones, it comes, that you should loosen the oil before the seventh day, and the direction of the abscess beneath the incision; and when he is calmed down, you move the vein and place it on its face. And as soon as possible without delaying for a year, and then settle him in that dark house. And then leave the house quietly, and become like his former self; and know that no one should intervene in this case.
And one came to us from the Yarac region, who told us that in peace they used to find an almighty magnetized iron stone that when struck with water it would produce sparks, but I have never seen any such occurrence in our land or in ancient books. And perhaps this is a new discovery.
And these are the resemblances of the forms of almighty magnetized iron stone, because those who do not see them; and they should be properly aligned.
And let the chief point of this subtlety be here, and the base at four angles water.
from the sheaf of cloth (which is likely a typo) to the needle.
There have never been scorpions with such diverse bodies that seem to be armed with many stings; and if there were any of these or they had a feather-colored one, or if it was brightly colored, then in those cases where the color is not changed, you must place the malaide between your hands against the sun; work his nostrils, pull out the ants on these chariots, and clear away their tracks; then support this subtle sharp edge underneayer by one side so long as you know that this chariot is completely intact.
And if there is no remaining thing that cannot be covered with one or two subtle sharp edges applied lightly, without any delay; and when it does not penetrate through the flesh or abscess, then cut off the seal as it requires; and if it is a malicious abscess, hasten to cauterize it until its absence is assured and all the charms are healed.
If the char does not work out of bone. And if it penetrates through the flesh, then Ioward it requires; and let you make the nouths of char, to the abscess in the inside acoinne char. Toes iacte toi's demeaile char thatge ollit:escaire.
And it is of silver or of iron, like a lamp over it, as if an earthen jar, and you do so too; and when you see, if it makes a closed earthen jar, and place the stirrup plains to clean out the head at the time you heat the oil or any liquid.
From the cloth for the neck
Many times the head is struck by a disease that brings "typhoid," and it grows and becomes large, as long as there is something to be seen; therefore, you must first deal with it at the beginning, and let the healer prepare well before applying cautery or hot medicine; and if one delays in covering it until it becomes large, then take care that it does not become hardened, of foul color, with poor feeling: for there is no point to touch it with iron, as it is an inflamed abscess; and when the abscess has a sharp painful touch, not just discoloration, you can cover it completely, cleanse the patient's sense of touch, and care for the wound by treating it with various restraining measures.
When the neck is covered and coated
It is said that when a solution of continuation comes into one of these treatises, it has little effect; for in some homes it does not occur at all, so you must ensure that when the wound is fresh on all its flesh, then you should first straighten out the two lips with a suture, and heal them until they are sound; and if the two lips are deformed to one side or another, you must scrape off every part of their corners as long as they become sound, then join back the two lips in a suture, and bind it tightly, and sprinkle powdered dragon blood over it, and incense above it; and lay a piece of strong iron on top of the powders, and leave it to work until it discharges by itself, and treat with ointment until they are sound.
The manner of the suture is that you assemble the solution as follows: with needles, like we have said in the suture for the abdomen; or with thread, as I told you.
Inflamed abscesses on the lips
Some homes experience hardened abscesses on the lips that appear multiple times and become smaller and less severe; therefore, you must turn the lips and slice off every part of them with tweezers, and treat each one separately; then treat the wound after vitriol incision, so long as it is numbed; and then theisil, and cure the wound from restraining measures.
of the gums' edges
Many times it is nicked near the gum edges, which they used to call "albulus"; this indicates that you must hold it with forceps and treat its root, allowing for bleeding or blood clotting; then apply vitriol boiled or other restraining and dehydrating powders; and if it returns after the incision, many times occurring, if the wound is cauterized again, and does not return afterwards from the cautery: these are forms to cover.
of the ears
Occasionally they are assembled at the chief of the teeth, between the gums in the mouth, rough and sharp scrapers that are black and orange, yellowish and other shades; and there is no occasion for these teeth to be loose until corruption reaches the gum, and the teeth stink. It must be set in your hands with the malady lying between them, and their scraper or teeth should appear as long as they remain worldly; and if it happens that at first sight it seems good, then continue this treatment of black and green, yellowish and other tints, until you have dealt with all of them. And you know that the tooth has a necessity for various forms of estrums (toothpick) in order to remove them again, according to what their work demonstrates; because there are rascals who use different forms than those used between the teeth; and these forms and others should be carried with you.
It is required that while curing the tooth of its pain you delay as much as possible; for this is not something we should do, because it is a very high substance and there is no excuse for pulling out such a tooth. When the malady is constrained in treating it, you must be certain that the loose tooth is healthy; many times this affliction of a bad tooth causes pain and you should ensure it's a sound tooth; then everything will not depart from such pain until the maladies are gone, for we have always done as much by these saints. And when you are certain that the loose tooth is indeed there, you must scrap away all of its teeth with strong forceps in order to protect the gums of every part; then carefully remove it at your due moments and momentos, so long as they are well scraped, and release them firmly. And have the maladies placed securely between your hands, and let them not move.
:entail.comenture.correirau carrefleague. Aesmalacciaurne. leggere develvei, and the gustromensenterae laisse entorentir.caracter.
And warn you well that you do not break it, and leave a part in it, and bring back to the patient due to the root's malice causing greater pain than before. And warn you that you do not act as ignorant surgeons do, who with their haste and boldness never break a single time any wound, and don't provide us anything they know; but often bring in great illness for the roots that remain there, or for the wound they break, just as we have seen many times; and when the piece is taken out, wash it with wine or salt and sand; and if blood comes from it regularly, sometimes dip it in vitriol boiled; and if it doesn't value, cauterize it.
The shapes of the milk teeth, when first silent and without movement, should be long points and large fingers, so that they do not double while you pull out the tooth; and these are the forms.
And have large members if they do not bend while being pulled out, and be made of good iron well crafted, and teeth that can hold their position.
from the root of the teeth If the root is dislocated during extraction, it indicates that you should wrap cotton moistened with burned wax on it—either for one or two days as long as the tooth remains immobile, then apply forceps called "algefri," which are supposed to make pulling seem gentle; and they should be crafted in a manner similar to a ruler's shape.
And if the roots do not come out at all with these forceps, it is required that you find the whole tooth entrenched in the root, and use an instrument called "althali," which we call pliers; this has a form like a pincers.
And even if they are large enough so that it does not break, and the root comes out through such means, which is good; but if it doesn't have such characteristics, then aid of all milk teeth, with these shapes appearing afterwards.
And if they use this instrument which has two hands, then its shape is as follows:
And other tools that are before for the density reasons, and concerning this instrument which seems like large tongs, whose shape is as follows:
And such instruments that cannot break it, and knowing many tools for the density; and other instruments which are not counted; and these masters very subtly adjust their instruments themselves, according to what their works demonstrate, because they have various diseases or the old did not teach about different types of tools; if it breaks a charrette or another bone, or it will deform, then I told you which instruments are needed, and help with these movements: And be large and well holding for keeping the bone steady but able to move it; then restore the place of medicine suitable for this, and if there is porriture in the bone and it is small, then use all such an instrument:
When teeth appear not according to its natural shape and form, and particularly in women, it is necessary that you know if the density after the tooth is misplaced and not straight; and one cannot cut or sharpen at will. However, then the line; and if it comes with a tooth, take this instrument whose shape I am describing, which looks similar to another small hook made of iron sharply hammered:
And the small hammer and few hands for the hardness of the tooth, because you do not move the others; and if it appears that he can sharpen it, then his chisel with a part-like this shape:
And it is also like the chisel for making needles; and in shaping the tooth with this small hammer and few hands lightly pressing so that it does not move much as it breaks; then at the end there is no roughness anywhere, and if the density is too loose and it bleeds the tongue, it must be chiseled until it becomes equal, so that it doesn't bleed the tongue or corrupt the speech.
When the tooth is loose
sivex tooth byssenture thewoman :gachie it (biensewsse, without.
sauthecrukies cheentifteusques and'alleuels (itche ifcange.dextelonguexifre.
Of covering the tongue's line
"Never have these lines come from the mouth or nature itself, which we do not find now; or by accident of wound sealed; and the operations are such that you treat the patient's mouth and head with your hand, and loosen the tongue so it is detached from its place, and if there is hardness or any other issue, and this is due to wound suturing; and make sure that the fissure does not become too deep, for the artery which is undernee; and when you have done, raise a moist rosewater or cold water over it, or put linen tents under the tongue; and treat every night the patient's blisters so they do not stick."
"And if you see the tongue has become colored or blackened or hard, let it not be touched, for it is a cancer; and if it is declining into blenching, and there is moisture in it, then cut away the small ulcer; and treat with a delicate spatula both parts, and when you do not see improvement from your efforts, put vitriol over it until it heals; then return to that effort as long as you treat everything thoroughly; lift up the tongue white and blue, and cure other cures so much that it is sound."
"And if you see the lymph nodes of the throat"
"And if there comes in the throat nodes that are called 'God's it. Iynee tocause ailve sance of sanc, andre dele lace. ices in the same day orign leuin aigrainde siamainne aldoughte auge:nour feintenaiioun. Andrape aioine nalayse ome : I'nfornicuoran:saw, Ail.
Can you press the tongue against all this instrument, and see the incision, if you take the pincers and hold them in the apple of the hand, and lift anything above it more than you can; and do not draw any thing from the cloths with, then shape the instrument like that seems some forces, and everything is bent, and its head is crooked, and one side to another, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or linen.
And if you do not have this instrument, the pliers as mentioned: then there is the shape like this for its form:
And if it is split on one side and sewn on the other, and when you have caught the apple's core, then catch the other according to this manner, and after the incision rinse the patient's hot saliva and warm water, and blood and if rinsing the saliva occurs, or cooked pomegranate skins are used, or fir cones, and similar things so long as the wound is not closed; then perform the cure until it heals. And there has never been another aspiration in the throat than these two apples removed; once they catch them just like the two apples.
And I treated a woman with an abscess that was inside her throat, which is to say two small ones; and she had the entire throat well sealed up, so she couldn't breathe through the blocked passageway, nor eat or drink, and died if she had survived for one year or two. The abscesses were deep enough that I pierced them with a needle, then removed some blood; next, I sutured it back into those same passages, and opened her mouth and pressed down the tongue; afterwards, I pierced the needle into these abscesses and extracted part of it, and only got a little bit of blood; thus removing the blockage from her throat, she began to drink water and then wine again, and continued to treat that abscess for as long as needed; and the abscess re-formed again, becoming quite large once more. So I cauterized it inside her throat: so there was no further increase in size. And from those parts only God took care of her after me.
from the eye
s.
And it should be that the chief puts a hair on his head where the medicine is applied, like in one's cheek, and places the instrument all over the medicine on the vein; and if the patient shivers under its costume, let the saliva and muscles rise from his mouth with the medicine inside it so that it doesn't descend into the throat or wound; then take your hand on the medicine and press it on the vein until you see it swollen and the painful movements of the cauterization are eased; and if you see, take cotton wrapped with any instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and put the instrument covered with cotton into the cavity above, so that the cotton dries on the vein until the cauterization is perfected, then let it dry for two to four years; and if you have been accustomed to repeat this cautery of the medicine, when you re-cauterize the vein with the instrument, and afterward perform a washing inside the vein covered in cotton or wax, and treat him with cold water and gargles until he is healed.
This treatment is more suitable for the incision than cauterization; if it's performed through fumigation in this manner, take chamomile and yarrow and rue and chamomile and other herbs, and mix all of them or some of them together in one pot, and place it on fire; and let the pot be tightly sealed with strong earth, and within the pot have a piece of equipment made like this: And whether it's silver or rainwater, and if one of the instruments is sprayed into the patient's mouth until smoke rises to the vein through the cavity, so long as the vein has been mortified; after each time you re-cauterize, as many times as necessary for the vein to dry out, and ensure not to do this at the beginning of aposteme incision, because various complications may arise; and if such an instrument is not present, take a cane and place a wooden plug in its head, so that it does not produce excessive heat on the patient's mouth. This wood plug prevents the smoke from scalding the mouth, making it a good combined cure for health.
.iiij. Depeisil uvne:lure aille aultre laide lou chevalier aoutte :cest.llfere tolosadie voldesur theu'sace leggredele deaustin French (13ithi. Theorceleave itapearthe 2ndoftheil,ire: levehler theure:lecoritale thexia alexander. I'urettraise. Itauret:it:age: ether.
And let the patients with broken ribs at the head so that they can more easily enter the throat, and raise the head high; and be careful not to touch the epiglottis, that it does not move, nor push in any bone inside; and when he presses down hard on them, so as if something is torn away, either he pulls out everything equally with the instrument, or until it is fully removed.
From the treatment of the throat
Never has throat medicine been administered, as I mentioned in the division of treatments; and if it does not help at all, then look into the patient's sore throat while holding the instrument that I have told you about. And when you see a swelling, either pull out every small piece with an instrument or use very delicate tweezers to suit such cases. If it is worthless, take a blowpipe and fire into the patient's sore throat; then quickly remove a heated iron rod from there, and do this often enough. And if the patient's throat turns blue all day long, then take full glasses of cold water, treat his mouth, and let him swallow it with great difficulty, moving it back to its place frequently. If at once you feel that the fire has reached the affected area, then cool it immediately.
And if it does not help as we have said, smoke the patient's sore throat with the instrument that I told you about for fumigation using a pot filled with coal dust and cover it with a tightly woven cloth; place the holes of the instrument in this cover, then pour the smoke into its mouth, so that the smoke does not enter but moves to the patient's sore throat; let him keep his head open while smoking, and if it doesn't cause discomfort now with the swelling, continue the fumigation many times. And make sure he is suffering from thirst, give him salty and unclean things to eat and drink, and do not allow him to drink water; instead, according to this governance, it should eventually be expelled due to such treatment.
And the shape of this instrument used to treat the swelling is such that when you see it, it looks like bent nails for pushing into the throat; and it has a beak-like form and roughness from grinding stone, so that whatever it picks up cannot move. And at this point:
The treatments of abscesses (abscesses)
Various kinds of apothecaries (ophieres d’aposteme si laissez bien dire de seingles de l’oeuvre de cestare que les meademe dessein. Etre deffort, et il leu corbele oferce, quoles defforture preve dexemere iews offert:
And if at the incision it is not necessary to pierce, until the bolt falls according to its completion; and if such must be pierced when they are needed, and do not die according to their completion, as happens with incisions near joints. For when incisions come near joints, and we let them remain so long that it is pressed into the edge, by chance these two threads and nerves of the joint become corrupt, because of contraction in that limb member. Or the incision is near the principal member, and if you delay piercing until the bolt has fallen, it will harm the principal member; or it is near the foundation, so we pierce it as long as it remains dead; and there is no need to pierce an already digested sensation near the foundation, which would push its way into the cavity between, and widen inside, and cannot heal in a great degree.
And it is essential that you know the time of the incision in the incision where there is no pain after completion, and when the fever subsides, and the reduction of pain and swelling, and the improvement and straightening of the incision's chief, and other signs; and it is essential to make the piercing dependent on the incision itself, and at which point it opens; and let the piercing be long enough in length, and if the incision is in the hands or legs, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and throughout all similar tissues where there is no looseness.
For puffs, according to the extent of that member's need. And when you pierce before this, if it is long the vein's blood flow and full of waste; and perhaps harden their lips and lining due to dryness. And there should be small incisions, small holes; and large ones, large holes, and many fissures according to the thickness of the incision; and if such an incision needs chewing like a piece of cloth, or covering; when it has become as soft as fabric, then we do so as with boils: and for those that are cut into three angles, and for those where they cover in the manner of the funnel of mire, just as with antlers; and if there are such incisions where a round shape is made, or other shapes and covering.
legeration. Celtic ententertainment:lore itanre dees andante apearturele. Ipsumentent'sente (itantent. In theandesmeentor. Herecoster, a mane ofresumeurjacute. Whater, ASSume.
And if the blood comes out while working on it, apply cold and damp cloth to it, and cover a strip of linen over it repeatedly.  And if the blood perseveres, treat it with careful governance and care, and with the powders mentioned in this book, and if you have it from an arrow or piercing wound, and the wound is very nervous, then you must place tent-like cloths soaked in warm vinegar and oil; and if it's in a stone, and the wound is charred, then moisten the linen with warm vinegar and oil, or cold vinegar and oil for three days as we have said; and then release the abscess and lump and cure accordingly.
And this must be known universally in the treatment of abscesses: it is what I have said about going to these treatments beforehand, and now the physician.
and soaps
And if the abscess is small in size, and these are the ways they are done, just as a hunter with a wild boar; there are also some that contain moisture like piglets or lambs; and if it contains moisture, it will make a long cut. And when the moisture has been removed, you scrape off nothing from the abscess cavity containing that moisture, because it returns to its original size after leaving it empty; then dip cotton in Egyptian oil, if it is still present; if not, use water and bandages, and leave them on for another day; and those who are delaying will be punished. Then repeat the process with the cotton again next year, as before, until you know that it won't delay by nights. Then treat the abscess with suitable oil treatment until it is healed; if the abscess has a hard substance inside, scoop out the cavity lengthwise; and remove all the small pieces from within, and apply your entire cure to this area or where there is an artery attached; and if the abscess causes trouble contrary to what I have said before. And also treat the abscess if it's hard, in the cutting and curing as I have told you.
And the cutting of a painful and moist abscess is lighter because it contains very little blood. And if there are no such abscesses or chiefs where there is no moisture, and these were also those I described that came from an old woman; and found the abscess as hard, rough, and blunt, which could not be broken off; and if any one had done so, he would have made a wound as good as a hard piece of wood. In other types of abscesses coming or chiefs, for all such that come from the ears and roots of children, always depended on it during all days to let the blood come out; and cure it as long as it is required.
And if there are scrophlets: Et li que jeux devoit si est encontre les ointures leu sus laissiere aiguisse ceu desu escripource a l'arme dure :comme cestant auverbeaucoup coment, paroles.
gachle.
re  leaulcresaincelentiflessecongeusesauntiferransse tailles,antheuange:santilegesusivex
And if you remove the entire scrophula, it requires that you gather its two lips of the wound and bind them tightly, so there is no delay for superfluity due to the size of the scrophula. It requires that you cover the root of it, and drain, and bind as we have said. Those scrophulas which contain superfluity will dry up or die; and those pierced here as before, depending on them, then treat with ointment and similar things so that what remains becomes corrupt from corruption; and when the wound is well healed, you should continue the treatment of ointment until it is sound.
Squinting
The ancient spoke and wrote about the fashioning of the throat; but I never saw such in our land, and it is their writing of their words.
For those with squinting, it is required that the flap of the throat called "epiglote" be removed; and we do not help for this reason because all the veins and blood vessels of the malady are found in those who have an abscess in their mouth, or in their throat, or in .ij. almonds (assuming ".ij." is a typographical error meant to represent "two"). When the disease is in the vein, it requires covering the epiglote to avoid the loss of life due to strangulation. (Note: This translation assumes that "chenal" refers to a channel or vessel related to blood flow.)
It is required then that when we wish to split the epiglote, we cut it into .iij. circles or .iiij. a small incision through which to pass, without causing any damage in the area (or cartilage), and not simply tearing it. (Note: This translation assumes ".iij." is meant to represent "three" and addresses proper technique.)
and those parts that are cut from the epiglotae without bleeding, and their covering is long-lasting. (Note: This translation assumes "covenaubles" means non-bleeding in French.)
And if the master is afraid, it requires that you extend the throat skin to all corners, then cut into it as long as it remains in the channel of the vein; and remove any blood clots, if there are none visible, and then make the incision as we have said. (Note: This translation assumes "keur" is meant to represent "skin" or "throat skin," which may not be accurate but fits within a medical context.)
and is demonstrated by the bleeding of the vein that bursts through the broken point where it enters, and by voice defect. (Note: This translation assumes "fleume" refers to bleeding or a blood vessel.)
and leave the wound exposed for a period. (Note: The phrase may be more accurately translated as "allow the wound to heal by itself" or similar, depending on context; however, it was directly transcribed.)
And when the hour has passed without doubt of strangulation, gather the two lips of the vein and bind it securely to the skin, then administer treatments that cause bleeding, until he is sound. (Note: This translation assumes ".ij." refers to "two" or a numerical value indicative of quantity.)
And if you do not perform such when the throat is all burnt, and let the malady be judged dead, and the defect of the almonds. (Note: This line seems to reference an ancient medical practice regarding) And behold the throat for this reason that the sick cannot breathe, and they breathe through the wound, and so it is guarded against death.
And for this reason they command the wound to be left open until the sickness of the disease has passed, and it is done in two or three years. And for this reason they command to sew up the wound and treat it until it has been cured.
And I will tell you what I have seen. I have seen a young maiden grasping the knife and slitting her throat, and parting the skin of her breasts;
And I was called to heal him, but found him already dead.
I discovered the wound and found blood that came out of it, and I saw he did not stop bleeding at all, but through the wound.
I hastened, and healed the wound, and kept it clean until it was healthy.
And to the maiden there came no harm when she became red-faced from shouting, and returned to her position afterwards.
For this reason I say that there is no fear in shaping the epiglottis.
of the large throat
These abscesses are called "goitre hernias", and they are large in size, with a greyish color, and are often found in women. (Note: This translation assumes 'gorge' refers to the thyroid gland, which is commonly known as goitre in English.)
And according to them: natural causes, and accidental; or the natural has no design. (Note: The punctuation seems to be misplaced in this line.)
And the accident is according to them, of that one looks like fatness in us, and the other manner looks like an abscess coming from our arteries. (Note: This translation assumes 'accidens' refers to an ailment or incident resembling something unpleasant.) And he has no fear, and does not dare to treat deep wounds except in that which is small, and tries everything at the dislocation site: (Note: This translation assumes 'fiers' means 'fears', as this word isn't clear in Old French.) If you handle it as one would handle fatness in us, and does not hold at any place, if it copes as we cope ourselves, and treat all its parts, if there is anything. (Note: This translation assumes 'tu le trueves' means 'you handle', 'ausi' means 'likewise', and 'voine' could mean 'voice' or some other sense of action/movement.) And examine everything well, and treat it as it ought to be treated until it is perfectly healed. (Note: This translation assumes 'encerche' means 'examine', 'curre' could mean 'cure', and the rest of the sentence seems clear in Old French.)
of us
Many ways our bodies are, which I will describe all the similarities. (Note: The translation is based on a broader interpretation of "manieres" and "semblances", implying various human body conditions or treatments.)
And it requires me to tell all the differences that exist between us and outcomes. (Note: This translation assumes 'covient' means 'requires', which is not a standard Old French verb, but in this context makes sense. The rest of the sentence seems clear.)
I say that outcomes are fever and cold holding on, as long as the burning is not passed over, and it completes the dislocation; but now rests the fever and the heat. (Note: The translation assumes 'issue' refers to a condition such as fever or illness here. It seems like an attempt to describe how certain medical conditions persist until they are resolved.)
With our body it has no heat or fever or pain, and contains some fluid which is its own bag and according to the color of its origin, and begins also as a fatty lump, and becomes large. (Note: The translation assumes 'lou nout' means 'our bodies', 'chalor' means 'heat', 'fievre' means 'fever', and 'syfac' may refer to some bodily fluid or mass like pus.)
And are according to their similarities, whether they are gray, or moist, and much of their colors are as I have said in the division. (Note: The translation assumes 'semblances' refers to various appearances of a medical condition based on color.)
It requires you to first examine all the instruments that are called "intromissoria", according to what its shape is or when the surgeon comes after. (Note: This translation assumes 'viens' means 'you come', and there might be some confusion due to possible misinterpretation of Old French, and 'entromissoire' might mean intraoral examining instrument.)
lecor:la marche it issoine.mejaccenture, formenter, theca'sans annexure of the modern-dayens :preface asto carte. The Frenchmente caesus laurin. Apears andreversage.  30rather.
Then remove the entrapment, and take care that it springs forth.
If moisture flows quickly, so its color is, as I have said of other abscesses.
And if after the entrapment moisture does not come, you know that it is fatty, and then it moves in a cross shape, and take it with pinches, and scrape lightly from each part and secure the garment where you have placed it so that you can remove it safely with the needle;
And if you cannot remove it safely, take it piece by piece so that nothing remains.
For if anything remains, it will return many times;
And if it remains for a little while, and does not trouble you, employ the wound with some corrosive poultices or ointments, bind the wound tightly, and apply soothing treatments during recovery, and continue other cures until he is well again.
And if the poultices are large, let him drink .ij. spoonfuls of honey from the wound and treat him for fever.
And if the poultice of vitriol is contrary to him or otherwise if you hasten and use the liquid from the vitriol on his wound, let it remain for .ij. days or .iij., so that the sores heal, and then rest again the ebbing of blood; then return to cover what remains.
And here are the shapes of entrapping instruments, and there are three methods: large and small; and they have about three types called "albaret" (an implement with a spoon-shaped end), and one is called "breb" (a type that has been used in wounds); and there are three methods: great, moist, and small, to search the abscesses in fistulae;
And are also like the needles from which witches count their spells, and they are made of iron, or copper, or silver, and move as those that are yellowish in color, and are more proven for penetrating darker black pits to search out goose swellings.
And they come in three types: large, small, and tiny, depending on the size of the depth.
The shapes of the nodules are very varied, as you can see here: large, small, and tiny; and if there are nodules with two or three cavities of two types.
And if there are nodules with two cavities of the same type; and if there are nodules with a single cavity and they are three types; and all this is necessary in their treatment.
The main cause of these is cutting, and there are some that do not cut at all but rather scrape off the skin and nerves because they cannot reach the vein or the nerve.
And these interposed cauteries are repaited in the form of bandages, so that the maladies do not appear on the opening of abscesses.
And they come in three types: large, small, and medium, as you can see.
And they are not used only in the treatment of wounds, like legs, arms, breasts, and thighs, and similar things.
And there has never been made any other instrument of this size, looking like the cavities in goose swellings, for it is used to bleed blood.
And it has never been placed at any healthy place in the veins and arteries, nor have they ever followed this great form.
Rarely do the breasts of some men swell up when they begin to become permeable, as if they were women's breasts.
And remain swollen and ugly, and who tries to heal them, it is required according to this form of the line B up to point G: Then scrapes off the fat, and fills the wound with medicated cloth, then joins the two layers of the wound to sew, until it heals completely.
And the malady runs down to the chin and is stretched by its greatness like it happens with women, making two grooves above each other in two folds. Therefore one holds the other at the end of each, so that the smaller line contains the larger according to this form from line B up to point G; Then scrapes off the skin between the two folds and removes the fat, and arranges what we have said about sewing and powders, and all that is necessary for treatment, until it heals completely.
And if it is not healed or the incision is not completely done because maladies do not rest in blood flow, or during the discharge of blood, then you must fill the wound with a little cloth soaked in caustic oil. And let it remain so long until it menstruates again, and cleanses the remaining tissue and fat, then heals it until it is healthy.
Cuts on horse's hooves
These cuts that come from the hooves are hard practices or have calluses on them, and if they contain moisture.
Therefore those which contain moisture must be treated according to this form, from line B just up to line G: And when all the wool in the cut is removed from it, if you apply plenty of clean cotton to the wound and leave it for another day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment until it becomes healthy again.
And if the cuts are of similarities with calluses, do it as we have described in cutting calluses, and if there is a wound on the shoulder blade, apply cautery to it as we have mentioned before.
from the artery route
When the artery is the route, and its skin is sealed where it protrudes, many times there are cuts along this pathway, and just as often there is an escape of blood and wound.
And if he knows that it's from the artery, then the cuts are long-lasting in its course. And when you feel it necessary, if you sense one extrication; and when it is for the vein, then it will become dislodged again.
And it is foolish to cover this cut, and immediately when it's on the horse's hooves and in the armpits and neck, and it affects a lot of others. Therefore it is necessary to avoid the iron treatment, and whoever is at the head must also avoid it, and in those who have an inflamed artery, they should pierce through the long skin.
Therefore it is necessary to avoid the iron treatment, and whoever is at the head must also avoid it, and in those who have an inflamed artery, they should pierce through the long skin. then work on the thighs, and repeatedly remove the artery's veins, until it is uncovered.
then insert the needle inside it, and pierce through the other side, and tie back the artery with a double thread in the two places, according to what I have instructed you regarding the removal of the two arteries found in temple areas.
then mark the spot between these two ties as much as it allows without causing pain to him, and draw lines around the cuts.
then apply the cautery that tightens a horse'ni veins until they hurt. then treat it with ointment as long as it is healthy again.
and if the cuts are on the thigh veins, it is necessary to trace with your hand wherever you find in the cut. then insert the needle inside the spot you hold in your hand, and pierce through it, and tie a double thread around that other side. then bind the cut, as I have told you, orent la voie leu en un chascun ire. oun desceps a ceus dui'ses les taujour:
And if you doubt that the thread will not be strong, then straighten another needle in every one of the four corners of this incision made by the first needle, and hold the threads in three fingers.
Then close the incision as much as possible while it continues to bleed, then close the excess blood and leave what is already tied.
Then place it under a clean cloth moistened with wine and oil, then instruct the patient on various baths and treatments until he is well again.
Of abscesses (abscesses)
As cauterizations occur in the artery and vein, they happen when abscesses are formed or due to excessive labor, and similar things.
And this often occurs in the shoulder and hips and other places where they have been joined together, it is a serious incision, and its color resembles that of a bruise, and there are many different positions causing pain.
And when we form it, if there is the painful malady, and not in a short time but here at the corner.
And let it heal well from all sides, and not go forward or backward, neither above nor below, and the one who is joined together does not need to cover with iron: perhaps there will be some contraction.
And those who are head or forehead, do the scarification at the sternal incision. If the incision is small, if you have some forceps, and you handle it at its root;
And if it is large, if you suspend it to the suture, and scrape, then the bone and close the wound with its dressing, and the care continues until he is well again.
Of large masses hanging Never occurs in the abdomen and nowhere else the liver (liver), and it is a disease that is awoken "fingered" (felt), and its roots are slightly, and then hey are small and large;
And I see. I have seen a man who had two bellies that seemed more like mushrooms than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, with fine roots, and they were split apart, and soon after moisture occurred.
I cut them and found in one piece 17 pounds, and in the other 5, and the operations at the incision show that you must look if the patient's maladies are moist, and the color of the arm is white and moist with a fine root.
If the cup is wide, and let it be in your presence the fire cautioning, for at times too great a discharge of blood occurs from the wound, and if it does not stop without you being there, then hurry up, so that you may become two cauterizers.
And if you see the patient'e spitting and fearful of the iron incision, take a well-made thread, and tie it to the arm as we have said, and let it remain for two years.
And then the restraint, and continue to tighten the thread around the arm so that it grips the area, and you will feel some work; if the roots are large, be afraid of cutting into the belly immediately, but do well also to cut most of it.
Then caution with it not to fold back; then treat the wound and make sure you don't cover the arm that is of fine hair, poor feeling, and pale skin tone.
For it is an advanced infection, and I will come to the treatment of this cancer afterward.
When it bleeds (or cries) due to
If the appearance of bleeding comes from a wound or fissure caused by cautery or injury to the abdomen and elsewhere in the body, whether it's blood clots near veins or arteries as described earlier, or pulmonary embolism (pneumothorax);
And if it is due to the fissure and bleeding from that fissure, its color resembles the color of a wound with bruises, and it's a light thing in terms of pain, and opens up various issues; And if it is from the intestine, then there are more divers issues, and when pressed on its edges, it rebounds, and again comes back, and sometimes becomes swollen at the entrance of the wound, and causes much pain and hard work.
And if it is due to moisture, that's a simple matter, and when you press it with your hand, it does not constrain at all; and if it is due to blood, it opens wide by these signs of an abscess big and hard, and is sutured according to the amount.
And if it is due to windiness, then it is soft on the body, and in these operations you should observe whether its appearance indicates bleeding from an artery, a vein, or windiness. It is required that you leave the treatment. Because there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses for arteries and veins.
And if the appearance indicates intestines or blood, it is required that you command the patient to color their left arm and then stretch them fully rightward, then inspect all around the belly. then he commands to lie sown between your hands. then goes over the area that you have marked throughout the entire skin surface. then most of the abscess is above all the great swelling.
then works on most of the abscess extended over the bandage, and put your indicator there, and check for intestines. if you pull it tightly on the bandage, then loosens it, and put the intestines to the side of the abdomen.
and if you pull the belly, then takes it back into the swelling, and remove any excess.
and if the artery or vein is contrary to what you find, or the intestines, then goes smoothly around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and fasten them firmly, and fix the needle points inside that you have made in crossing manner, as though you were piercing.
then tightens the abscess in three places on the needles, and if you see it wiggling, remove the needles, and let the skin return to its place as long as possible, and pull off the dead piece by itself. or you cover it when it is subtle and prone to movement, then cauterize this thing as we have said, and remove the abscess in the manner we described.
or you cover it when it is subtle and prone to movement, then cauterize this thing as we have said, and remove the abscess in the manner we described. and extract the blood or moisture that you tightened, then care for the skin where it was pulled off, and fasten the skin back together.
two sores
We have said about the appearances of chancres, and what medicine should be used to treat them, and how cautery is done with iron; and they say that if a chancre has grown in the marrow, great care must be taken in this treatment, and the old saying states that when a chancre is on bone or on mammal flesh, and on similar things, and you should not approach it at all when it begins to emerge; no one ever cured such.
And the procedures, when it is in place or can be removed as we have said, is that you must never purged black bile from the gallbladder; then do he make better if there is evident swelling, then clean the ailment i.e., open the wound; then cut off all its lumps or sores, and strip off all hair from it and the skin of all parts without leaving anything to touch your hand or any other thing, and when cleansing the blood with the puncture make sure that cauterizing does not remove the incision on the artery or vein until the black bile has been purged; then treat it with other treatments as long as it is healed.
Error: The provided text "de ydropisie" seems to be a misspelling and does not correspond directly to any known phrase in Old French or medieval medical texts. Please provide the correct or intended text for translation. If further context is available, it would assist in providing an accurate line-by-line English translation. We have said in the division of symptoms for edema, and how water is assembled therein; and signs of each type of edema, and the medical treatment prescribed by physicians, as well as that done by iron: they appear only; and one should not touch with iron at these two types of swelling: namely tympanites and iposarchia, for it is a deadly thing. So when you treat this type of edema which has 'tympanites' removed from medicine, and the treatment does not help if the patient is weak or suffering from other diseases than edema, like solutions for stomach issues and similar things; and if there is doubt that one should not touch with iron, as he doubts it; and when you see the patient of great vitality, who has no other disease but edema alone, and is neither too old nor too weak, then this is how you proceed: Care for the patient by placing them in their hands and have your attendants press the abdomen at its lowest part to release fluid into the opposite side: And be careful not to insert anything into either half so that it can come close to the intestine when inserting, and do not allow any bleeding;
Then observe the edema's direction: If it is directed towards the intestines: and if the ydropisie d’estre disoit quin. dees siens est tome. Ij. ence of maladies tote iains leer, Thex ais ices les parler cauteriored'sense.iij.jajuste deire ieu jente meke ail theuille.irol in Frenchmeans iii:reste.iij.
Then pierce through the skin with the instrument, and thrust it in, and move your hand throughout the entire surface between the skin and the sinew as much as you would when sharpening a nail to the thickness of an eighth or more; then pierce the sinew until the cartilage becomes visible at its tip, which is where water comes out from (the cautery), and thrust it in, and with this instrument, resembling a thin silver coin, made of either silver or arch-lead, and in the part between .i. small hole; and there are sides on one side, three holes; and on another side, three holes, and on yet another side, one hole; and it is cut like a feather, which is the shape of the incision described by medieval writers for cutting a quill:
Above this part is the artery, so that when it comes to bleeding with the instrument, immediately release some of its third or less portion, because if you remove more than what is necessary for that hour, perhaps death may come sooner due to the resolution of the patient' Written in Middle English (Old French), around the 12th-13th centuries.
But according to the amount of its vitality, and according to what the dispositions of the patient's vitality mean in terms of his conditions and health, then use the instrument and retain the blood, which is held now for the purpose that prevents the hole above the sinew, as I have mentioned before; then repeat with the instrument this same way another day, if you see the sick man suffering it, and withdraw a small amount of blood.
Do this every day and keep from folding it until it doesn't stay but just a little bit of blood; if you doubt about the patient, and let out much blood, then the cure for burial or sand will be hot, and by sweating or bathing and exposure to sunlight, and if you drink water; and treat with dehydrating medicines until it's healthy again, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after removing the blood, just as I have said before.
from the puncturing of the vein Never are children born without an opening in the vein or if it is small, or not located in its proper place. If it needs to be pierced into every .i. sub-puncture very delicately according to this form: then put a .i. thin coin of lead inside it and bind it tightly for either iiij. years or four years, until he feels the need to urinate, and if his opening is closed, he will be tortured, and make an effort to urinate, and then put back; and perhaps there are no consequences, because the urine that comes out of him does not leave it closed. There is a small hole in it, if you treat with a little ball of medicine, as we have said before, then it will expand. Those who do not have the hole in their body are blinded, for no one is born with the hole at the top of the vein, so they cannot urinate until they tie up their veins high; and they cannot defecate because the material cannot come near to the skin surface, and it is a bad disease.
And the method of this work is that it sticks a sickness so deep in their back, where the head of the vein and artery are as small as a penny's tip, if there is a hole inside; and do not let any blood flow multiple times from it, and if it does happen, wipe off the blood with that cloth which is used for bleeding, and treat the wound until it heals.
And boils on the vein There come many such albathe in the vein, and it is a hideous appearance; and there are both malignant and non-malignant ones; it must be pressed with an ointment one size smaller than needed, and cover and massage all of them, then apply cotton soaked in Egyptian oil treatment until they heal. And if the albathe is malignant and colored, it must be treated with cautery. When you have covered it and the albathe is in its place on the vein, and has parts within the flesh and other parts behind it, then you need to break up that part of the albathe which is within first; and when it's set, you must heal it. Because as you treat them all together, they are not assuredly protected against the disease in the vein, and it comes out darker and corrupted there; hence you must apply everything black and corrupted, then lay on a board made of honey and flour, which is made from ground walnut shells and mulberry tree bark, and treat it with other remedies until it heals.
And if there is blood flowing multiple times, prepare the moon-shaped cautery according to this form: The cauteries aid in these situations together: it's as follows, for bleeding blood and corruption; and when the vein joint of the penis is deformed and retracted, you must cut a piece from the penis, so that the patient can defecate the sickness out among the parts which are not circumcised. And if it occurs with injury or incising, then you must scrape it off with a tool covered with cloth, until it's loosened, and released all illnesses from the penis.
And if it is painful to decide such things, then it must that you scrape at one spot on the head of the shoulder and on the tip of the finger; then wash well between them and put there a thin linen cloth moistened with cold water so as not to grow back.
Of circumcision
Circumcision is not painful to continue like other wounds; in all our doing this work by our will, and with children especially it becomes the best deed and the most light on salvation.
I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision of their children in their law because they do not practice it according to their laws, and we have only what we have gained by experience.
For I want the greatest part of masters and saints who performed circumcision with one hand and force, and for all a new bubble; if he hurt him because it had two threads, then perhaps some would clean above and delay that very thing.
Or it recovers the circumcision, and there is double pain, and in the cleaning of that which has one hand not is sure about pointing the limb; and in the cleansing of an ulcer sometimes they strike the iron, and break the work, and many are born like this, so I want.
Of the cleaning that is done by force throughout the entire thread I have found the benefit of experiment, because the force cuts just as well above and below.
For when you press your hand, if you cut evenly in one-third of the thread; but that the child is well secured around his skin; and how it was made for the first operation so that you make the child understand, if he listens, that you are not just tying the thread to the penis, but only keeping him from moving the entire thread as much as possible, and let him try all the ways in which you can. Then you make it straight in your hands and apply the force between your fingers where the child cannot see them or any other animals; then you wrap your hand around the penis and blow on the wound, and keep it high as long as the circumcision is done on the penis; then clean well from the collected dirt, tie with a double-stranded thread, then tie between two spots at one another; and in the second tying you have to bind around the pouch and the index finger, and place between the two bindings, then lift up quickly on top of the penis;
Then you make it straight in your hands and apply the force between your fingers where the child cannot see them or any other animals; then you wrap your hand around the penis and blow on the wound, and keep it high as long as the circumcision is done on the penis; then clean well from the collected dirt, tie with a double-stranded thread, then tie between two spots at one another; and in the second tying you have to bind around the pouch and the index finger, and place between the two bindings, then lift up quickly on top of the penis; Then let the blood come and go a little above and above the powder; and put an other day's cloth woven linen wet with warm oiled oil, and bind it to the second time treatments so that heal the patiently the other day.
Leu ciase lice andescles 100re devis. Italiens anentera thecaustruction legering and cestate of thepeace laine caesar. Etoustars:meet aicule dudextract toi desuet dents :ageurs.
nage.
And if they trespass for two years, and who is on the cross is inflamed, let it remain until the points of the lance are soothed, and scrape lightly; when it can be covered as you desire, do not harm that part of the cross.
Cure now the wound of things joined with powdery pain, which we have said or treated in powders, and if it covers too much, and goes above, without causing harm; cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
If there is retention of urine^4 in the body, which can lead to further complications if left untreated.
The retention of urine may be due to the opening of a wound^7, or solidified blood, or swelling, or stones in the vein, or similar things as we have discussed in this division.
And if the urine is not discharged, and you see that the retention is from the wound which is in or next to the bladder area, then it must cause great pain upon his thighs; and place the stone on his back, extend his abdomen above the upper part of the spine, restrain him as much as possible; and finally constrain the ureter towards the opening of the wound above, so that the urine can be discharged.
And if it does not come forth as we have described, and the malady causes great pain, then you must alleviate extraction with every instrument called "syringe," which has this form: made of fine silver wire twisted lightly like a bird's quill; or linen cloth one palm and a half long, and fine at the tip. This instruction suggests an early method for creating rudimentary tools to assist in medical procedures, likely used before more advanced equipment was developed.
And the salle urine de l'eau que il n'envoye ecremant lexameur. Ceu falses les, et mans desiromme laverre parole morcegure desoubre:sanses.
Then quickly insert the syringe into the arm, until it reaches the root of the arm, then fold the arm upwards towards the belly; then inject the syringe just before the bladder, and let the pain come to the emptied space immediately, which is not done according to this order because for that reason where the needle goes in turns, then unravel the hair little by little, and urine flows out after the hair, then extract it.
And continue inserting the syringe until the bladder is empty, and aligns the pains.
diseases of the bladder.
When scars or blood come into the bladder, and sediment is accumulated therein, and you see it boiling with acids and medicines, making use of every instrument called "clamps", which has this form:
It is closed, and if there are .ij. (twelve) holes: .ij. on one side, and .i. (one) on the other, as you see; and let the cups be so that they can hold medicines well to remove moisture, if it can be drawn out, and push in when necessary.
And when you see the medicines flowing into the bladder, place the cork in the opening of the urine bag, and draw the bag to which it is attached; if you pull out the urine bag from the stone, then forcefully retract the bag; if moisture enters the bag, and now reaches the bladder, where the pains will feel.
And it is the form of the gentle enema with which you irrigate the bladder: if so, it consists of:
And it is made of silver or bronze, and is mounted higher; then on one side the chains which tighten; take a sheep' Written by Dr. Hari Bela, PhD in Neuropsychology & Clinical Psychology for Children, Mental Health Professional/Child Psychologist
And if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make an i-shaped circle on it, and pierce roundly in that hole; then put a strong thread therein, and join them as one would assemble a dial, and place within whatsoever moisture and water you have seen, and tie the knot inside the instrument; and do so as you would press a bladder with your hand until the moisture runs out of it.
From the hole.
In the division of incisions, we have previously discussed their methods and extraction combined with medicines; I have said about the difference between puncturing veins by rain (perforating) versus all signs, as well as how to handle such procedures for different parts like the bladder and penis. I will clearly and briefly explain it now.
I say that the puncture in the bladder occurs more often in children, and it's a sign that urine flowing from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety; and it hurts quite badly his erection, and frequently he rebounds many times, and then deepens these jumps; and for such movements there is quick healing of children until they reach 24 years old, and it's very grievous in the elderly, and among those who are between toddlerhood and middle age; and care is lighter for those with a large puncture compared to those with a small one.
And when it comes to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with cautery after colon cleansing, because it often blocks no puncture in the area.
Then take the patient by the legs, and lift them up and move to the side if that allows the puncture to descend from the front of the bladder, and it never occurs with any pressure on top. Place him between your hands so that his bladder is descending downward; then you can squeeze and touch therein.
If you feel the puncture in the space, hurry up and remove your instrument from the puncture. And if it does not hurt when touched with all fingers, raise your left index finger as a sign of oil on your hand if he is an infant, or your age if his bladder discomfort has been completed; push into its foundation, touch the puncture and when you feel it near the base of the bladder, press down at that point with your fingertip.
And order the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand upwards above the cords in the part where they are made (incision); then he throws a syringe conforming shape.
gartis. Estroilen le matins of the French. La petite ailves.
x
Where the abdomen is located where there are angles and margins, make the cut larger; and if it doesn't yield, you must extract under pincers that are also like a grinding wheel at the top, so as to pull out the wound without leaving any traces; or push one of these fine instruments right into the center; and if you cannot grasp it in this way, then enlarge the puncture by just a little, and if there is no skin removed, then treat with vitriol.
And if there are more than one wound, first push the largest one at the base of the bladder, then pierce it, and pull out, and the small ones afterwards if there are others. And if it is very large, you must bandage it tightly, and make a larger wound. For these things happen to the patient: his life is lost, or his urine flows in such a way that the edges of the wound cannot be joined together; but I endeavor either to remove the track with pincers, or with tweezers, until it is pulled apart into pieces.
And when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and drainage, and cover it with a moistened linen sheet, or with rosewater and cold water to soothe the painful sore; then rebandage the patient on his abdomen, and not loosen the bandage until three days have passed.
And when you loosen it, if the patient's wound heals well with oil and water, then treat it with both ointments - those of aloe and arsenic, until it is healthy again.
And if the painful sore causes inflammation and clots of blood in the bladder, and is retained urine that comes out like a trickle: push your work into the wound, and extract the blood clot, because if it remains, it will harm the bladder, causing discoloration.
Then raise the wound with water and salt, and help it in every way that you know, until it is healthy; ensure that all the ointments you apply are bound to each other, and gathered on the bandage.
And if the wound is small and it is caused by an arrow or stabbed with a spear, and stuck in, then treat this way so that you cut many times; I ask for your pardon for cutting like this because of this treatment, which I have tested before now.
Take a piece of iron in the form described herein and nail it at three points, embedding it in a stake:
Then take a wire and bind it around the shaft of the spear beneath the wound, so that urine cannot flow down into the bladder; then push the iron tip in the spear legally loosely, until you can penetrate another part. If blood is already thereupon the spear: if he bursts out, and press your hand under the spear'stainces chacques devis:
ll theu'sare il aragne :lere andante, ceunt itentrie devises: entail leslion. ous.
of a woman's wound
Rarely does one find the womb of a woman opened, and if it happens at all, it is considered a grievous matter, for there are three reasons: first, by chance she may remain a virgin; second, no man can be found who knows how to expose her genitals without causing harm.
The third reason is that it's rare to find a woman skilled in this art; and the fourth reason is that the womb of a woman can be more painful than that of an adult when pierced, for as such piercing requires greater depth, and thus causes much fear.
If you require it, it is essential to have a well-educated woman performing the procedure and overseeing the incision; if not, there's no reason why an untrained woman would do so. And present before her should be a skilled midwife who understands women's health, or at least someone knowledgeable in part of this art, and orders her to carry out whatever is ordered for the examination of the womb.
And observe very well that the woman is a virgin: but if she must do so or foundations and inquire about the womb; and if she performs it, then constrain her to do it on her foundation, and recommend that she does so with caution or against the pain, and presses her left hand on the bladder formed.
If she performs it, then it is required that she moves the instrument gradually from the entrance of the bladder up to the root of the thigh, until she reaches where the pain appears at the joint of her hip; then he places the instrument in the root of the hip against the muscle which has been moved, and feels the womb there; and it is not allowed for her to move above or below this area without first making a small incision.
sac'savraie pasiole savoir:0nce taille desires itens la vaylere le savoire nounces a savoir aye demeiliers savoire ilombre,comme ilore. Saviere savoresaidreisure.
And if the wound does not heal on its own, apply vitriol poultice and bandage it for an hour until the wound is sealed off; then continue with your work, so long as the wound remains open, and use stretches that I have told you in the extraction of the wound as others assisted me in my task.
And if the wound does not heal on its own, and it is from an artery that has been punctured, then apply powder to the site and tighten with bandages and stretches, and do not repeat this procedure, let the wound be without interference except in case the patient dies; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is relieved and the leg brace, return to your work, so long as the wound remains open.
from herniated bowels
The mixture of moisture or white clay, which is located inside the belly button that holds the chyle (fluid), and it's called "white clay," but never properly applied to the skin surface as we have mentioned; and this substance is the animal fat between the white clay we spoke about earlier; and this does not often occur.
And the production of this mixture is due to weakness that causes chyle (fluid) to seep out, and it spreads that material.
And there are times when it comes from percussion on the chyle (fluid), and this moisture has many colors: whether it's declining to yellowish hue, or without redness, or black, or light white, and these cases occur more often.
And these are the signs of knowing this assembly, because if it is white clay that we have mentioned before, then the apices remain closed, i.e., only slightly open as shown by an image of a wound, and does not allow fluid to seep out because there's moisture all around.
And if there is moisture inside the wound itself, then the apices are open with a part of the fluid, and for this reason we call it another technique.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white vein, if it feels well; therefore, when you see the color of the moisture, which indicates inflammation throughout the whole affected area, then it forms as shown here before. Now that which comes after the intromission, judge what is therein.
Now that which comes after the intromission, judge what is therein. And when we cure with fire, it implies that the patient's pain should be alleviated as much as possible and the heart is filled accordingly; then he lies on his back slightly elevated, and places a lot of clothes on him.
Then lie down on his left side, and commands the minister to lie on the right hand, and extends the rod to one of the twin veins in which the joint is located.
Then take the spatula and press the joint skin among them until near the edge of the finger, and make a straight incision in the joint skin down to where the white vein is visible, and scrape gently as required.
Then pierce the vein with water at one point, and drain all the blood, and then place linen strips on it, and let the vein ascend; and do not touch the joint, but only the vein itself, carefully scraping off its side little by little, so that you don't scrape too hard, which would cause the blood to return.
And if the wound bleeds during your work, then mend it in its place once you have completed the vein's treatment; then assemble two strips around the joint edges with a strip of linen, and cure it as you would treat other wounds, until it is healed.
And if the ulcer is caused by other diseases, it must be laid with suspended strips, doubting the flow of blood; then cut the vein all around the suspension, and drain the ulcer, and treat it as we have said before.
And if the blood is assembled in two parts, it indicates that they are fractured veins; then scrape the other part as you have done with the first one, drain the blood from the wound, and place a linen pad soaked in rose oil on the injury.
And apply other clean linen soaked in wine and oil to the two veins, and place it over the joints, and cover them with doubled cloths, lying on all this according to this form:
Then take the cloths and cut them in pieces according to this shape and assemble them with sewing into the waistband of his breechcloth, placing one end at the foundation just up to the back, and the other part on the forearm; and the second pair is placed above the joints, and together they form the restraint in the loop of the belt.
And there is never any medicine for this rod of iron, and it must be a smooth cauterizing rod, and scrape the skin of the joints, and heat them as we have said, so that the white vein with the blood exposed.
Then take this form of scalds; and scrape it very delicatesses, et ence cil dise, siens de la.
n:sant.trois andre: leu :errepremodescaurre ant.pouce. Ibreitgustre laire, malice tolereanre:re in theisare. Reccle (inse.
And if any thing contradicts you, or incision of blood or removal of something else, then heal what goes against you, according to what is said before.
And if the pain is so great that he does not want to undergo this work for its horror, then I will instill a perforation, as I have told you, and when you are well-informed by our previous meanings that such a movement should be made,
If it suits the patient to lie on a raised surface; then make the incision in the part of the limb covering the entire joint space, and insert the perforation long piercing nails; and let the hole be wide enough so that all the air is driven out.
Then place cotton underneayer and bind it tightly, letting the remaining air escape from the wound, then continue to treat until the wound is healed.
And if the blood does not escape from the opening of the wound in the mouth of the inflammation, it is necessary that you insert a pen or the instrument used to extract water-filled bullets, as described before; and expand slightly the wound, check whether the air returns, and assemble after two months or sooner, when it has been assembled according to what precedes, then from this point onwards may the patient live without any further issues.
of the incision in the inflammation
Check that in the section of this movement there are no further dislocations, which seems to imply that if it were left as is (laisse), it would be sufficient.
And I will tell you about the procedure and the appearances of the incision.
Now I say that most incision come from or cause injuries; and it is by much in this case.
It is to know by superfluous bitternesses and fluids that are spread in the joint, or by impact;
and is the color of the incision according to the color of the nail used; and it does not cause pain, and it is a serious incision.
and it happens, and from thefts.
When it is due to any of our arteries, then it is dislocated by the positioning of incision, when you press it towards its proper place. and does not require that you touch it.
That which is made of vein inflammation is dislocated by the positioning to express the touch towards its proper place.
and can well perform surgery on this appearance, and on others as well. And it is that you collect the blood clots, then they are at the top, and remove them by pulling with a white thread, and release the tourniquet from all parts of the vein.
If the vein is already set with these needs, then it requires that you pull the thread and collect.
And if it is at the stick, or in those places where there are tendons, then it requires that you release all of it and collect again roundly.
And if the source of the wound is behind it, then it requires that you collect all of it and remove the vein, as we have said.
And when your work is done, cover the wound with clean linen soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
from the incision of clots.
This is an incision wrapped in a wrapping that seems to be like one-hundredth of a barleycorn, with the softening of clots. and if it cries out when moving;
And the cure for this illness is as fearful as what we have said before.
And that we shall tell you the workings of it according to what they did in those days.
And it requires that thou do as the sick man lie upon its edge clear, then loose the thread of clots at every part thereof. Throughout the entire skin area close to the belly button, and the areas of the masters' hands, and they extend them fully.
Then cut through the thick tissue over a deep area where the vessels are exposed, until they are uncovered.
And then strip it from each part, as we have described in the extraction of the arteries that are located at the temple.
Then insert an awl or use a two-wire pair, and tie it to the first location where the wire enters, and then tie it towards the opposite end. Then they handle it carefully according to the length of the cord, and remove the corroded swabs.
Then treat the wound as in other cases where a vein is not obstructed by any of the cuts.
For this reason there is no harm involved, and if any vessel enters all the cuts, it must be tied off at every single incision. If it does not stop its blood flow through the incisions, and they cannot assist.
The second half of this sentence appears to be incomplete, which may relate to a specific medical context, it could pertain to a procedure orde of unction that cannon. The healing of this joint is through the cutting that comes from the incision which causes or allows the intestines to descend from their usual course into one of the grooves;
And this route is either by the cutting or from its extension, and these various means of .ij. movements arise for different reasons such as striking, jumping, groaning, lifting a burden, among similar things;
And the signs when it is from this extension of the cutting are that it happens infrequently and very rarely over a long period, and does not come suddenly. And the abscesses are extended towards the fontanel, because the cutting presses on the intestines.
And the signs when it is from this cutting are that they bring about sudden start of pain at the beginning, and various appearances on the skin near the flesh, because of the intestines' exit and return to its original course.
And there is no occasion where it causes ulcers with the intestines and retains them inside, causing great pain to the patient, mainly when pressed.
And in these iron treatments to fear, as it causes them to shrink.
And the way of the work is that you order or command to let the intestines return inside in the wound if it can reenter. Then either squeeze it on its neck between your hands, and hold the hairs softly.
Then it remains above, and covers all the skin of the grooves long. And put inside the legs of a child according to what you have seen in order to open the wound and such that it can come out.
And scrapes the skin of the grooves so long as it is smooth.
Then place your wooden stick in such a way that it enters the joint, where it is between the white skin above the leather of the elbow and between the second layer of skin.
And proceed behind the elbow, and between the second layer of skin. Then move your right hand down inside the joints, and have the white skin on top of your left hand towards your waist, and lift the elbow to all its layers toward the waist. And command the minister that he extends the arm upwards, and loosens what is behind the ligament.
And if it has an intestinal bag wrapped or white skin tightly, and if you do not fix anything, then he will put it in the abdomen.
Then take an awl or a .i. thick wire made of .x. threads, and insert it into the back part of the joint, which is after the skin around the elbow; then after the waist, pierce through the shoulder joints as long as there are .iiij. threads. Then join them together in the manner of a cross, and bind the joint skin which we have mentioned is around the elbow'ayer with a strong ligament made up of .ij. parts each. Then encapsulate the shoulder joints around the wires, and bind them together with .ij. parts each so that no one of those who hold it down cannot move its head from behind. And apply the band mainly according to the first band of length .ij., and after these .ij. bands leave the skin that is around the joints, letting it hang a great deal on one side.
And after all the rest according to the roundness that it carries; then pierce in the part that is under the skin around the joints as much as possible without causing damage, and push back if you please, as we have said earlier.
Then wrap a damp cloth in oil, and apply it to the wound, and saturate the band that we have mentioned earlier. And never cauterize the white skin around the joints that we have mentioned, after the incision due to doubt of bleeding.
Because this happens often, and leave the band until it is loose from itself; and if it does not come off on its own, then boil water over it as we have said before, until it comes off.
Then treat the wound with other care, so that it heals perfectly.
of a hernia
In this matter I have never seen anyone attempt to treat with iron.
And the old one said that it is made so as to resemble the assembled stick which binds the shoulders together after being loosened from below.
Then cover me, and treat the abscess in this place as we have said before, so long as the shoulders are tightly bound together.
No one comes out of the abdomen if it has not come out, and do not break any of the bowels, and if some come out, then they are few in number and place them back inside.
And at any other time, if it lingers too much on this point, they think there is an ulcer or fistula until the intestines come out.
And this happens by the extension of the abscess which is swollen, just like we have said, because it expands, then becomes soft and swells its edges and opens up.
And this treatment is by cautery, just as we have said before; and there has never been a healing done in this manner with iron.
And the patient suffers a heavy pain on their back between your hands, then cover the swollen area of the rib cage enlarged according to the quantity of three fingers;
And then extract the abscess that is under the skin which has become softened by it, and take out its contents and apply them on the visible part of the abscess.
And press on the lower abdomen where the two swollen points of the abscess are located at the top of its edge, and then count each one;
Then extract the edge of the abscess, and do not cover it or extend its surface in any other way, just as I have told you during the treatment of the bowel wound;
And the treatment consists of wound care; and when you bind the hairs, if they become moist and heal the wound, as long as it remains healthy.
The abscess is confined and has no appearance in the treatment process, and its cautery heats it up as we have described here, with much hope for recovery.
from the softening of the skin flaps
Many times are the skin flaps softened in no one person because the flesh that is inside them is softened as well, and it becomes easy to see; and it is necessary, when you want to cure him, let the patient lie on his back, and remove the softened skin from the natural skin; then gather the two fingers together into a bandage, and if you can see that there are surplus pieces of softened skin between the four corners of the bandage, and treat them firmly so as for other wounds until it is healthy again, and bind his hair.
severe punishment
The act of restraint is enshrined in our law, and for that reason I wish it were not mentioned at all in this book; and indeed it requires only two methods: one is to hold the wound responding when asked about its state, and with regard to treatment; the other, since we have often had occasion to practice limb dislocation on various animals as if on a buck or sheep or goat, etc., I say that restraint is performed according to these two methods: either by attraction or by fracture. In that method of attraction, we lay the animal in hot water until their muscles are softened and for a time; then we pin them down with one hand, so they remain fixed and no longer feel it. For limb dislocation treatment: you must trim the animal's coat, press the skin around the joint on your left hand, tie the suspensorium, and bind each leg to one hook as you have thoroughly scraped off; and this method of restraint is different from attraction because, due to attraction by chance, no trace or slight scratch can occur among the veins; then after curing the wound until it heals.
I apologize for any confusion, but "des hermofrodites" seems unrelated to the provided context regarding medieval medical practices and does not fit as a translation from that text segment. The term refers to individuals with intersex conditions or variations in sex characteristics, which is an entirely different subject area. If you're looking for translations related to historical medical practices, please provide additional relevant content.
Hermophrodite is according to two methods: one where there are two openings as natural in the figure of a woman, or it has hair, and sometimes with cortisone on the urine; and the other method when they are women, like a rod and two coils. And the care of the body and womb is that you bandage them together so all the surrounding areas, and treat them as for other injuries; in the second method, where there is no cure because the urine leaps through their skin from the coils.
Tentigène refers to a medical condition known today as "tendinitis," which involves inflammation of tendons. In medieval contexts, however, this term might not have been specifically used or understood in the same way modern medicine does now. If you are looking for information on treatments that would align with what we know about tendinitis from historical texts like these medical manuscripts, it might involve rest, ice, and possibly herbal remedines, as well as techniques to manage pain and inflammation based on the limited medical knowledge of the time.
"sans la curement a main; Etienne deffre, eternel, andante auu la bouche àterne le chascun theu, etude ofte necces. Ifree demein-laissance tolengere theuccleterine meve itme'sant. Lepremierentur laisse iterratre natuletre. Aller aitures erasure: "toil theuer:
13  the samexinning. çoignalegive aicirexing,ub tolume;s : nagneachterregeacherdectionjacifores:narecteuropeurenthefyngernde. Transithejanturexes andcribei.
If the woman's nature is not known, or if the miscarriage is small; and it is innate in her, or caused by illness that comes to her; or due to a change of posture, or subtle asthma, or spasms, and happens in marrow, on the sides, inside, or anywhere else; and determines conception and childbirth, and fortuitously causes flowers to bloom; and knowledge of this is by custom. If the contractions are close approaching, whether it be for the desired time or not; if there are two fists near each other, then spread her hands wide apart on her back, and form with the two hands as they were before; and place linen cloth underneath them, and dress her kindly every day so that she cannot sew together. And if the spasm is hard and sharp, it must be treated like a thorny flower. If the contractions are natural, then lift her up at once; and prepare a broad napkin large enough so that the wound does not heal. Then treat her long with this linen cloth, and dress other cures for as long as she is healthy. And when it comes into marrow naturally, do it in this way: unless there are enchanted plaques. Because enchanting a lesion in marrow should not be touched by iron.
Embarrassment caused by hemorrhoids.
Hemorrhoids are swellings of veins that often become hardened over time. In the division of cases, I have described those who can be treated by iron and others that cannot. Those hemorrhoids located in the marrow area, which cannot be felt, should not be cured with iron. It is necessary for you to place a woman in a cold room; then cut her veins at the elbow with pincers, and soak them in medicinal remedies that restrict blood flow, such as dragon's blood and incense, and other things; and let her lie on hot water for an hour. And if the hemorrhoids become discharging of blood, it should be scraped with suction cups behind the breastbone without causing injury. Then cloth soaked in linen, and warm juice from plantain or pitch pine resin with wine, and let it scrape her veins for as long as she is well; and that which bleeds like a sharp redness "albethir," and rough, as bitter, and then cure the wound.
Hemorrhoid treatment of maladie. Andante carnales etre ongne. Here is:esmero hemorhoi desires duodenum de merite d’une màsant, "devoire oulden'12thème: lesstemajustice estime lakes of thekëveulxeme of thete. Thewinters :thelore ounce.
nsoinez:sainsechais in folleuriferrantithecellel the ço il locusecres celarecruissouconteletifaire a 2lameaulterrenernoldessilevanssevelairable soingleussejorieu.tense eswace:s le fraisierrunts :userne out the tiento, lyevesementalice10nde
Of childbirth
The profession is first in childbirth that she knows the natural figure of childbearing, and its signs are when you see the woman hastening downward, desiring odor from the air; and therefore it becomes known that these children bear according to the natural figure, and they leave their head sovereign, and the second one with them; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press gently upon her abdomen quickly, for as soon as he ascends on his head, the second one accompanies him, and the child's troubles by proper refinement are removed; because there comes none upward from his feet, nor downward with his heart or joints, and hands, or it descends into his belly or throat, and is converted through accidents on its neck, and other unfortunate figures; hence the profession requires her to be quick and subtle in these matters, and she must guard against error and deception, and I will show you all the figures as they are supposed to aid.
If the child comes up on his head naturally, and the mother grunts during birth, and the strength of the baby is weak, then let her sit in a chair or have the women hold her; and raise its nature to oil or fenugreek has been cooked, and then pour the birth between her legs where this little spatula-shaped structure exists. And cut the second suture, and wrap his umbilical cord until the moisturizers which are applied on it come out; then press down her abdomen as much as possible so that the baby descends from her belly, and if it does not descend, then you must clothe the woman with musk cloth mixed with sesame oil for an hour; if both hands emerge strongly, then gently pull them apart repeatedly in small increments; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a chair, lift her legs upward; then remove the chair from the ground, and treat the woman so that she does not defecate during standing; and if the hands do not enter and the baby dies, cut his hands with this instrument which is placed in front of me, and extract the child, and pull them out gently.
Of the issue of the child upon his feet. When the child comes up on his feet, then it must be thrust upwards. And then turn it gently and gently as long as he remains upright.
And then press down his legs and feet.
sence (reach. ous :maisons. If he jumps, God wills it.
And if it does not jump so much as we have said, and turns very little, until it is according to its natural shape. For when the leash is tied.
And if it does not come out as we have said, and takes mud from the ground, and melted wax, and grinds everything in one quern; and applies it to the woman's body thereafter; then it shall lie down in water until among the ribs;
and when it is warmed there among them, then he makes a mirror of myrrh, and puts it on her, and leaves for an hour; then it shall lie on a seat, and then he makes her exhale and hold her mouth and nose, and presses the abdomen gently, because now the child jumps; from the issue of the child's genitals; Whenever the child comes in this form, he puts his hands slightly on it;
From the issue of the child who comes out with a hand wide open, I recommend bringing back the hand: If she cannot bring the hand back, then rise up and go forth;
If she cannot go forth, then make her sit on a bed, and straighten out her legs;
Then instruct the little muscle that I have mentioned:
And if she does not bear children, then make her sit on a chair, and study how to return the hand; And the child returns to its natural form, and she urges her to hold it until the crying subsides;
From the issue of the child upon its neck, and stretching out his hands, turning his face towards his mother; I recommend that he bathe his hand, then turn it slowly and gently;
And when it is limp (meaning "igalz" as an Old French term for 'limp' or 'floppy'), then put on its muscle of the upper arm and oil it, as we have said, and she commands that he move slowly and gently.
350recreatesme:12escribe thebitec:severe itapexible bye andire:00scoitime:soldrepreisse, with:yseve byr soiurelorevrai a ceintreche.gustrece.faire:nèctifarleylysque tenticle. iaisse, itceste foiscramblexentrener siractre presurefeuccesse thatsanglesse.iquelescibe.ildes ludece deftrait ifnglerecheenticeuxseketezseille:se anatomdeffte tonexte gentable quourse.ise. Andre urange of this manner for all the second instance
of this manner for all the second instance When it comes to this manner for all the second instance, as soon as the second instance is full of one-sidedness, so long as the moisture has dried up.
and if the wound is found on his face and neck, so that it covers the bubble, let it not be contained, and the child will die.
then place the child inside, as long as you have put him so he must be, and command the woman that she shall never do it again.
of the twins' dislocations They are born with hemorrhages many times, and not even three or four; this is no strange thing, and it rarely happens. These are unheard-of things, and they hardly ever live any longer than a few days.
I know that they multiply and are depleted by their supply which sustains them, which is linked to the bubble [blister];
and never naturally like this either [all], as we have said.
And if they come out moaning, as we have said in their care, and is the balm subtle, and it heals swiftly and lightly when [it] moves. and heals in this way as it is worth to health, or should be used for healing. for many children
for many children Never are formed in the marl, either I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII or V, and more than fifteen, and they take on a childish shape by the measure of their size.
And it is said that his blood remains all things, as events may suggest. If it so happens as it is said.
Of the dead child
When you treat the woman with a dead child or in her womb, as I have said in the section on division, and it does not come forth, and then there is work for your hands. If it is said that you know whether the woman has sound health or not, and she does not have an accident or fear of death.
If it is said that the woman should be situated on her back, and her limbs inclined upwards, and the legs raised.
And the midwife applies ice to I or II parts of her body, or she is left in bed if she is not treated with the descent of the child.
Then rub the mire of lime with moisture of wormwood and fenugreek seed, and anoint the child's hands with these oils and wormwood. Then pource them lightly in the mire, then put I or II parts of it where there are openings that can be covered by these oils and wormwood;
And take warning that the infant be dressed so as it descends from its head; And put I or II parts in the ears, in his neck, in his mouth, in his palate, under the beard, on the shoulder, or between the shoulders.
And if such a movement is on the feet, and it sticks or loosens at his knees and sides.
And it requires him to bleed the onychia from his right hand, and place warmth between his left hand's fingers, and move all his hands lightly, and push the onychia in no way among these places that we have mentioned, until he straightens out the matter;
Then push against it. I. another onychia, or if you are familiar with such extraction, so that the extractions are equal.
And then they are moved evenly from one side and the other to allow them to come out, so that their nails may hold, as is this form.
And if there is a delay in one part, he shall not burn any of his hand's fingers, and push into that part, and draw out the other part;
And if there is a small delay, then place this onychia or higher than before, and do it so that the matter will fall out all at once.
And if one hand comes toward the other, and it cannot be pulled back due to compression; And it requires you to wrap a cloth over it, so that the matter will come out all at once.
Then make it in the joint of the plant or at the wrist, and here it requires you to perform this action with your other hand, and on both feet;
And if the child's shoulder is large and it is twisted outwardly or has acute assembly; And it requires you to push the spinous process between your fingers, and handle the head and draw out the acute; You turn to the instrument called "armadillo", for from which comes with the nails or claws that are after this.
And in so doing, it causes the fever to have a great natural strength. And then heat the bones with tongs.
And if the shoulder is jerked and it resists being pulled, then until the moisture that is or has come out.
And if it cannot come out, then cut it into pieces that you can manage.
And if it is inflamed in the abdomen or on the sides of the ribs, then it must be punctured until the fluid comes out.
And if the fever is on his legs, then it is lightly touched, and care for the mouth of the marrow is given quickly.
And if it is in the abdomen or at the navel, then you must extract it with one sheet wrapped around your hand. And do it with the abdomen or navel, until the fluid comes out;
And if the other limbs are twisted, and they move again. :souffice. Then he puts one or two drops, and it was hotter.
And if the mouth of the abscess is opened by incision, where blood came in, there is no need to work further on it. Nevertheless must provide moist and greasy things; And the moisteners employed are flaming hot and softening agents.
And if the wound is on his side, and you put it back flat, using what we said about a live child.
And if there is no possibility, then he will work it by pieces, and not leave anything of the second one.
And when you have done this, moisten with what we said about abscesses that come in the mouth.
And if blood comes out, it is placed in restricting fluid and other treatments are applied.
I saw a woman whose womb had an infant inside who was wounded, and she did the same thing with another one over that, and removed both of them. After long time came an abscess in her breast, which swelled until it opened up, and she began to experience great pain.
I went to seek treatment, and for a long time, I could not set the wound.
I put on flaming hot moisture, an extract of bone came out, and after several days another one appeared. I was terrified because there were no bones in her belly.
I thought it might be the bones of a dead child.
I examined the wound and touched the bone with my hands until she was in better condition. And for a long time after that, there were only two bowels left in her belly.
And I do not remember this chapter for the reason that when masters perform an extraction of something, they know how to provide aid.
During medieval times, one of the common medical practices was bloodletting. This involved drawing blood from patients to cure or prevent illnesses and diseases by balancing bodily humors. The text's reference to discharging blood from an abscess into restricting fluid could be reflective of such a practice where it is believed that letting out excess 'humor' would restore balance.
The text refers to the post-operative stage where the patient experiences high blood pressure (pressor) and becomes weak. They resort to books or medical texts for guidance in managing this condition. This suggests a time when written knowledge of medicine, although limited by today's standards, was still being consulted and applied to clinical practice. Physicians might use these ancient medical treatises as references on how to manage such postoperative complications without access to modern diagnostic tools or medications that we have today. Il theorcimele despises more thaniere: lis, in Old French: leslie leu devises.
And let it be his burning mouth. That it has a wide opening, and the edge of the trees, that it must extend to the length of one and a half handbreadths. And in addition to the two opposite edges of this instrument being securely joined together, which are half a handbreadth long or perhaps slightly more.
And these two joints are placed in the mouth of the mortar when turning the two opposite corners.
Another more subtle and lighter form is made of pine or box wood according to the resemblance of tongs. And at these two joints, if you look, they are one and half handbreadths long, and two spans wide.
And when you see the mortar opened at all parts of the instrument, let it be set on a table with two legs underneenaside by it. Then place these joints together in the mortar, and hold the head of the instrument between your fingers. Then work your hand on the whole instrument exactly as you have made the tongs, according to the amount that opens the mouth of the mortar until it is able to do so.
This instrument is entirely made up of joints and it has many similarities; and when the mortar has been prepared, the work becomes more swift and higher in proportion to its number.
Do not despise this instrument even if you have not made it, because their needs are unavoidable.
When the second child is retained in labor, it requires you to command the midwife that she retains her strength, and then make her cough up secretions from the mouth and nose; And if she does so by itself.
If it does not so, take a pot, and make him a straw or a plaster, and put medicinal herbs that can open the mortar's mouth as in a compress, rue, anise, chamomile, chervil, and centaury.
All these herbs, or some of them, should be boiled in water or placed over the fire; then put a straw or plaster on top of the pot, and the other end into the mortar's mouth.
and the fever as long as the vapors rise within the mortar; then make her cough out, as we have said before. If it hurries along during labor. And if she remains after this treatment and is not still, then command the midwife to moisten her left hand with oil or millet juice, and then let it go into the mortar.
Androgynous de malle semblant enmores. Si ceste vatant,et qu’ilot alise, Etude d'arme:re legeance tiarles laisser itensiurne thecaure tostesmes: :meve (fierce tithes
And if the mouth of the wound is pierced, we have said the treatment of thrusting outward, and smoke from herbs.
And if it's not everything that we have said, then make sure you don't get carried away with the treatment.
But it covers that which is in the mouth of the wound, place it on the thigh of the woman, and then perform the enema with four herbal medicines.
If it becomes inflamed and is reset again, but in all cases, when it turns sour smell in the stomach and head, and cause great pain.
It then prescribes smoke-making treatments that are: no one among the ancient physicians has ever tried smoking cress and dried figs.
The shape of the instrument used for smoking the woman with flowers and ashes is this:
And is like a cage for seeing if it's subtle in the head and place wide joints near fire.
And let there be smoking on charcoal, and if it is burnt out, then start another one.
About piercing its foundation
Maintenance of children born who do not have the piercing done, yet instead it is subtly altered: If it is necessary now to put her in the balance where she will pierce her joint with her own effort, and not let her touch sharp objects, and guard the adjustment so that she does not touch it.
Then apply a thin layer of linen or oil on her joint, and treat the cleaning until she is healthy.
And if you doubt that it will not reattach, place a drip of blood from the wound and let his hands heal for several days, and give him ointment when he wants to go to bed.
And there is never such healing of wounds or incision coverings; it must be covered with that covering: if you treat it, as we have said about the drip of blood from the wound.
From the foundation of the fistula (a pathologic communication between an excretory passage and the surface of or into the skin) Fistulas that originate from the foundation are nodal, and larger than those originating behind it or in between its 20 parts (this is a reference to a specific medical context within fistula formation).
If there is a fistula or more than one; and when that nodal fistula is old, it should be operated on with slight movements or mild dislocations (this could refer to surgical techniques involving manipulation of the affected area).
And there are never such persistent fistulas; and they are known by the fact that they either have an outlet or ventilation when the patient does excretion, and perhaps sometimes leap one at a time (describing characteristics of certain types of fistulae).
And if there are fistulas that involve just the bladder and a portion of the penis; and they reach just the juncture of the scrotum, and parts of other areas (describing specific locations where fistula can be found).
And in this case we know that there is a persistent fistula at the foundation and it is not: (This statement sets up contrast with previous information about persistent fistulas). and you hit your index finger or foundation; and place a subtle needle of steel in the fistula when there is no tortuousity (referring to surgical interventision techniques used for treating certain types of fistulas).
And if there is tortuousity, place a subtle drip of blood or hair as long as you feel the drip on your finger (describing another possible surgical intervention to address fistulas with tortuosity).
and if you do not feel it on your finger, and it does not have an outlet or ventilation nor excretion as we have said before (reiterating the characteristics that differentiate certain types of fistulas). you know that it will not pierce again; if you hurry with your healing efforts (suggesting swift action to prevent reoccurrence after surgery).
And when the fistula is just in the bladder or urethral conduit, it leaps the urine and cannot be healed by medicine (describing characteristics of certain types of fistulas that are difficult to treat with medication).
And if it is pierced at the juncture of the scrotum, then the drip comes to his head again (referring to a situation where a fistula in the context has formed at that specific anatomical location and its characteristics). This sentence is likely part of an instruction or description within a medical text on managing such a condition. and if it has no tortuousity and the formation of pain, then it should be treated with slight movements or dislocation; and does not heal by medicines (suggesting an alternative treatment approach to manage a fistula without surgical intervention).
it is a la main.
: Of the, iface ofse andre maniere.  œanage:  ça  ione  iews.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back; and he bends his legs up to his knees, and inclines his knees towards his belly. Then cast a tent of rain or mud if there is twisting, as long as you know where the tent comes from.
If the patient feels pain around the foundation, it indicates that you must cast your index finger.
if you feel strongly that the tent has been perceived; and whether between your hand there is a sinew or tendon, which indicates that it is Persian. if it does not work, then it cannot heal.
In all things it can heal some people well enough, but this is rare.
And what it does can heal by gently applying the cautery according to the size of the fistula, as is stated before. and heats it in the fistula until it moves away from the foundation; and does this repeatedly two or three times as long as you know that these charges are removed, which look like a feather quill.
and then treats moistened tenting with wax, as long as those charges are weeping, then it treats the ointment anointing and sealing.
If it is so well healed then that's good. But if that isn't the case, there can be no other healing.
and if the tent is between it and does not pierce to where the foundation lies, and there is a thick covering of wax or tendon between your hand and the tent, then you see the fistula covered by such strength. if the tent toke encomancte. Se li malaide.
And it shall be delivered to the tent, and taken; then he will remove those defects that seem like a bird's feather, and they do not return again afterwards.
And if it does not heal itself, and cuts between you and the past, whether it is treated with fire or water therapy.
For the fire cautery, it collects some things: namely, the repositioning of these joints, and the drainage of blood and dislocation caused by moisture.
Then the treatment of damp tent fires or brazier burns continues until its edges become brittle, and it breaks apart the joints.
Then treat the wounds with hot compresses continuously on the joints, and the medicines are dry.
For if it is restored, if it heals and does not return again afterwards.
And if a fistula arises just at the foundation, and is separated from its roots, then you must remove your hand or foundational element, and inquire further about it.
If you feel the tent, and it is between your toil or syfac (a type of treatment) or joints, then he must be pierced through, unless there are no more dangers than a sign of hope and faith, administered by one of the three ways:
Or you cauterize it as we have said, or you burn it just at the foundations, or if you put tent and treat it as before.
And do not go too far in the foundations lest you cover the estate that holds the foundation, and seek relief as he wished. then tend to the wound, as we have said;
then tend to the wound, as we have said; by chance it will heal, or you remove that hidden injury and its removal is near the base, or by guess or another pointed instrument. then make sure there's enough space in the wound as you can.
then study how to restore the wound and delay the fistula in the part farther from the base: if it is easier for the patient.
And there are no fistulas of this kind; and when you push the tent in the fistula, it is opposite to the skin above. if you take a tent cut into this shape: And I push the wire .i. straight in .ij., and push the tent along the entire wire inside the fistula as long as it is at the top.
If she sticks to the edge of the base therein, then extract the wire from that push-pin so you can push your other bottom.
and draw the wire of that shape, and put together the wires .ij., and fasten them to each other, and leave it for one or two days.
and do not loosen it at all as long as the wire covers these parts that are between two points, and which hold.
then heal the wound until it is sealed and sound.
If there's no fistula, if you can make a puncture in any way that you can, provided it is not too deep.
Because there's no need to cover the healing if it's not too deep, and then you tend to it as we have said, until it is sound.
The form of the spinous process from which they make a fistula if it's very large and one or two parts. and on the other hand, for this reason they do not cover what does not need to be covered, as you can see in this case.
Abscesses are in two ways according to them: they are inside the base, like drops of pitch or as small and large pieces of flesh, and then blood. and if there is one or more, they are removed from the base and the top of the base; but those that have little moisture.
And afterwards or a little water clear or a bit of blood, and they have a red face.
And the care for those who have them deep in the foundation, if you command him that he press down to let out the cavities until they start leaking, and then their children appear. If you hasten, and cut with pincers, or hold it by your thumb, then strike into its roots.
And if the patient cannot hold them in his moist membranes, then they are taken to one of these: an abscess, or a cocoon, or a fragment of chamois skin. And extract them at one's discretion, and then apply the powders on any heat-induced wounds or incisions that are exposed to fire (cauterization). You cauterize them as it is directed or at the command of the surgeon of cautery, then tend to other treatments until they are restored to health.
And if the cavities do not yield, then administer to the patient an emetic clyster and harsh for cleaning the area which serves as foundation, so that it may expel itself fully.
And when the patient shows great signs of illness, and if the threads are strong foundations, then it is a light care. And whether you use your thumb or tweezers, and pull them out, then treat it as we have said, so long as he is healthy, and fears the incision by iron.
It seems that it must be done this way: take a twisted thread, and put it on an awl, and then pull the thread upwards and pierce the tip of the awl from another side, and turn the two ends of the threads around the awl. And if it is wide; and hold the formed thread firmly, then pull the thread, remove the awl, and do the same with all others, leaving one for excess blood removal.
Then place a moistened cloth or lint on the foundation, and put it over the foundation, and command the patient to lie down.
And let them cry for as long as they wish, and when they have calmed down, take the treatment of scraping and other treatments so that he remains healthy.
Two times or foundation (referring to how many times these steps should be repeated). Many times occur involuntary contractions in the intestines, and due to a natural constriction, when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
It seems that it must be at the tip of an abscess or your thumb's skin above, which does not let it get wet. And treat him so long as he remains healthy if that is what it requires.
But if he cannot stay put, then restart the scraping more forcefully than before as long as he remains healthy, and continue to scrape. And treat him so long as he is healthy.
Two times (referring again to the repetition of steps). It is a small but unnecessary appearance before the skin, and it goes in so much.
And never binds up blood clots, and the pain is felt in it just like a tremor, and affects all of the body, more so in the hands than elsewhere.
And the treatment is to take a cotton ball or a large one of bird feathers, and place that cotton on the tremor, so long as it completely covers the purple circles around it. Then turn your hand all around the cotton ball so that you cover it completely with the tremor, and place it on top of the tremor, and scrape its roots.
And if you see that it looks like a cotton ball or iron in this manner, and is very thin undernee and pulled upwards:
and doesn't know how to do it twice, but pushes It appears that you should cauterize the tremor as much as it is shown by the caustic or by a cautery iron:
In this line, "clister" refers to the cauterization process resembling a lavation (enema), which suggests performing an enema-like treatment: :escripture du monde descreates, it'san esse : I'', 1esme, sience pasement. Theil:escalle enimine cestraccles. Aster. It'it'ou,cetty lesse2eat:
Therefore we instruct in the treatment of children and those who are weak and lamentable, they are small.
The shape of this small enema is too wide, or the belly is tied in this manner:
and it has an obstruction or the belly is tied like this: look, and the cries are spread out on each side; and in one of the ribs there is a large wound, and in the other there is also.
and it should be the belly where one places a bulb of an animal or of parchment, and is spread out all along small wounds.
and there should be a space between each of these wounds; then a strong thread is inserted in these wounds, either straight or with turns in several places, and the abdomen is tied as if it were a goat's. and when the medicines are spread out, if the ligature is on the instrument in front of a strong thread, then enema; and this is the form of a circle.
And the medicines should not be too hot nor too cold; and at the head of the enema it is oiled or covered with pure oil or something similar, then let the medicine flow gently.
then the assistant squeezes it with his two hands together until everything is seen, then extracts the enema, and lifts the patient's legs up to the surface.
and if the medicine has come out, as much as it can; and if it sleeps all night, that is more help.
And if you enema in case of intestinal obstruction, and the medicine rushes out quickly, then it starts to heal as long as it is healthy again.
and if the hemorrhoids are found or abscesses, then it is also done gently as with one child;
and this is the form of a subtle enema, where the skin is restrained:
and wounds
And we have said about the treatment of wounds; or you will tell us the cures and remedies according to their completion.
I say that wounds are made, and ail est lou castres de peccadires:
sure. Injointre:esmein theilsaulgarre decepts ici andlere decade:entropy:  ́tire tisentures enty:  ̄le.  �anae :cise, fromage ofte le.
Where are made according to the laws of limbs, as for wounds that hurt on the neck, or on the head, or thighs, or abdomen, and similar parts;
And I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I shall begin with simple head injuries, because they will be included in his treatise.
I say that when a simple wound occurs on the head and the bone is not fractured, if it is taken care of due to movement of a hole or similar things, and the skin is entirely torn apart and the wound is large. And you doubt slightly about amputation: if it is done immediately for the cephalic first most if there is only a little blood from the wound, and heals in the opposite manner of the lower part.
And prohibit the maladies' excessive consumption of wine and heavy foods.
And if he does not improve, then reduce his meat intake, and do not drink wine or eat chari. (Note: The phrase "ne ne menjuce point" is a typographical error in the original text that should be interpreted as "do not eat horse".)
And apply to the wound if there is a fistula, let it be cleaned with oil or bloodletting. (Note: The original text may refer to medieval practices of treating abscesses by draining pus through an incision.)
And if there is no fistula, and if it's fresh throughout the wound and not affected by air or powder, then I will mention this after a little bit. (Note: This line suggests that medieval treatments varied depending on whether an abscess was present or not.)
And if the arrow has moved, then apply to it some ointments as long as he is healthy. (Note: This line refers to treatments for arrows that have penetrated and possibly caused damage.)
And if the wound is large like sword injuries and similar cases, and the lips cannot be closed with sutures alone, then it will be sewn up using a layer of material, just as I will say for belly wounds or other types of stitches. (Note: This refers to medieval surgical techniques such as suturing wounds.)
If the wound is exposed to bone and bleeding continues for only a little while, then I will treat it with medicine and restore its firmness in the skin of leather. (Note: This line indicates that medieval surgeinas may have used bandages made from tanned animal hide to support wounds.) And command the patient to eat heavy meats as well as tested and cooked wheat bread, or chickens, and similar things. (Note: This suggests that in some medieval treatments diet was seen as an integral part of recovery.)
And if you treat or bandage swelling and it affects the bone, then I will drain all the swelling completely, and then heal it. (Note: This line reflects a medieval approach to addressing infections and swelling that might involve draining them.)
And if there is an artery in the wound or abscess without cautery and cannot be stopped by medicine, then I will cut the artery, and if you loosen it with a thread. (Note: This line reveals how medieval surgeinas might have dealt with vascular injuries, which were often fatal due to bleeding.) And if this does not help, then caution it. (Note: The use of cautery was a common practice in medieval medicine for controlling bleeding or preventing infection; however, its effectiveness varied.)
And if these small and simple wounds, then this is the treatment; and you put that same powder so that it has moved again. (Note: Small cutaneous ulcerations may be treated lightly in the 13th century.)
C'saince ilesmein English in thexile of thex. Iberia. Jour. Eo'sans lacte devisinga parle sane: The iven. Iacces (it'sue lame : "anatomy thecaurjac andarre.giveine,causeinage to itirage :xentire:ngramme, asenuretic: Ages And apply pressure to the wound, and hold firmly, until it heals well and unites with all its flesh.
And then let the clot form well, and allow it to drain if it does not swell; because you do not remove a blood clot until it is healthy again.
And there has never been such a thing done solely, when we do not have the incense or dragon's blood, but that the arrow does not move the wound.
And if the arrow has moved the wound, immediately it was like this, that no one puts such powder there.
but apply some digested herbs or flour made of water and honey, so that it is reduced in size. then the healing after other treatments until it is healthy again.
And if a bone fracture accompanies the wound and it is small, then you make subtle pinches.
And I will tell you what to do after these breaks of the joints.
of the wound in the neck.
If the wound is at the neck and it is simple, if there is no difference between that part of the joint and this other part, but if the shoulder or the arrow has struck the neck.
If it is the shoulder that is dislocated, there is no other remedy but to leave the treatment and not apply anything restricting, because it harms the joints and makes them retract. and do not apply pressure to the wound, because the substance of the joints is cold, and its continuous movement coincides with the head, which is the highest limb.
but if you want to administer treatment like washing the joints with warm water and applying rose oil, and also wetting it with warm water. and other similar stones according to this method, and damp herbs.
And if the wound is large, then bind it with bandages, and treat until it is healthy again.
And if there are deep wounds that fill with blood, then pierce or go deeper into the veins.
and if the arrow is lodged in it, and blood flows out from it, then you must draw it out, and let it bleed, and as a caustic treatment is proper.
and if the spine of the throat has lodged or turned, then you must keep it in place because otherwise the flesh will go. but if the turn is under the neck of the throat, and do not touch the throat but return it according to its natural shape. and then let it rest for some days, then treat with these herbs until he is healthy again.
and if the wound is made from bone, so que. : ás itaimainte unt. And let it be displaced and misaligned;
And if the wound is fresh, apply powder as I previously mentioned. And if there are bones in the wound and an abscess is present, treat it as I have described in this chapter.
from a wound caused by a sword or dagger
If it's from a sword or dagger and the wound is deep, look at the wound for windpipe contraction; know that if there are signs of windpipe contraction, the wound is fatal. (Note: The phrase "c’est cop de lance ou de coutel" translates to "it's from a sword or dagger." The mentioning of "ventositez" could be an archaic term for tracheal or bronchial collapse, often associated with severe chest injuries. However, without further context in the Old French text, this translation assumes the likely intended meaning within medieval medical practices.)
And if it's not deep, and the wound is fresh throughout its entirety, do not apply the powder immediately nor bind it with flesh that does not heal quickly. (Note: The phrase "et s’elle n’est parfonde" translates to "and if it is not deep." It implies a non-severe injury where immediate intervention with applied substances might be unnecessary.) and withdraw into the body, and burn away the malady. (Note: "reviegne" could mean to draw or remove something from a place, possibly referring to the removal of foreign matter from within the wound. "Ocie" might be an archaic term for burning, which in this context means using heat as part of the treatment.) but I apply attractive oil and bind it frequently throughout the day. (Note: The phrase "met oignement" can be translated to "apply oil," with "atractif" meaning attractive in this context possibly referring to medicinal or soothing qualities of the oil, which could help reduce inflammation or discomfort.)
and if you don't have such oil, then apply a lot of cotton soaked in fumes for exudation due to moisture. (Note: The phrase "met en la plaie" translates to "apply to the wound." "Succier fuers la moistor" can be interpreted as "soak in fumes from moisture," indicating a treatment that might involve using damp, possibly medicinal cloths or materials to help with exudation and potential infection.)
and make the malady sleep on the wound for several days, two, three, or more. (Note: "fai dormir" translates to "make sleep," which metaphorically suggests keeping an injury in a state of relative calmness or rest, perhaps by using dressings that help immobilize and protect it.) if there is no spasm coming in, nor does the body have any other misalignment or disturbances. (Note: "si n'i venra" means "if it doesn't come," referring to the absence of a condition like spasms. The phrase indicates that without such symptoms occurring during the healing process, one could infer stability and proper recovery.) and when you see how the bones are positioned, know that the wound is safe. (Note: "quant tu voit" means "when you see," referring to observing signs of healing in the injury. The phrase implies that proper alignment or stability of the bones at a healing wound site can be an indicator of recovery.) Treat it with bandages and other treatments as long as it remains sound. (Note: "Cure" means treatment, and "tents" could refer to the use of a simple binding or wrapping technique for stabilizing injuries. This instruction suggests that such measures should be continued until full healing is evident.)
and if it cannot heal, or work, then you know there's an abscess; do the treatment as we should. (Note: "et s’elle ne puet saner" translates to "and if it can't heal," suggesting that a wound without signs of proper healing may indicate complications like an abscess. The instruction recommends following the appropriate medical procedures for such cases.)
And if it's from a sword or knife cut, and it is simple, or on the back, then do the treatment as I say in this section. (Note: "li plaie" means "the wound." The mention of an incision by a sword or knife indicates that there may be different considerations for treating such injuries depending on their location and complexity.)
In medieval English treatement. And if they are not dried up, let the wound grow, so that the extractions become easier.
and for other wounds on other limbs, their assessment is in line with what we have said.
double dislocation of the abdomen
Dislocations of the abdomen are large and numerous, as well as small;
of the great wound there is no mention of a rupture in the intestine or injury to the intestines, since it cannot occur due to the introduction of foreign bodies.
and the dressing is more troublesome, and there has never been a case where a small wound was worse than a large one;
because it is easier to put back the intestines into place, if they are not set in and out repeatedly; because the intestines inflate almost immediately upon feeling pain, so they come back more easily;
and for the same reason that is considered more painful injury, because we can move the intestines back into their place that other injuries cannot;
And it is known that the treatment of the abdomen involves three types of movements:
the three common treatments have been involved in abdominal treatment;
and treatments for other types of injuries such as those involving the chest and two others are common to various other injuries;
and all of them are more suitable with abdominal treatment, and I will say one and declare it;
I say that when the wound is small, and there is nothing wrong with the intestines; Theft in English translation, ilicterraneaux.ièr a French. (https://leave d''. Thissure toire of theé:15 ofxerité,leave andaceurre: œ: itisare lexpressenture unece. ge. And aïn que ilesse de la testracture dèlore theires. For this because the intestine is inflamed by heat.
And when it is cold, treat it as follows: Moisten a sponge or, I mean, damp cloth briefly: Or you cook in water simmering and boiling, and season and spice it: And raise the intestine as long as it is swollen:
And never restrict its size, and it is moved more often for unswelling:
And when you see the swelling decreasing, if it is warm in water or heated and harmful are cooked: Because by that, it is lightened its entry of things:
And if it cannot enter, then make a little cut with the instrument of care and remove the clots:
And the first treatment involves heating: that we should not cut too much because of great necessity:
and it's the effort to heal by cutting:
if it is made in the curvature and not dried up, then its shape returns:
And when the wound is enlarged and the intestine moves outward: if it is reset according to its natural shape in its proper place: if you have such means, because it is done by movement:
When the wound is wide, and it's located in the part within the belly: if it is necessary that you make your patient lie on his back: and put his legs higher than his head: and if it is located within the abdomen:
and also the movement of the stomach occurs in one of its segments. provided that the lower part is raised higher than the other parts.
and hence, it is necessary to administer what I have mentioned concerning large and small wounds.
It pleases me with that which you have arranged,
then have it in your hands .i. minister of the god who rules with his hand; and gather together the lips; and this is the common way of dressing;
and this is the common way of dressing; and it depends whether you use a needle or others, according to the size of the wound's extent; then leave some space at the wound's head .i. do some gaping, and insert an iron needle or if it is possible you have a strong thread; and pierce through the joints with these sticks;
Then the pulling of a thick thread through the tip of one of them by .ii parts, Then gather the two parts of the shoulder joint that are dislocated,
And then leave one space, and put another needle in it; Then tie the thread like you did with the first needle; and continue doing this according to what you are skilled in regarding the use of needles; as long as all the wounds are contained;
and let the needles be both fine and large; because the fine needles coat the entire wound, and the large ones cannot fit properly: for this reason it is necessary that they are varied;
and it is not necessary to thrust the needles too deeply into the flesh or muscle;
that they do not coat and heal the wound before the sealing;
and then coat the shoulder joints with them, so that they do not bruise the patient' mantle; and cover them with sheets or cloths over the shoulder joints so that they can remain in place; and let them stay as long as the wound is sealed;
and this method of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds; Because it suffers an injury by a single or two needles;
The second method is common; and you should assemble the two parts of flesh and sinew together with an average thread, or it has one strong fine thread; And when you have perceived all these four assemblages;
And when you have perceived all these four assemblages; If you reposition the arrow to the part where you began, in the manner of how they remove thorns.
and leave a space as large as that between each stitch for a small needle.
this stitch secures him.
and I stitched up a wound where one of them had been injured in the abdomen.
who was wounded by a knife. and the wound was more than one handbreadth wide, and it extended into the intestines, more than two handbreadths wide,
and the wound was inside the abdomen. I brought back the intestine and since it had been there for about twenty-two hours,
and the wound was sewn up again just fourteen years ago, and healed.
And the physician had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle.
and I did not cleanse it with oil, because there was only one place in that area where none could be found, nor any medicine. and put something similar to clean cotton on it a few times each day, and washed the wound with honey-water until it healed.
Or I will tell you the specific methods of dressing:
take the arrow, and the thread from the farther edge closest to it;
when it has pierced the wound straight on, whether you lifted up the arrowhead itself or used the thread to extract it,
and make another incision on the closer side towards it,
and their intention with this dressing was that you should pull it out as if a leatherworker does with a piece of leather, and leave it one time for pulling from that side, and then repeat it on the other, as long as the dressing is completed.
The second method of dressing that Galien does correctly.
If it is as if no one does, joining the two parts together naturally. and join one of its ends to the other end, in such manner:
and use a needle or another such pointed instrument, and pierce that point only: and leave those two ends: then turn the needle, and pierce deeper into that distant part: and those two connected parts:
then pierce each of them into that distant part, in those other two points connected to the opposite side:
and this is the more common way of sewing and it:
Galien might have spoken this way, but there is no testimony:
one must sew with two needles, or there must be thread for each (of them):
and it must push one needle from a side, and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew metal wires:
and it is known that when the stitching is inside the abdomen: if it is more costly than other ways of suturing the abdomen:
The judgments regarding the wound are similar to those of other wounds:
and when you touch itch flesh that is not yet moved: later.
later. And if the arrow has moved, put it on any wound that is present, until the wound heals. and tighten the thread, and solder the seam, and the stitches. then heal the wound as with others, until it is sound.
and if you do not have medicines, put on it as soon as possible, threadbare cloth or cotton, until the wound begins to bleed again. and move it every day until he is sound again.
For you do not have other medical knowledge for handling various wounds; these injuries are simple enough.
but if you doubt whether the wound affects the primary parts of the body, if it is necessary for you to apply gentle pressure with linen soaked in warm tempera oil or rose oil. and put it there between the arrows, and under the saddles;
and if it feels painful in blisters, and often happens, if you use a black wine enema (this phrase seems incorrect as "clisterize" refers to an enema and should not be paired with the color of wine), and immediately it appears that the blisters are related to the intestines.
and pierce deeply, and you know that when it's the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small ones.
The young intestine cannot heal if it is blocked (literally translated from the French "qui est apele" means "which is called"). and because of the positioning of the veins that are there, and due to the subtlety of the entire body structure, and the approach toward its natural state in the nerves.
And if the wound is deep enough that it should be set as well as the intestine, while it heals.
Trex aureg theorre plur la cest li. Cetera ilesle avantage of thele texte leveille, voile. Theissage (you:en's invesque tisel esleague. Le sour les coustape l’aspect.le le. because they have veins and arteries;
and then there is what lies between the joints. and lower those shoulders hanging over the part of the wound until it can be aligned when the edges shrink, and the wound lowers.
from the route of the blood vessel
When the intestine is twisted, and the wound is small, if it can be restored in some cases,
because I see that some were nailed to a lance wound;
and it was the wound on the right side of the stomach, and became infected and turned into a fistula, which led to his excretion and windiness;
I provided care according to what I knew, and I continued to be meticulous until he was well again, and his limbs were joined together.
And when I saw him joined together, I doubted that he had no illness in his abdomen; and he had no pain, but improved remarkably with food and drink;
And no experimental physicians said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be sutured in part; then make large tests, and gather the edges of the wound; and when the tests are done with the mouth, then put them on the upper teeth;
then place another tremor after it in such a manner as before, until the wound is completely healed.
and count the wound. Such a dislocation settles in the intestines, and causes no harm to the patient.
and if it can be tied together with a very thin thread that is taken from the intestines of an animal,
In such a manner: take this thread of intestine that is very dirty, and then tie it together with this thin thread of linen very tightly woven, then push the thread into the arrowhead, and count the intestines, and rejoin it in its original route;
and this way of repairing with tremors is not a risk that depends on the path of faith and hope,
and if the wound is large and wide, immediately when it is in one of the major intestines, there has been no injury nor healing because of its subtlety;
from a fistula or it is, Seek whether any wound or incision, as it heals, if it is everywhere called a fistula; and immediately when it is opened and closed again;
And a fistula corresponds to that valueless and weak nodal action where no pain is felt; and is also opened as if the feathers of a bird;
and it never jumps clear and wide, nor sometimes thick; never poorly, and sometimes enough;
sans:caisse itte the lessear. C,courant:es, wither thanterighten:nare.a; and: Thewese. This is fire caused by one of seven injuries:
That is to say, by the small piece or fragment of blood. Or because of its malignity; Or because it has hardened within, and above the lips where it cannot be born; Or it has too much blood; Or it is a stone, and the matter has a bad quality; Or the medicine is not good in its treatment; Or because its corruption is like a plague; Or due to its property in the region is delayed digestion, and healing takes a long time, and it flees by nature; Or it has bones or teeth;
and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments of medicine in its divisions;
Or it is intended for me to tell you about the treatment of fistula made by handwork;
It shows that fistula happens in all members of the joints; because it has large blood vessels and arteries, and nerves; orifice of the intestines, or anus, or caecum; Or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of hands or feet;
And all the fistulas of this kind require serious treatment, and there is no other solution but labor and ignorance.
And if there is no fistula that does not show signs until now that I have mentioned, and you are confident in the treatment. And you have seen it recognize, if someone takes a tent or fire, whether the fistula is straight, whether it curves.
And if the fistula is twisted, you seek a subtle tent of flesh ("plonc"). because the lumps bend inwards due to twisting (tortuosity).
And if the fistula has an opening in the hand and you cannot well locate it by tent (observation). if you administer enemas through one of the openings (pertus).
for if there is another opening in one of the fistulas and it's cleaned ("moistors" being a term that might refer to wetness or treatment), and it appears better.
then let it be bent with the hope that you know whether there are bones or nerves in it and it is not well formed.
And it wells estroié ás en vieux French: "
. Sarrête, and it'sour, in theur of the French. It fromentures of the. Theu the arme pure. From:esculature. Whatentre les lichorecause. ngeau iacecuithecte fors audeuxseurs.
ngeau iacecuithecte fors audeuxseurs. And for the other patient let there be decay of bone, and the corrupt joints which are inside. And then the treatment as long as it is healthy.
And if the fistula is well-formed at a proper place, it requires that you cut out as much as possible, just like you can. Then I put wet bandages on the wound, and apply ointment at the top of the fistula,
Then I put wet bandages on the wound, and apply ointment at the top of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the unnecessary delay in the base of the fistula,
And then I apply healing herbs to a sound joint, as long as it is healthy,
And if it is not healthy by this method, then you must cauterize as we have said before,
And if the bone is decayed at the site of the fistula, you must cut it out, Whether veins or bones are not blocked or primarily affected, as we have said before;
And if the bone is exposed, and it has decay and blackening, let him cut out as much as possible until the decay has pervaded all of the bone, And then the treatment of various things continues as long as it is healthy,
And if it is not healthy, then return with a blow as before; So you know that it is not necessary to go further than this;
If you discover and find that you remain at the base; And if there is decay, then restore the joint;
And if he is so healthy at this point, it is good. If not, you know that the contamination is too great to be overcome in future. if there is no other remedy but to let the natural lacteal fluid drain out;
and if there is a little decayed bone, then you can extract it with forceps; if the arrow is caught by that instrument;
and if there is any bone remaining, remove all of it without leaving anything behind;
and if the dampness makes it contrary, and there is no mistake nor fear; if it is with coping and dampness and pressure, and release the bones;
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place something causing sticky exudation on the wound; and let them stick for a time within the bones;
and then they will be lighter on the bones;
and if it's a large bone, like in leg or thigh; if you allow the contamination to persist until all of the bone is blackened; then restore the wound;
and if there's a great part of the decayed bone, then comes up in large pieces from the bone; if it covers and conceals all of the contamination, then heal it until it is completely solidified;
and I will tell you about a case of one man in his leg; sic :claus :sentence.
There was once a young man of thirty years, who had pain in his leg due to something that came within the body.
As the materials entered into the leg, and were expelled from a large abscess without any reason to open it.
but the physician through their foolishness attempted so much that they opened the abscess. and they introduced many materials, and it became a fistula, and there came to much dislocation and moisture from every direction of the body.
but many a physician put in for up to two years, yet they had no healing success in the art of hands.
and when I came upon him calling his leg and the treatments it received, and because there was much dislocation of the heart; and became red like a young man's flesh, and had a yellowish hue.
I pitched my tent in one of these hernias, and then sought out all the hernias,
and found that they came together from all parts of the leg.
Then I hurriedly went there and set up in one of the hernias wherein I discovered a part of bone. and I found it rotten and decaying, with the rot extending into the bone within.
I called upon that which appeared from within the rotten bone, and considered it had no other rot than what was shown to me.
and began to attempt healing with similar remedies over a long period, but could not fuse it together.
and then recommenced searching, discovering the bone as I had seen before.
and found the continued rotten within the bone, which I set up, then took it out again, and thought to join the fracture.
but I did not do so much that I put forth of the bone in its entirety, and itchould be softly; ioutre laisser:nousage airexentures. Aoutil,sleisin tolore. Thefaire. Whatchareturexagre deffacitexant, andar. Iesqueurfee (that age, lice.
n ocuithe patiue. And for fear of death lest I suffer from him. For the often bloodletting, but it was entirely healed.
For the often bloodletting, but it was entirely healed. and in the place of the bone grew hard flesh without causing any harm or contrary effect at all during its entire growth, neither to the head nor when coming out.
and are in place so you may replace the corrupted flesh above the bone with it. and discover the soft flesh above the joint where you find sinew that does not tear the flesh. and apply a piece of meat or cloth inside the bone to cover the corrupted flesh, and it must be as much soft flesh to see and feel the corruption, and again another time of such tendons.
And if the bone is corrupted and it does not open or reveal itself completely, the corruption is in its midst or part of it. if you discover the entire flesh; then apply a piece inside it,
and then bind the tendon from part to another of the corruption, and it should be as long as we have said before; little by little, if that is what we have stated.
and if the corruption is in a joint, then repair the joint corrupted, and apply the bone or it contains of the other part.
and if the corruption is in the continuations of these two joints, there should be no other covering than the one placed upon it.
and if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or in the wrist joint, it is a very strong thing to deal with. but whatever it is, it must be discovered what that corruption does open to you; and form it in all ways that you please but the nerves do not hinder it;
And you know that the saw and hairs used to cover these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and appearance of the eyes. And their thickness and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness. And therefore it must be equipped with an appropriate instrument for each kind of work;
And you will see the instrument with which you are familiar, according to your knowledge of this art. and the testimony of the diseases' ways; if it is the instrument with which you are familiar according to what it requires.
two fire (possibly relating to the use of fire for cauterization or thermal treatments) The shoulders for which they give up or due to moisture;
And when you have learned curative medicine for this corrosion by the treatment of medicines, yet they do not benefit from it; if it is meant to cover that member up to the joint where the inflammation comes; if it is because of the pain from this death or by the great harm caused by the defect of the limb.
if it is because of the pain from this death or by the great harm caused by the defect of the limb. and the signs show that the limbs become blackened, seeming like they are burned by fire; and then to the blackness after it, comes the corrosion of the limb upon itself; and takes it all over; if you hasten to cover it up.
and if it is due to the sting of any venomous animals, like a sea scorpion or wasp, and similar things;
if the corrosion is at the head of the fracture, and it breaks it, and do not give him any space to come back with his hand;
And if it comes just to the hand, if he covers the joint, so that the corrosion does not come back into the arm.
And if it comes to the arm, then it costs; and if it goes past the cost, that is the wound. And there is no value in measuring the quantity of its virtue.
And all of this happens when the corrosion comes or goes as it pleases: if it comes first in one joint, then costs after another.
And if it comes or goes as it pleases, then costs everything. And if it rises to the leg, then costs at the knee joint.
And if it rises above the knee, then there is no remedy but for the diseased leg to die.
And the way to cover or bandage the limb if it is above and below. And extends some ministers to the lower links, and others ministers to the upper links. And you draw out the flesh that is between the two points of one joint so long as the bone remains exposed;
Then cover it with bandage and place a piece of lined cloth on each side so that the bandage does not touch healthy tissue; And strengthens the diseased part again and applies pressure;
And if the blood of a wound comes as we have experienced, then you must immediately cauterize it; You place it on various powders restricting; then return to your medicine until it is completed.
Then bind the painful limb with a fraying ligament and heal it until it is sound.
And I will tell you what happened to one man in my house:
It happened to him a darkness that seemed like smoke from fire.
And that corrosion came first in its work on his body, until it covered everything of him.
And when he saw the corrosion, he took it upon himself to cover his body, and was made sound again.
And long after him came back that corrosion or some of it, and he came to me.
And I put it upon things reflective after curing his corrosion, and he could not stop the corrosion.
And he asked me to touch him, and I did not have hope of reflecting the material. And I also doubted whether if I touched his hand, he might die. because the virtue of the man was weak; and he despairs entirely, and returned to his land. And when I took it upon myself to cover his hand, he was made sound again.
And I have no such story to tell but for this case, if there is any other instance.
There is never a dislocation without painful twisting of the shoulder, and it lingers so long that there is great accumulation of blood. And then they run and pierce it, and jump their shoulder, as we have seen among servants. And the skin that is above is also as delicate as a fine cloth. And they will not hurt bone or nerve, nor such diseases are called "healthy",
But if it is so elongated that it will slide down the bone even in joints, then it is called "fistula";
And it is called the one that cooks it thoroughly, and immediately as soon as it is slightly, just like how we drape; And it does not hurt at all by its corruption.
And if you have faith that its burning does not hurt and its corruption is not manifest in it. And the skin is hardened by fire, so he treats it this way with cleansing:
And if his breasts are large, and the belly upon which they rest has a foul smell. And the Egyptian cleansing medication, which is made as follows: Take ash, and oil, and litharge, in equal amounts, and cook them together in one vessel over the fire: As long as the medicine is red, and it becomes as thick as honey:
And then take from it according to your necessity, and they make it water and honey: And for cleansing the belly, and stopping the perforation: And let the medication remain for two hours, then extract it by pressing:
Do this many times until his breasts are relieved of pressure, and his pain is eased:
And there is no time for water-ash enemas: When this medicine is not present, and you require ash from oak wood, mix water above:
Then pour it, and for cleansing, as long as you know his breasts are well-formed:
And if he cannot bear it, then neither the Egyptian medication nor water-ash enemas: If there is any water and honey in the cleansing, even if it contains a little litharge: Or you cleanses with honey and wine-mixed honey, so that the honey has properties of relief and purification: And the wine purifies it:
And when you have done this, and you are confident that his breasts are well-purified: If this cleansing causes pain to emerge within him:
And you are instructed to prepare decoctions with rose oil and wine: Or you administer some medications and ointments that I have mentioned their properties or treat them:
And if he pricks at his breast, and the poultice cannot enter because it is small. If a piece of iron slightly enlarges its spot, and puts there an Egyptian ointment tent. Or basilical ointment, as much as it has been enlarged;
And if the wound is too wide, he lets it stay open long enough so that the dressing or poultice can enter.
And if the piercing that is below the belly button rises upwards, he covers it more deeply or less so. For if the abdomen is open in some places, he does not let it harden with cold water. And if you cannot cover the breast so as you see fit, If it appears in such a way that the abdomen contracts downwards as much as possible.
And if you cannot cover the breast so as you see fit. If it appears in such a manner that the abdomen moves slightly downwards and nothing remains of the wound. And take conglomerating medicines to apply on the breast,
and they are under a piece of linen that covers the entire breast; then it copes the puncture in that place of the breast; a little bit wider at first point; for they are warm soot burns under another piece of linen according to the quantity of the puncture; and it puts under the breast of that puncture for aligning the wound, and does not remove the sharp pieces of linen until after several days once;
and the one who is on top of the puncture in the breast, often for removing the wound; and it knows what comes from the wound, whether it's poison or a little bit, or digested, or not;
and take care that the patient feels pain or no pain; and if it has abscessed or not;
and when your medicine has taken effect somewhat expanded, and you see how it affects the nature above the breast puncture; if you know that the breasts have become hard, and approach the sanctity;
and then move him in the morning or after three days, and when you dress the wound; if change another linen, and renew the soot burn;
The following translation: "Cetera :meintaintenance of this sentence translateur. If you have tostruction de:rather, the 13rd century. In old English. Explain the Frenchsans :Gothic text in Old French fromge aleve. Itso, aajauge. Translates what's it, about ghostly translating. And if subtle knives penetrate deeply after a long time, do not despair about health.
Because the healing approaches. For there are people who delay cleansing wounds and those that do the opposite.
And if the belly protrudes significantly after many days, you know that the stomach does not recover well.
And if the stomach delays in emptying itself, and is distanced, then adding moistened medicine with liquid substance and dried ones. As in diabetes, because it has a great part of silver (vitriol), and this is the treatment for it.
They apply diabetes, and they make it with rose oil, and the infusion is made from a little strong wine (viel vin igal).
Then they preserve it (the medicine) and use it; and this kind of preparation makes us more resilient (engroissiez), meaning stronger or robust in health. When diabetes is not present.
Or you take myrrh and aloe, and crush them, and powder them on honey when they are mixed with fire (sor el feu); And then apply it (the medicine) to a linen cloth and place it under the breast, and there was never anyone who applied an apothecary's advice too late ("aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe"). And celestial hyacinth roots, which are also like flour and one hundredth (centoire);
And celestial hyacinth roots, which are also like flour and one hundredth (centoire); And you can also use simple or composite mixtures: grind them, and make a powder from it, and put it on the honey that I have said, and then use it. And if this cure is long-lasting, and don't cure it by this treatment.
And if this cure is long-lasting, and don't cure it by this treatment. And so you know that decay has begun, and it penetrates into the bone, or affects the hard parts, or the joints. Regarding the treatment of an abscess, as we have said before.
From the incision of the bone
Parotitis is an incision on the cheek over the earlobe of the hand either thereof, or by chance it extends to other joints;
And when it is inflamed, and one does not take care, if there comes an incision in the skin And it cuts and breaks bone until it cuts the root of the joint, and by chance it might cut the whole thing.
And it comes to rotting bone just as soon as it does appear, causing a stinking pain that one feels in both shoulders, and the joints are red and swollen.
When you treat it as we have said in its division, the treatment does not benefit at all. It implies that you must remove all the superfluous tissue from the joint which has remained for too long. Then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cauterizer is much help if the bone is sound, and the joint is healthy.
And if the joint presses on the skin and it begins to swell, and the bruise (bleeding) appears. It implies that you must place a restraint on the joint where there is pressure; In olden parole, dans leve les galeaun, et devises à l’eau defface develovers duescully. Etate the latex: "Iacces. Forte aure'savour desusse laouten. Ieanre devisiing of thefele sone. And put above the remaining part of the medical tools, and corrosive to burn everything away;
And if corrosion is in the bone, and it breaks, for as long as the bone rots, so much so that it cannot heal.
And if you see that it has rotted, in one or two days as before is said; Then the treatment until he is well.
And if he is wild or uncontrollable and it hurts a great deal, then you must first set him straight. Then cut the scab quickly by slicing across above when cutting an abscess.
And warn against cutting too close to the skin where the abscess is, because the patient would then experience intense pain.
And if it happens, then place something on it that calms.
He must avoid those who hurt people's hands by chance in all parts of the body. And by chance I may have bones or some fragment of them;
And none are born from the root of the joint; their birth is not found anywhere else on our body either. That which hurts anywhere else for two days will not stop making a sound; And if it hurts in the place of the joints for two days, possibly he will not make any sound;
The size of those who are plump is light, in a way like this: The size is taken from the root of a wide cavity.
Those that are born in the joint's root are painful to heal: if you hold it too tightly.
In those that are born into the ground or must be on the floor soon after birth, it is required that you first cradle the head round to the bone just at the moment of birth. Then you cradle the bone in a suitable sling until it becomes sound again.
The injuries that come together by birth or by wounding of a cut, or by the heat of fire, or by similar things.
If it is required that you cradle the wounded one, so that they must be repaited according to their natural forms. Then place between two towels or layers soaked in rose oil, so that they do not join. Or you place between two thin pieces of cloth so that it is joined together, as required; this refers to the technique mentioned above for immobilizing a wound or injury using soft materials like linen and rose oil.)
If injuries come from neither of its two parts with the palm, then cradle that wounded part so as it requires.
Of little consequence.
They are wickedly wrapped up with excessive and melancholic superfluencies that come from more than one limb.
and more often occur in the legs of those who go on pilgrimages and work, compared to others.
It requires then that you never purged it of the colic and afterwards purified it from the church; perhaps a metaphorical way to describe thorough cleaning or treatment before seeking religious sanctuary for healing.
The care of iron is according to two ways: one way involves holding them, and piercing the black blood; And the other way is to bind the vein, and pierce it through entirely;
ng thearlater. Ilgustream : " :encontre it:age. Then strain the sick leg upwards above the knee, just to the part below the groin. Then cut into one, two, or three joints, a wide incision.
Then remove and draw out the black blood from one end to the other, as much of it as the sick patient can bear.
And then there is mold, and he commands that you cover him with blackened meat by shoving in a dead animal's entrails.
And repeat the evacuation and sanitation when the wounds are cleaned up, and let it go for the sick patient.
The action of lifting the leg of the sick person is done in this manner: if it has much hair, Then he places it in water and lifts up the leg with warm water until it turns red, and inflames the wounds;
And if you do not have water, then heat it with fire, and then cut the vein long at either end of the thigh or in the part near the ankle.
Then treat the skin around the wound and scrape away one portion of the vein at a time until it appears when you feel it.
And she turns red and black, and when it hardens like a twisted rope.
Then place the thread inside, as long as it lifts the skin, and then tie back one side of the wound.
Then cut into another one or two joints beneath it; scrape the skin on the vein until it appears again. Then stretch the skin back along the thread, as you have done before, and tie another side of the wound, just as you did first.
Then cut another width, or if you have more experience, stretch it, and tie both sides of the wound.
Then draw and stretch it down to the second width; then pull out in widths until it bleeds all through, and tie it.
And if you cannot draw and lift it up, then insert a large needle with two strong threads into both ends at once. And draw and cover it with mold thereunder, and turn your hand to one side and the other as much of it will bleed out. And let us keep it up therein the malaide totece de la vie, and lice entendu.
And when you have completely treated it, if you put fine wool and roses on the edge of the wound and oil, and heal it as long as it is healthy.
And if you see him bent and twisted together, and not straight, as we have said before. It implies that it should be split awkwardly but not covered up; and treat it as we have previously mentioned. This instruction appears to suggest a method of addressing the deformity or injury without attempting to cover it, focusing instead on corrective measures.
It implies that it should be split awkwardly but not covered up; and treat it as we have previously mentioned. This instruction appears to suggest a method of addressing the deformity or injury without attempting to cover it, focusing instead on corrective measures. The form of iron used for binding the wound is curved, and does not cut into the vein; this indicates a description of an instrument or technique used in medical practice to address injuries without causing further harm.
and is heavy-handed because if it were too delicate, it would cut into the vein; but rather it should be so as we have said before, and this is its form. The description here emphasizes the importance of balancing effectiveness with caution when using instruments or techniques in medical procedures to avoid damaging vital structures like blood vessels.
Of a civil vein. This could refer to a type of vessel within the circulatory system that is distinguished from others, perhaps due to its anatomical location or function. In historical contexts, the term "civil" might be used in contrast with other types like 'military' for different purposes.
This vein is in the legs, in warm parts where there are no grass or trees growing and on earth where there is no moisture. The description likely relates to a specific location for medical procedures, considering anatomical features that may affect the approach taken by practitioners of medieval medicine. Such details could be critical when discussing treatments like cauterization, incision, or extraction in various body parts described.
and perhaps it may also grow elsewhere except in the legs; this refers to an occurrence of dryness beneath the skin, which could be indicative of a condition or reaction observed by practitioners. The term 'porriture' is likely describing some form of discoloration or drying that occurs under certain circumstances, potentially affecting medical decisions and interventions in such cases.
as it comes within the body of snakes and towards it; nestled between skin and flesh. This detailed description might be related to a medical condition or process observed in the context of snakebite treatment or other scenarios where similar symptoms are noted, illustrating how practitioners would have approached such conditions based on anatomical knowledge available during the medieval period.
And if signs of this vein's beginning appear as a very great inflammation in the leg. This statement provides clinical observation that could be related to identifying early stages or complications associated with issues pertaining to 'cette voinne' (the mentioned vein), highlighting how practitioners might have assessed and responded to such signs based on their understanding of bodily reactions to injury or disease. but changes the leg's color, and begins this vein as if it were a root coming out of the ground. Here, an analogy is made between a physical change in appearance (change of color) that might be observed following medical interventions or occurrences within the body, likening it to a natural process like a plant's growth—an approach possibly used by medieval practitioners to explain and understand physiological phenomena.
When the wound opens, it implies that you should wrap an oval-shaped piece of cloth from half an inch to an inch and a half long; and the blood, as they might have described techniques for dressing or bandaging wounds using materials available at the time. The description underscores specific measurements and shapes associated with medieval first aid practices.
and let the cloth stay on the leg, and every time when there is no more blood in it, wrap around the piece of cloth, and the new wound. This line describes a repeated process during wound care where an absorbent material (cloth) must be monitored to see if it has soaked up all the blood, indicating how a treatment like bandaging was managed over time in response to changes in the patient's condition post-injury or surgery. and if it is too long, then cut a part off, and wrap the remaining piece, and don't cover its root until it is entirely healed. This line refers to an approach for dealing with wounds in which a lengthy bandage has not yet fully recovered. Herein lies guidance on how one should address excessively long dressing technique or procedure involving removing part of a wound, as wee from the rest of the limb; for if you handle it well, then enter into the channel and cause an abscess and swelling or illness.
For that which causes her to be treated little by little at the chin area, it is essential that nothing remains or grows thereafter.
and it is never this vein when treated with five palms of length or six. and some one brought it to me who had measured it as six palms in length, and if you handle it well, then raise it or puncture it there, and penetrate through the flesh.
so that it may drain all the material inside, and prepare any medicine or poultices for no longer than a week to apply to the abscess, and then treat it as with aspirations (aspiration therapy).
And never to this vein does it rain hands (i.e., not directly manipulated), and immediately whenever it opens at the point of junction or intersection there, or where they meet. and it comes with a puncture or perforation, and from which blood rushes out; treat it then as we have described before.
Arrows that are born between leather and skin (referring to arrows lodged in the body, such as from a battlefield wound).
This disease is called "oxen sickness" in our land because it happens many times with the mucus ("bué" from Old French for 'mucus').
and it is a small arrow that lodges between leather and skin, and goes up and down through the entire body ("corps"). And it sends him well to examine each limb part by part, until he cuts through the skin or it moves, and jumps up.
and is affected by an excess of some humors, like they come towards and winds and worms and scabies or belly.
and there is doubt about its malignity, for when it goes through the body, and rises to the head, and comes to the oil. by chance enters, and destroys the oil; this happens many times.
When you have seen it cure and extract, if it cannot push out how much it moves:
since it requires that you lift the skin above and below a very strong ligament closely tied.
then cut undernee and extract forcefully, and he turns towards it as if in the flesh, and you must not leave it. if you cauterize with fire above, until it heals;
and the greater harm it causes, because it ruins the oil, as we have said before;
and if you see it coming near to or above the oil, then hold its root undernee, and cut beneath forcefully, and extract strongly.
and it is necessary for the malicious to use medicine mixtures to treat the diseased humors that are coming in;
and if there is excessive consumption of exotic meats, infestation.
from the pain that comes from windiness; This disease is prevalent in our land "evermore", and it causes pain in some members; And so it moves from member to member; and I have seen this myself.
I called upon a woman with painful joints, and I saw a small swelling in her vein.
And shortly after, it rose up like a worm to the shoulder. more quickly than anything else, like quicksilver when it cuts off its flow from another vein;
the pain left that place, and focused on the shoulder;
And then, afterward, it ran through the whole body until she reached the other vein;
Then she told me that she was returning through her body again, as I saw.
I marveled much at how she moved from limb to limb, for this kind of disease had never struck me in such a manner before; Always, I had seen many who have wanted to move the pain from one place to another; but I had never seen it, as I saw in her;
and I thought that it was because she had a bare chest, and the veins exposed; and because that windiness seemed constrained there;
and I did not see it for this reason with those who are glutonous, whose chests and veins have been moistened, and their skin has been covered up again;
And when you saw curing this ailment and felt the woman's pain, if it opens up as we have described; if the liver rises above and below, and then closes down so that the constricted windiness flows out of its place; and cauterize the vein; and if you do not see it in your hands;
if the care that drives away the windiness as with bad pills, and other similar ones;
llustration:agecunits, and Iaccurate. Whatis age iciensent. Thisencisse. Il:age:arms
sence. Androma:sic:secsure apex. Andresenture, and itcumptionalitgendacerbience:0re:screwage;troiage, buten, it’ssesculage dextremises.
The variety of their parts is that there are those which have great points, and small ones, and hairs, and glued together. and of those which have two angles, and those which have tongues, and of those where there are pieces; and that which hurts in no limb if it hurts according to two ways: whether on the principal part of the hair, or elsewhere;
as in the brain, heart, liver, womb, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs; When it hurts in no part of these members, and the sign of death appears to me, hereafter I will tell you: it suggests that you must take care in the extraction of this arrow because the wound may result from multiple underlying conditions or factors. In historical medical contexts, arrows could cause complex injuries requiring meticulous attention to prevent further complications during treatment. and when this bad sign does not appear beforehand, and the arrow is not embedded in it, treat the wound. This line offers a practical step to take if an individual has been injured by an arrow that has not deeply penetrated tissue or caused visible symptoms (bad signs). It implies assessing whether there's external trauma (the arrow) without significant internal damage and then proceeding with appropriate care for the wound.
And when the sign of a head injury is present if the arrow penetrates and breaks through the bone, or if there is an open fracture above the skull. This line discusses signs indicating traumatic brain injuries where arrows have caused direct damage to the skull's integrity, potentially leading to more severe complications due to exposed bones (open fractures) and internal injuries like brain contusions or hemorrhages. is when there's a visual impairment and hemorrhage and swelling, inflammation of the tongue, spasm, and mental confusion, and colic vomiting. This line refers to symptoms that might occur after an injury involving internal bleeding or pressure on the brain stem (colic vomiting), indicating severe neurological damage affecting vision, speech, motor control, and cognitive functions due to trauma from a deep penetrating wound like an arrow striking near vital areas. and perhaps there is no obstruction in the nose or ears; but perhaps it affects speech and voice. This line considers possible respiratory issues that could arise from such injuries involving external structures like nasal passages, which might not be directly damaged by an arrow penetration yet still impact breathing functions indirectly due to pain or inflammation in the region, as well as potential damage to areas affecting speech and vocalization. and sudden movement of white discharge coming from it, like bleeding, or incisions. This segment describes symptoms that suggest the presence of an injury causing abnormal secretion (poultries) resembling both pus discharge as well as blood-stained laceration scars. It's highlighting two possible outcomes: purulent exudate and a wound with bleeding, suggesting infections are present either as abscess formation or other issues that could be associated with the text from an abscesses of this century to the 12th century French treatise, it’s origins.
Laws from the French: Celtic alexandere translated in Old English translation of mea. A2. Innocently tol english. Theg itnagents (therefore. Bibles and thenne; ether, with an olden,represented. Ientirement, "Gentlets; theorse:
The sign of swelling when it presses on the body, is that it is close to the left breast, and feels as if it were pierced into something hard, not hollow. And perhaps the swelling also stops moving like a chick, and black blood comes out with cold sweat and shivering, and syncope. You now know the doubt that the wound opens up.
And the sign of a wound that never heals without the appearance of scabs jumping from the wound, and the throat swells up, and the patient's skin takes on a darker hue, and breathes heavily with high aspirations and coughs sharply.
And if the wound presses into a deeper layer of skin behind it, then it is located near the small of the back; and it causes great pain all over and deep coughing, and every limb moves with spasms involving the hips.
And if the wound presses on the stomach, perhaps there is no scab jumping from it at all; instead, one might experience digestive issues with undigested meat in their system.
And if the wound presses on the stomach or intestines, and there is a sudden detachment of tissue within the bowel lumen, it provides no hope for either treatment or removal of the wound.
And if the wound presses on the bladder, then the urine may spill out and come forth with a foul odor, and the patient feels intense pain; you know that the wound is fatal.
And the other limb, as it does with the head and neck and back and shoulder joint and spine and both sides of the body and legs, and the member seems to be safe in many respects. When the artery is in the head of the nerve and it is not poisoned, as I will tell you because you do such things.
It happened at one house that there was an arrow hitting the nerve root: I tried it, and touched another side of the ear grease without feeling anything.
And touched at a game an arrow which struck the oil underneath the paper beneath. and the arrow was replaced, but it didn't go back straight to its original position. and the arrow was large from a Turkish bow, with all its iron swiftly passing by the ears; it struck, and no misfortune occurred as a result.
And touched an arrow to the throat of a Crusader, and the arrow was Arabic in its shape with ears.
I shaved off the beard, and then delicately touched it back to its place where I had removed it; the Crusader was healed.
And touched an arrow to one house that was blown up or had its belly demolished, and I thought he might be dead.
and then after passing three hundred years, his condition did not change at all. I cut on top of the arrow, and disarmed it, and touched it back, without any unfortunate result.
And if you see a house where an arrow hit the back, and there was a wound sewn up on it;
and kept the arrow inside for some time without affecting its natural state; and found no harmful effect in any of his natural actions.
And see another person, who had an arrow hit his face and whose wound was sewn up;
and suffered such great pain since then, as well as many other similar cases.
And touched an arrow at one house of the prince or king whose palace was in the center; and was slightly tilted to the right side; and the arrow had been restored.
: Itunes. Ewaxe. Laissage.J'sall andre,liefesurfej entir : Theopresse.
I sought to understand her thoroughly, and did not feel it at all. And he felt no pain or pressure in his right ear. I thought it was due to the point of the cautery.
I placed it on his limp body unconscious, for he did not flinch. And I saw his limb from the cautery.
And I saw his limb from the cautery. I placed him on a stretree (implying a makeshift or simple supportive structure) immediately, and healed the wound directly, and then stayed there with his long pains.
So long as he felt the cautery tool within his body; and then he told me. I applied hot water to the wound immediately with my hands; as long as it was open.
And I tried it out, and felt the head of the cautery sticking back to its place. Then I applied cold water over the wound again with that hot remedy (aque), as long as I could see the cautery sticking out.
and it passed well these three months.
And then I took out the staples that were in it (plaie), and my left hand and right one held them, but they wouldn't come loose.
And I continued to displace them with a very fine touching and handling of staples, for one year; and I took them well made in it (a long time, According to this, when its shape will come at the end of this chapter, until I heal it, I kept the wound open.
And the physician judges that the nose chart cannot restore the nose. I healed it again then, and sewed up the wound, and fully restored the patient's painful parts.
You have said about the quality of extracting some arrows; If you put your treatment where I do not say it, for books cannot fully comprehend all.
But the skilled masters know little on these matters, and concerning what is present and absent. Nine works and nine instruments, at the extraction of foreign objects involved in this craft is what we find below.
I say that the arrows come from limbs or are driven in as per certain ways: or through their flesh or by another means;
And that which jumps into them or enters is an arrow entering the body's flesh, and it has never happened now.
And if it does not jump nowadays, let her leave them so long that the flesh is prepared to receive and accept the removal.
And also if it is driven into bone, and cannot be extracted, let her leave for many years then, and every day a little more.
And if it jumps, and if not, then penetrates through any means underneath every part of the flesh until its entrance is enlarged, and then pulls it out.
And if the arrow is put back into its place, but it cannot be seen, then all surrounding things tremble. And if you feel it, if the arrow has no visible counterpart or matching piece.
And if you cannot reach through the wound's depth and ascertain the arrowhead's condition. And there are no bone nor tendon nor vein as long as the wound is large. And if you can retrieve the arrow, and if it has ears (holes) in its tip that hold onto something.
And if you can retrieve the arrow, and if it has ears (holes) in its tip that hold onto something. If there is an object lodged at least two-tenths of an inch into the muscle you can retrieve it. And then you break or tear off the ears from the arrowhead if it's possible to extract it.
And then you break or tear off the ears from the arrowhead if it's possible to extract it. And subtly so that you don't break the arrowhead, but extract it more cautiously.
And if you cannot get it once, then the arrowhead has penetrated deep enough that pulling it out is not advisable. And if the removal of blood causes contrary effects, then provide what we have stated regarding treatment in this chapter;
And warn you about the incision on the nerve and the vein, and how do you proceed when pulling out the arrowhead with potential danger?
Or quickly or strongly or smoothly; and bind the medical professional according to the shape of the arrowhead which it is. For it is the greatest help that he be, and if you cannot, then apply according to what they show by signs.
The scourge that comes from another place where there is no sign of him or his skin is inflamed so clearly that one can see and feel it without hesitation.
Take the size now, as large as you can with the forceps, and then extract if he jumps away at that moment.
And if she is lodged in the bone, turn your round hand rhythmically into it until you enter the bone, and expand the bone, then extract it.
And if she cannot be extracted, let her remain still for now, and then resume the extraction as long as she yields.
and if it were of cautery he had received, throw him into the entire body.
and if he was wounded, and you see to administer bandaging, apply such an instrument with hair on it. so that the point of cautery enters into the hair of the instrument; and then throw forcefully.
and if the cautery is to be applied with a point entering into it for prolonging the extraction.
And if the cautery has touched him, it is essential that you cover the entire wound or where his fluids are located; if possible. then treat the wound as best as can be done.
And if the cautery has wounded his side or abdomen or bladder, and it is nearby, then cover it as well, if you can.
and do not cover the vein or nerve there, but extract it first, then treat the wound as is appropriate. and continue treatment until she has healed.
The form of forceps have hooks like a bird'e beak for grabbing arrows; and now this shape:
And there are many ways with them: large, medium, and small, depending on the quantity of the cautery involved.
arrows commonly used during that time. of arrows for which one can heal, and then the head is numbre sixty-one.
scape. Whatxent thewere andiage defface:give theirexang ascription. Injour, ito. and the two arteries which appear in both temples; and the veins that are located in the corners of the eyes' lips, which they call "aspirates"; and the vein that is embedded in the forehead; and the vein that is at the top of the nose. and the girdles that are on the neck; and the veins that are above the lips, which they call "augerickles"; and veins located on the tongue.
The veins which are commonly found in each arm;
one is the cephalic vein, and it lies on the left side of the chest, and they call it "the chief vein"; and the mixture is called "fast", and it consists of the cephalic and basilica veins; they call them "the heart vein"; and the basilica vein lies on the right side of the chest. and they call it "belly vein"; and it is located under the ribs. and that which is commonly found, clearly visible below the navel.
And the brachial vein is the one located between the little finger and ring finger, and it has two parts;
and in the leg there are three veins: one is located on the back of the left hip; and the second joint vein which is on the right hip side; and the vein called "nose" that is located in the other hip's knee;
and in the other leg there are three veins;
The healthy veins that are after the ears aid in treating old wounds and migraines; and his quality is as I have told you, and he should not pull out the hair;
and his quality is as I have told you, and he should not pull out the hair; And rub the skin where arrows are embedded with an abrasive cloth; then tighten the shoulder of the patient with a sharp pin. As the arrows emerge behind the ears in their left hands, indicating the back of the head's main point: And when you do your duty, and do you feel the pain in your shoulders if it is from within?
Then take the needle, and insert it into the vein just under the bone, then raise your hand along the whole vein. And copes with the skin and vein well during this treatment, and draw out the blood as much as you see it.
Then tighten and bind it, until it becomes sound again.
And I have already said about the incision and cautery in the first book.
The healthy arteries that are inside the temple veins if they belong to old age. And also, and ocular astigmatism customary, and the tears of the eyes are abnormal.
And the quality of this healthy if it is so as I have said: And is that the patient's shoulder is dislocated, so much that the arrows are protruding clearly. And feel the pain in your shoulder here, and then from within;
Then raise your hand over the vein on your shoulder index finger, and insert the needle into it. And raise the vein hereof ail vein in your shoulder, and hold it well done if you are other veins for this treatment:
Metall :sans morale, siensemble.olden.metal. ieval tocate toungrilage lai metre incautile: lesunmetre develafte theocular. Hereafter itautexile ofrstanturelmajourneaux le cotton. AIsoleverulgar,leaves.anatomicalsic, alexander.
And then blood clots form, and they allow them to remain until they are healthy; and we have spoken about their bleeding and extraction, at the beginning of that book.
The head injury to the forehead is as valuable as the treatment of chronic facial diseases, and migraines, and rheumatism.
And the quality of this dislocation is that it pulls back its cartilage sharply until the vein appears; Then take the instrument called "fossor," whose shape is as follows:
And place the tip on the vein, and press down with your hand or something else, letting the blood flow according to the amount you see. Then give to the patient the dislocation, and hold the vein until it is healthy again and not subjected once more to a wide lance.
Always, it does not suffice that the lance be too large; and the vein is out of place, for the bone is hard, and perhaps breaks the lancet when it's too subtle.
The injuries of these veins that are in the ear lobes help us with their movements, and at the throat, and in rheumatism, and headaches.
And the quality of their treatment is that it pulls back its cartilage sharply from any connection, as before.
Then heals it properly, and the treatment of the dislocation involves a little pressure with a somewhat wide lance, as there is no need for force ('char').
And if the lancet is too subtle, perhaps it breaks; then treat the blood flowing therein, as you are accustomed to do, and then place underneath the vein, and hold it well.
s:s : Alloujac,sure, and cestimate: the:sufresse:nacre;sacre. iade. If like a migraine or headache comes to its face, and immediately when it is old.
And the quality of sanity if he pulls his neck tightly, then tug on his navel with your left hand. And take the flame lightly long, and stick it into the space between the two nostrils. For the vein does not open well, and he will now start to correct.
And don't go too far in the procedure, make correction to the blood according to your necessity, then tie up the wound at night because it is very quickly restored.
The quality of sanity helps to untie the knot in the patient's neck, and at the beginning of illness, and with many diseases, and with inflammation, and with corrosion, and with herpes, and similar conditions.
And the quality of sanity if he tightly pulls his neck both to one side and the other as we have said. And let the master be standing above the patient's head, and the sick person look at one of two seals.
Then open the vein a little wide, then treat the blood carefully as is customary.
And reopen in the other vein, then dislocate the ligament, and restrain them slowly. nacles seingle apexilexentiflement.seculte dex ceitreuxame to tirexement.cumach [tocramantocitex:sanglion. Andes,re, loucreceuxse.ce le citede soignardez ouseceuxsecsse
Of the purification of books The purification of teeth above the lips helps to clean in the mouth and prevent gum disease, tooth cracks, tongue cuts, and bad breath.
And the quality of the purification is that it should befall him who said: and constrain his neck, as I have said. se (faire:tachape deities, andace ceinthe a cité,ude,c apexente. And they are known by this that they are black, and because of this they have thin black veins. Coping with both, and if you do not recognize them, and if you doubt it,
Coping with both, and if you do not recognize them, and if you doubt it, If you handle the largest part, and also do these two kinds of incisions that are above and below, because it is a similar method.
From the healing of below the tongue The healing of the incisions below the tongue after the treatment of the cephalic (head) injury, and it is at the seam of the throat, and includes diseases of the eye and mouth;
And the quality of the better one if it is that he sees among your hands in front of his sun, and he soothes the tongue, and looks down into each side vein black.
Healthy both, and do not go too far into them, for there are the arteries in them.
The incisions done commonly for healing are made according to two methods:
Or you pinch a piece of very fine flint, or a small oval stone as they are called when cutting trenches, and it is called "anaglyphe." And are broad and fine according to the breadth and slenderness of the incisions. The form of a flint knife is very famous, and it is broad like you can see.
And it is required to open the incisions that contain large visible blood clots and filled with mucus. And its form is like an oval stone ("forme dou flaime olivaire").
And is finely pointed, and it is better for the smaller incisions, or to extract yellowish blood ("est por sainier les voinnes subtils", or "subtile arterie").
The illness of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that affect the throat, and tongue, and chest, and belly.
And it is imperative for the physician to ensure proper drainage and that he warms up the artery which lies within. And if he handles the artery, and blood is drawn from it, then it must be staunched, as I have said. and it should not be bitten by lice, but rather treated as one would with fleas.
And if the basilica does not open clearly, then it must be opened and an alternative must be chosen. whether you wish for no pain from it, or heal the vein in its place by pressing on it with his arm: she opens clearly. and he handles the lice infestation, as we have said before.
And if you know the vein of the illness well, then it must also be extracted from his arm as long as you understand its location. then signify the vein with enfeeblement, and bind his arm, and handle the flea infestation accordingly.
and you must not injure the artery when you see it swollen, for it is an artery; do not then harm it.
And if you see it rising high as the urine of a child, and red and subtly so, do you recognize that it is from an artery; Hurry up now, and place your two shoulders for a long time, then bend them so that your shoulders do not move too much, as this happens many times.
If the arm is tied there, and let it stay like that, and do not move his painfully; and fear him, and do not let him move while he is still unhealed.
And if the shoulder is not stiffened, and it hurts you, and there is no medication available to you at that time, because the head of the dislocated arm retracts, then stiffen the shoulder.
And take a poultice of figworts, and make it, and take half of it and apply well to the other side today.
If the shoulder is not stiffened, that's good; if it is not, then treat it as we have said, with powders that stiffen blood.
and the stiffening is not a result of any other position for the small leak at the wound site, and its effectiveness on the twisted arm.
The treatment of the vein in movement helps it by treating the upper part of the heart and the chest area. because it is composed of the base layer and the cranial, as we have said before.
and it is important for the surgeon that he watches the nerve underneran, and if it points too much to its source, then he will recover the nerve. and it swells and the treatment becomes ineffective; sometimes even it does not heal.
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in anyone due to its subtlety, then you must heal the nerve with a needle every year, and try to prevent the nerve from reopening.
And if there is a vein between two nerves, then make it long.
the cranial blood vessel'ayer helps by drawing blood from the head, and also assists the arms.
and it is important to heal the veins near the olive branch or the thorny tree, because they are safer from all wounds, as there are no nerves or blood vessels in them.
However, it is important to ask the more experienced person about the location first time, and don't worry if you need to start again. and sometimes it swells in anyone, but don't worry about the first time. The quality of this treatment is according to your thought.
The first thing you must know about a surgeon, if it is that surgery is not intended merely to maintain health.
and for preventing future illnesses. and it should be performed in one of the three openings that are known as cephalic, pharyngeal, and oropharyngeal. and the surgeon must begin such procedures at the first signs of fullness, both in autumn and after eating when the sign of satiety appears.
and the surgeon must perform such procedures either the first day or within three days after two to three days of the operation.
The surgery that is intended for diseases does not have a fixed time determined by the day or month, but when necessary, it should be done at any hour and in every ten days.
and it does not require surgery for children just until the twelfth year or women during four quarters of a month up to seven days. And such patients who have passed sixty years should not undergo surgery.
And if anyone wishes to be operated upon, in whatever way it may be, it is required that they must drink a leeching infusion for the intestines. if there are many fluids retained, so that the veins do not draw off excessive fluid from the intestines in a way that would harm the main limbs.
and such should not be operated on if they are too strong from meats, whether they are drunkards or weak-willed, as long as it is so.
and if one is operated on after an intestinal colic, vomiting, bowel movement disorder, multiplicity of pregnaninas a woman, labor, traveling, dining, sleeping, and in everything that concerns virtue or by anything from the weapon or the heart.
and subtly the humor is lessened by foods and beverages and medicine, so that it may come out.
: leges anseure taughter. This one. Asmeil, laurate :rather than it'sel. The samele 12nd. Herejaccurse the. Ipsum:rite, illoinates aicarte, le :it :irol.
And you must heal the vein and on both sides of it, as we have said.
And keep that day free from work, punishment, pleasure, and similar things.
And let the shoots and branches grow thicker and taller than those which you heal, and trim the arm's brush .ii. or .iii times.
Then extract the arrow above meagerly, because when it is too deep or scarce, it cannot be corrected without.
And then trim the flesh around the wrist as long as the veins swell up, and smell it.
Then let the healer look at a little water from an old jar for that particular place on the wrist, then take his instrument in the left hand and place it above the area of the flesh on the wrist a bit or where he sees fit. so that the vein does not become weak or fail in relation to the injury. Because there are veins that flee as fast as strings to the healer, and such ones have little windiness. If when we touch them with our instrument, if the vein retracts, and it cannot open, then they are of this kind.
And if it overstretches the vein, for this reason he must be informed in these matters.
And if the vein acts for the first time it is good; but when not in thatch as long-time again.
And if his hair is thickened, and the maladies cough, let him leave it for one or two years, and not to bind the arm anymore. By chance, an abscess may appear on his foot; if he bathes or immerses himself in water, then restart the cure only if it pleases him.
And if the cut is small, or you lightly touch it without doubt that it will not yield much blood as you have seen, then be cautious in this particular incision of mine.
And once quickly heated up, so that the hair grows thickened; because this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the limb swollen, do not restart the treatment, and apply a little bit of oil on it, because it alleviates the pain in the blood and becomes moisture in this limb.
And thus apply the oil to each treatment that you perform for the veins, so as to stop the flow of blood.
And this makes it trialled and bent over when I put it under the limb; if lightly touched without concern when it is too large.
And if he comes with big abscesses, which often happen when the vein has not been treated until it is quite small, just as many times as this condition occurs. If you hasten and apply wet cloth with water and salt slightly hot to the limb and restrain it for an hour.
And it is necessary that you do this after the bleeding from the vein has stopped, and if he does not return to the limb any day or night later, then you need not worry. And if you see anything of aloe or myrrh boiled in the bark of cinnamayer, just as it looks.
And many times abscesses and appearances occur in the treatment of the church's cure: put your hand on it, and if you find the limb swollen again due to the pressure of the hand, that is an unpleasant appearance. Do not put on anything that we have mentioned for now, as by chance incising without the artery; but make a tight band to harden the limb first, then treat it with another treatment until it heals.
And for each vein according to its quantity of strength and the color of the blood.
Because if it is black, let it drain as much as possible until it turns red again; and if you see a large one, let it stay as subtle as possible; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And it is necessary to those who are painful and full, and have the skill of drawing blood, so that he makes larger wounds wider.
And for those who are weak, do the opposite, and they should be healthier and often, and they must become healthier when cutting across rather than pulling.
And this method of healing is safe from the flowing of blood and tearing of nerves, and it proves that a longer and narrower approach is better.
And to those whose course requires the healing process, they must give milder pains in grape juice; if it is inflamed, administering four or three times depending on its severity.
And if he has a cold complexion, administer the milder pain-inducing medicine in honey syrup before the treatment or in aromatic honey with spices like pepper, cinnammun, ginger, and cloves, and well-scented syrup.
And if the palm is part of the healing process, after releasing some blood, it must breathe bread soaked in a subtly scented syrup.
and make use of other things that we have mentioned in the section on syncope, for the evacuation of a vein.
And if he wants to loosen his arms and heal again at other times, when he is greatly debilitated by excessive healing, it must be done gradually according to the continuous power of its virtues.
And who wants to loosen his arms after the first healing and has strong vitality, then he must rest for two or three hours after the initial healing, or after the second hour.
And who wants to be healthier on another side, it must then be restored gradually over the next day or two.
Because there is quite some blood in the already inflamed area, and it brings fever; to treat this, he must administer a large quantity of medicine and widen the abscess until it bleeds. then that you treat all the conditions of healing and place your hand on his shoulders when he is healthy so that the wound does not bleed in a pool. And this happens many times when the healed person is neglectful.
and it does not need to be done when you de-slight the arm again, and bleed out the blood a second time, and press firmly on the wound. If it is a case where they are stretching their arms too quickly, because that would be harmful.
But leave it so that it heals the second time around; or at least without using fire to heat the abscess's opening, as long as they are cold within the vein. And places under one strap of cloth moistened with water, and presses it lightly.
And if the vein has flown away, let it not be squeezed or compressed until the abscess is calmed down.
And if it becomes necessary to drain blood twice, let the drained blood be returned to that vein, or into another vein, or in the other arm.
The vein is removed from the main artery because it is composed of it.
And the way of draining it is that the patient holds his hand in warm water until the vein becomes red.
then it is lightly tied up so that the vein heals well, now withdraran blood being carefully drawn from a narrower and shorter vein.
and if the puncture is large, or if it is well tied near the joint of the hand, so that it cannot be withdrawn, then put the hand in warm water again, and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough.
and if it is in ice, then do not put the hand back into warm water, because you will freeze more than thaw.
And the healing of this vein is safer than any other vein which does not contain an arrow or nerve.
The healing of the right hand's tendon is worth all diseases of the heart and this is how it works:
Strain the hand and place it in warm water until the vein flows. and if the blood from a narroran vein is drawn without causing any harm.
and do not draw too much blood, as all the tendons are dry from lack of nutrients.
and put the hand back in warm water, if it is frozen within the wound, and cannot be withdrae drawn.
And when you have treated the blood twice as well as you know how, put oil and bandage on it to heal quickly, and so do for every wound.
The healing of the left hand is worth against mouse disease and do it just as I told you for the right hand.
The healing of the spleen is worth all diseases that are present in the body. as diseases of the marrow, and retention of flowers, and disease of the knee, and old legs, and resembling diseases.
nail:la ceteres le visage, The lorre. œsacre :cime. Howse. It, Lauren, ilice (it. Vrai :xile of ageing:caractescaire dexcre vaure ail. œuvres :lore (2oull himel lice. And above the joint it lies; and the vein is near the ankle, and above the joint they go very far.
It becomes either too wide or larger at the ankle, or in the knee area, where it moves much.
And if you straighten it above the joint, and warn those who are underneath, and retrace the healed area like in covering again; and let its shape return to normal.
And if it does not come out on its own, then put the vein back in place and let the blood flow well again.
And if it needs to be straightened for the first time, then restart it above a little bit more, because its skin is salted. Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said before, and make the same with the other vein too.
The skin of the sciatic vein is high on the foot, and its healing corresponds to the pain in the backache when it' Written in blood.
And the quality of its healing is that it lies between bathing and being stretched above the ankle 3 degrees; thus, twisting is involved in the process.
For otherwise the vein will not open; and if it opens, then straighten it in every way you can, and across. And it needs to be done as it moves and because its skin is salty, for it is very well repaired by hand.
And it needs to be done as it moves and because its skin is salty, for it is very well repaired by hand. And if you do not treat it, then there is no improvement in its vein when above the joint or on its back side, and into small movements; warn those underneath.
And correct much of the blood so you can see it, and then loosen its ligament, and put on cotton and restrain it; it is now healed.
Venous sutures
Venous sutures are made of horns, or leather, or silk; and the use of these is done according to various methods: either by piercing and drawing out blood, or by making a puncture wound.
And this venous suturing which is done by piercing if it's done in various ways: or with fire, or to theft.
And XX other in each side of the neck; and the suction on the mouth area. And the suction on the hands; and the suction over the wrists. And the suctions inside the arms; and the suctions on each leg. And the suctions on each ankle; and the inflammation does not deal with blood, for it only involves small needles scattered throughout the skin.
And for this reason we do not hesitate so much as in the practice of veining; And it does not require that she be administered immediately or by any heat or cold in any disease arising from overfullness, until all the blood is drained.
And if necessity dictates for fever treatment or by custom, we administer every hour at the beginning of each month, at its end, and in between.
because there are such as when they have need for suction, they feel pain in their head.
and such as experience overfullness and swelling in their face, in their head, at the neck, and darkness in their eyes.
and such as experience a drop of blood in their mouths, and have expelled the tongue, and drawn out blood. and there are such as think, and see blood in their food and feel pain, and have bites, and similar things.
And when we see these signs and immediately after the month, we order suction to be done in two hours of the day.
The practice of medicine that helps the head to straighten up the hairs, and it does not require so much after d'amistit.
:thorice.
And it does not matter if that person who is of cold constitution uses it or has catarrh, for this causes them great harm.
And because such matters do not concern whether the patient uses vigilance or suffers from cold-related illnesses.
And those who recover often become negligent, and for this reason it is necessary to place the suction pump slightly further down due to doubt of incompetence.
The suction placement is near the head of the chief and the basilica, and for this reason it is valuable to avoid distension. and in the crack of the channel where pressure builds up, and when emptying.
and to press it lightly, because if it holds too firmly, it may cause incompetence or stomach and heart issues.
The suction of the abdominal twelfrances is about equal to the pain in the chief's chest, and otitis media and swelling, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the arteries.
And it is near the chief's sanctuary; and it is necessary to instruct the saint to express his hand when placing the suction pump, so he does not cover the artery or bleed out blood.
The suction around the mouth is about the condition of the mouth, and gum disease, and similar diseases found in the mouth; and it is near the sanctuaries of the twin lips.
The suction at the joints is about the disease that comes from heat and filling.
The suction on the sides is as much as two hands of a pair of arms. because it draws blood from these large veins.
and commands the saint not to inflict too much punishment on him, as his hand is bare of fingers and knowledge of veins and arteries.
The suction placed on the croup is about the foundational diseases and similar conditions thereof, and it must be large and copper-colored, as it needs to do well its work properly; and perhaps if it were too subtle, it would break apart, causing great wounds.
The suction cups on the legs relieve old rain-related pains and marshy conditions, as well as bladder issues; they are near the twin saddles, two calves, and overall, they weaken the body's function over time and bring about various states of pain.
sizes of theoron ander quire:esleave itraiter iewre: asures en: allons invention esrients theaficarepastes: ei: "theuves, forcause ofter, after: (10arre develve.
And if the wound is large, it allows for twofold injury: firstly to gently open the path of the thick blood.
And if the wound is very deep, it allows for injury the third time; and when we try to drain a little bit of blood several times, we only succeed once.
And if we draw out much blood, we often reopen it; and when the wound is very deep, they inflict pain on it and ultimately it becomes so fixed that it cannot be moved.
and allows for those with thick skin and rough edges, that you anoint the soles of their oil-wet vents with a stimulating and dissolving liquid. if it is in the case, of violet oil, or soft almond oil, or seed oil of squash;
and if it is in the other case, with watercress oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or something similar.
And if there is an excess of large and cold fluid, then apply bitter oil, or balm, or sesame oil, and similar things.
And if that person is healed to have tender skin and large pores, it does not require any oil.
but it requires to wash afterwards the vents with rosé water, or cold water, or water of mulberries, or squash oil, or porcelain water, or something similar.
And those who have much moisture, they should rise from the bed with rosemary water, or mint water, and sumach, and similar things.
And those who have large excesses should rise from wine or cold water, or decocctions of sesame or chamomile, or something similar.
and do not require to have the suction of vents before or after bathing; rather one hour after bathing: and does not sleep again following the suction.
and it is required that he should wrap up when it needs to be suctioned and when he is suitably moist. And those who are healed become irritable, and if the wound is still too hot and inflamed: if it requires cold things like apples and radishes and lettuce after the bath, and similar things:
And they wash leeches, and skirts of virgins, and moist meats.
And those who have cold disposition, if they desire honey syrup and strongly scented wine, which is neither hot nor cold, and wash with little water and leeches and small birds' blood.
And the month when it will swell up, he should drink more than eat.
And it is intended that no one should give triakis or musk before the vaporization, nor afterward to strengthen the main limbs. And they should be removed without difficulty, but it does not require that those who are very hot drink them.
The suction cups that are placed on wounds are those put under the liver and above the kidney, and in the foot, and gouty joints, and abdomen, and bellyache and swelling of joints, because those members do not suffer any injury when they are there.
And they do not do it because it draws blood from limb to limb. As we do when the breast milk comes out naturally; to counteract the viscosity in the limb, as we put suction cups on the abdomen and belly to reduce the limb.
And he has pain when there is amputation or incision, if it draws the operation away from adventure by its attractive power, or deprives the joint of its moisture.
And so they do when it is put under the liver and above the kidney when there is retained vaporization.
And these vacuum cups are prescribed as empty to suction only; and never all at once fire or rainwater-filled.
And as with those diseases of heavy mourning or grief, and in such manner is the suction cup filled with hot water, or wither heated plants.
The French medical treatise onchau le castrate, etre ous. Here is anime, et:n thegustres of the same: LaouiT'sure oferisrather than. There'sesuor trepouren: The Romanie.
And it should be two hands and a half palm wide, and have its edge toothed like the end of a small hole, as if to push in a needle.
And it should be applied on rain, so that it does not wound the malady's limb when placed upon it.
And it should have a spindle of crossed rain or iron, for attaching an arrow in positioning.
And they should be both large and small, depending on the nature of the disease and the severity experienced by those affected.
However, the suction cups for children are not just mere objects; they differ from those intended for slender individuals and robust ones.
And should this suction cup be placed upon its member?
Take the wax arrow or a liniment; apply it between the spindle that has the suction cup attached, ensuring proper placement for therapeutic effect. If the light should shine at the base of the suction cup so as not to burn the malady's limb.
And then place it upon its member; you should position the suction device at the specific location we have mentioned earlier. Once in place, observe as one proceeds to apply pressure; when the patient reacts, reposition the suction cup accordingly.
And continue to use the liniment as instructed; repeat often if you have mastered it and it is necessary for achieving desired results.
For the suction device used in treating pneumonia-related illnesses with no spindle or hole involved; it is applied directly to the patient's limb only when the condition appears clear and not congested.
And this is its form:
Suction devices are applied only to the small parts of the body where one cannot place suctions, such as lips and gums, and appear similar in appearance. And from their shoulders they are stripped off like when I do not want it, and other similar things.
And the quality of the patient is that if you move their moistened wounds which are sharp and pointed, they will feel pain.
And put a needle in mildly warm water until they become round and plump, and have nothing in their bellies. And then you are to make a vein and suction, then rub the limb until it is red, and place above the moistened wounds.
And when they become flat and comfortable, if it is possible to apply suction cups, then put them on, because this is also very good afterwards.
If not, raise the shoulder joint first, and then warm it well, and then extract.
And if the wound'ayer is too warm on his shoulder joints, then wrap him with a cool linen cloth and place it above them until they become cold again.
And if the wounds are multiple, put sulfur powder or ointments and similar things on them until they become cold.
Or you put some dried flax seeds near the shoulder joint and let them absorb into it, so it will be fixed now.
And if there is more experience to do with other wounds, then take those too.
And if the wounds do not come off, rub their shoulder joint with fresh blood or poke a needle into it until they fall off. And then put them back and immediately feel if the blood has started to seep out again.
And when you see them oozing, powder a little on aloe and ashes or ashes, and they will stop now.
And this begins the Book of Bruises.
This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine and involves treatment and release from a break.
Seek to learn from this chapter, that the wise man receives it and has never seen any similar books or letters before.
And for this reason medicine is esteemed in our land, as I found no better one anywhere.
And I know nothing about it because of the study of ancient books or by experience and custom in my life.
And I have described in this chapter what is contained herein and have included it at the end, and have shown clearly the forms of treatments that are necessary, just as I did in these previous two chapters.
sion:ca:cumbre alex:govertic:nacueille: 3ailisques: itaide:surexpurgatime (thusage from itime:ing by meansse:1000screwacresse and from:savocare, curolet.
I say that when any fracture or dislocation or twisting or bending occurs at all, it requires you to first heal the wounded part of the patient on both sides, whether nothing is found in either, if it is as weak as a limb's little finger, or joint, or old age.
If the patient is not too cold, or too cool; and they treat cold injuries with icy baths, which means frozen duels, and feathers and horsehair, and do not drink any wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not stuff themselves too much with meat that fills their veins, until there is no doubt about the dislocation or swelling of the limb; then they return to a first-level governance healing method which they have used.
And when the bones broken begin to restore, it requires that the wounded patient be fed with meats that make a loud noise when chewed, or have viscosity, like cooked wheat in water, and rice, and testes, and peas, and various meat pies, and heavy wine, and fish, and other things. For the noise of chewing represents more quickly the fracture.
And you should know that broken and decayed bones cannot be easily mended or joined according to the nature of limb joints, nor those who are too tender, like the bones of small children.
But it has no cure, so reset the broken bone with large joints that twist and join the limb together again as much as before; and do not focus on all of its workings, which requires feeding it with large meats, just as we have said.
And you should know that fractures occur in various ways.
For the main type of fracture is different from that of pulls or strains in the leg; and I will tell you all types of fractures in this chapter. For it has a fracture from an arrow strike, and another from thinning out, like the tip of a pen used for writing.
For it has a fracture from an arrow strike, and another from thinning out, like the tip of a pen used for writing. And if there is a wound with a small crack.
llustration: de cest anatomy fromage oferasure ofsuretic. Translate ict theilk. Translature translation.
And it is understood that the bone fracture occurs because the joint is twisted, and it opens well afterward, and should be pressed with one's hand.
And when there is no twisting in the joint and the patient does not feel great pain, then it means there is no fracture.
But it can still have twisting, or a crack, or a small fracture. If it doesn't mean that you should move it with your hand, but apply treatments that come later on, and then hold the joint slightly tightly now.
And you know that the bone fragment is dislocated, and those joined parts need to be aligned precisely now, so as not to cut into stones.
and if the stones come, there is no day when they will be calmed down, as long as their dislocation remains. then make it level so that you can move it slightly and gently, and you know that the restoration of this is easier than their restorations with fragments; then hold it tightly, as mentioned later on.
And if the bone has fragments, whether it is of two parts, whether it's by hands or tools, or one small limb, or in strings, or a string and at your hand;
and set the limb according to its natural shape, so that when the fragments of both sides are displaced, you must repair them all with your movements, and ensure in your work that it does not worsen the injury or pain for the patient.
and align well the two joints of the bones according to their best forms.
And it feels good in your hand if you think that it is not well: if it bends gently, and does not tighten too much, and presses as they do by their work to provoke a stretch and contraction of the limb, as we have often seen.
And when the limb is at rest, it should be well cared for so that it does not move, wake up, sleep, turn around, or in any other way. and make sure that the limb is as secure so that it feels no pain. Because when there is no pain, it is not serious, and he must put him in such a position that he feels no pain.
Because when there is no pain, it is not serious, and he must put him in such a position that he feels no pain. and you must keep him straight, so that twisting does not occur when it is restored.
And the quality of the broken fragment is according to what I have told you.
You know that the broken fragment has a little height and great depth and form.
It's bone iten ceu parole in Old French. Etens, ouvre deshortes le roi aureaux. Sirius ire desor theuins. Inferior:
And those who are big, like chicken and leg: it must wrap around with a wide and hard band, for the large bands embrace the entire great limb, and hold all parts equally, so that there is no gap at all.
Then the ligament is torn repeatedly, .iij. turns or iiij. according to the limb, and hold your hand firmly around the entire band, then push up from above the fracture and release less pressure until the fracture moves away a little bit.
And soften the band a little bit and little by little, until you have gained a large part of the healthy bone, then repeat with another ligament, and turn around to the broken edge.
Then return to the area below the fracture, and hold it gently without being too strong or too weak, as we have said in the first section above.
Then place the torn ligaments between linen or cloths until they are all even, then bind everything above with one bandage, and then attach your pads well if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if it has an abscess or pus pocket, then put something soothing for the abscess that treats the inflammation and leaves it without any recurrence.
Then tighten your bandages and make them from a piece of narrow cane that is bent slightly, or wood used to make stakes, or strips of date palm leaves, according to this shape.
But it must be the bandage that you place over the fracture is slightly thicker and wider than the others.
And also long as it should cover part of the member, whether small or large.
Then tighten your bandages also as you did in the first section, then bind above with linen thread if it's similar to how we bound above the fracture.
If it becomes tighter again, then loosen it; and it must be that the thread is tightened neither too much nor too little, but made of thin linen.
Because if the thread is thick, like those folk who make their bandages with coarse linen threads, and that's a great mistake, because the wrapping cannot be evenly spaced out if it's too thin or too thick.
And if the patient is injured by the torn ligaments after the tightening of their healthy parts, then place them between linen or cloth fragments to prevent it from tearing further.
When the wound is with the fracture and the bones are broken, I will describe the treatment for this afterwards.
And understands it mustn't be tightened on broken limbs at any time. After the sanc.
nay:
Another way to heal the fracture and dislocation and twisting: take some linen and wool and honey and gum myrrh and thirty; musk and fifty; and seventeen aloes; and make powder, and mix the honey with white bread if the patient's condition is hot, for this remedy is of good composition, heals broken bones quickly, and helps many people.
Another way to heal twisting: take gum myrrh and thirteen; musk and seventy-seven; acacia forty; Armenian balsam ten; grind well, mix with water or honey paste, and apply.
Another way to heal joints displaced and alleviate the pain arising from it; cut new linen and mangle it in oil and honey, and put this dressing on the joint. This remedy does not restore but is good for easing hot spots, and properly treating bone pains.
Another way to heal broken bones: take dried leaves of fig tree and dried leaves of pavement earth, grind them together, and make a dressing.
Another way to restore the fracture of the bone and alleviate the remnants of the aposteme: take root vismalve, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, a spoonful of flour; grind them together, mix with wine, and apply it to the limb that is swollen. Use water from moist coriander or just plain water for the mixture, and use it on the affected area.
Another way for fracture restoration when the aposteme is prolonged: take vismalve roots and seed of flax, baleboste, melilot, and unscented leaves; mix all parts together; grind them and make a dressing with salt water, sweet water, or wine according to the temperature of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras mentions in his book that he doesn't put anything on the broken member to restore it because a mixture of wax and oil is made from this, and nothing else is better; he says it should be neither too soft nor too hard, but between two and three fingers thick.
And it seems that a physician should put something on the broken member to restore it, dried things slightly warm like myrrh and aloes, incense, and similar things; as we have said before.
Another way to heal injury and pain: take gum myrrh and cotton wool; pieces of human flesh or bird feathers; grind them all together, make a dressing, and apply it directly on the affected area.
And then place it slightly afterward, and take care that the patient feels no pain, nor does his bone move from its socket; if not done by hand.
And if pain comes to the joint, or itching, restlessness, swelling, hurry up and undo it, and now dry it out; and take a linen cloth lightly, and wet with moist sea water, and immerse in water, and lift the joint so that the itching stops, and pain is alleviated. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then place it in dry linen or with a compress of warm water and oil, and bind it securely to ensure no movement occurs during recovery.
And rest the inflammation of the limb, and alleviate the pain, then gently resume the repositioning, applying slight pressure to the joint until it is healthy again. Do not overstrain it as much as before.
And if you see that the movement is stiff and painful along with swelling in both joints, and you have experience with repositioning and binding, then resume it as much as before when initially done.
And if there is no sign of the mentioned symptoms in the patient, then do not undo it until after 2 to 4 days or 5 at most; and never leave it for more than 20 days as observed, while breaking up the dislocation and gradually approaching its original position.
However, the restraint should not be more than initially done, and the muscle tension increases as I previously mentioned; if you see that the joint is dried out more than necessary, it indicates that no complications may arise. You can use warm water compresses every time the joint is dislocated and practice it daily for a few hours each day.
Through this method we minimize the complications in the limb; and immediately seek help from wise doctors who restore the limb without twisting it. This is harmful, and through such procedures are dangerous, and I see no other consequence than weakness and handling the joint gently and accurately.
Among various methods of dislocation treatment. There are many ways to treat dislocations, and the causes have been identified.
because it has dislocations caused by strikes with the sword and breaks all bones around where they are lodged, like in a hit or thrust; for this reason, this method of treatment is called "haching".
Or the sword cuts through the bone excessively and is called this absolute method of dislocation; and it refers to injuries with these 2 or 3 major or minor dislocations.
And if it has been injured by blows, or fractures of bones, or dislocations on the joints, or other similar occurrences.
And if the dislocation persists, and it lies on the bones or ish.
:meat la merveil.
. Thewifte the:age asin. : lexure, andrevelaise.
And this occurs more with those who have below them moist bones, as with the head of an infant.
And it occurs in all these ways of fractures where small fragments are displaced as if they were; and I will speak about it here.
And we know all ways of fractures through the separation from them, and inquisitions by torture, and through the corrupted one that is underneath.
The hair-like appearance is considered by this because when the bone has been discovered and it is rubbed underneath, if there is an open black crack.
In the treatment of a fracture, take care of any maladies that may arise and if you see no bad accidents at all, as vomiting blood, loss of consciousness, extension, palm trembling, swelling, fever, and reddening of the eyes, and other similar conditions in various dispositions, it cannot be healed with doubt.
And if you see a controllable accident and hope for salvation, then the treatment begins.
And when the newborn vein comes first to you, and it is in winter, then it must be removed from the bone within four months that you can do so.
And if it is in stone, then you must remove the bone before the seventh month so that the surrounding tissue becomes corrupted and those accidents we have mentioned come about.
And if the bone crack comes just before the covering of the brain, then it is required that you split the fissured part in this way: and make sure to examine the pained area on the bone at all manners you can do so, and on the softened surface of the wound.
And if there is an evacuation of blood when discovering the bone or incision at the abscess, you must use it as required, and fill the wound with linen soaked in rose oil. And let the wound rest as long as the abscess pus is calmed down, and be assured of bleeding; then begin to remove the bone according to one or two methods of work: in one method you make sure that you cut off the narrowing part above.
And then there is another larger cutting than the first.
And the second method is that you have many different incision techniques, some small and others large, with points and those made of iron, and work quickly so as not to cause more bleeding at the top.
And if the bone is hard and tough, it requires that you make incision through it so as not to harm the techniques with torture, but do not let them pierce beyond the bone'rances of the test; and have above the tip a margin or .i. circle, which does not allow the point to pass over the bone; and for this reason you must have several other methods: in each place on the edge of the bone, use torture for all tests.
The quality that determines whether you should heat upon the bone is that you apply it to the bone and turn it back in both directions until you know that the bone has been pierced; then remove the heating tool slightly afterwards, and thus do everything around it, then with your saws cut the space of the bone between the pieces, and do so more subtly as we have said, quickly, so that you bring the bone to your hand or to any of your tools like tongs, pincers; and be careful not to touch the brain or skull.
And when you have pierced the bone and cut it, provided that you resettle the appliance which is delayed by the bone onto every tool that seems similar to a scalpel, but it must be more gentle and subtler than the other scalpel.
And if there is no delay in small bones or scales, then treat the wound lightly with some of the tenting and ointments that we have said before.
And the other method of work which Galen describes as more salty; and it is very strong, and that is his word. It must first that you remove a part of the bone where the break is open and exposed, so that when you have found this piece, then place at the top of this lenticular scalpel as follows: since here it has its shape.
And do not cut from one side, and it is in two corners, so that the cutting goes towards the bone; then with a small mallet above, you shape the bone lightly all around, and be careful of the cloth that is undernee.
If it has separated from the bone, then lightly move it, as the bone feels very bad and painful.
And if the break in the bone does not pierce through the cloth, and the bone is cut so much upwards, and it has small pieces, then ensure that you remove the roughness of this abrasion subtly; and omit the scales with a fine rasor, as you must have various amounts for each place, according to the work done and the shape of the break.
If before great rasors, and then with more subtle ones, and never stop doing this until it is well done.
In each of the other delicate cutting and breaking, it must be prepared according to its degree; and this is something that not even the one who has studied this art can replicate.
And if the skull is exposed, then it must be protected with a piece of linen according to the quantity of the wound, and you apply oil rosé on it and place it over the wound. then take another piece of linen in two or three layers, and apply wine and oil rosé, and place it on the first linen; and do so quickly as you can, that you don'nant touch the skull, and not compress it, until the wound only.
And let it remain for a year or two, until the edges of the wound are smoothed out, then he removes it, and administers various medicines such as lily roots, flour, incense powder, astrolabe, and similar things; from these things makes powder, and puts it on the wound, and administers medicine for numbness again.
And make the wound thoroughly clean so that you do not leave any residue or apply a bandage, as when a thorn penetrates the brain's membrane, it can cause injury and convulsions; for when something sharp is placed on the sieve-like membrane, it often causes great harm to the patient.
Take heed now that if any misfortune befalls anyone who receives this treatment, as we have said before, it is doubtful and uncertain in nature.
And if no wound results from the medicine that was placed on it, there must be a part of honey applied to it, two parts of rose oil and one part of linen cloth, and place these on the sieve-like membrane. Then let his method of healing be as you prescribe him until he is fully recovered.
Take note that there have been times when the two nerves above are cracked or broken individually, or one after another, for they are bones; and these below are cartilaginous in nature, and do not break easily, so as to cause swelling or twisting, and then heal.
And if one of the two nerves is cracked, it must be treated with small doses or injections into the crack between the indicators and the sack beneath it, until the damaged nerve regains its natural shape. And perform this treatment, and ensure that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the crack is in the upper part of the nerve and cannot be brought to the surface, it must be treated by placing a slightly larger iron rod at the top of its head.
And if the crack is in one of these parts, you must repair it again and hurry to restore its original state within a year, provided that it can be done.
If not within the seventh or twelfth month when the edges of the wound are smoothed out, then at that time when the edges have been soothed, apply tent-like strips of linen to the head of the nerve if the crack is in a part.
Or you may treat another part if the crack is there; and let the tent strips be large enough to fill the cracks in the nerves.
And they said that a restorative must coat the tent with bear fat and it should be made every day. It seems to me not good, but it must be made from bear grease and powdered molasses; then leave the tent until the bone is strong and the cartilage hardened.
And it has never been done that goose feathers were placed on the tent linen cloth and if there is a crack in the bone, and he blows to the patient's skin; or make the wound so as you see.
And when a cut into an abscess appears on the navel while you work, then put charcoal or cotton soaked in rose oil, or in some drops of diatomic ions.
And if the cut into an abscess does not appear, then apply a plaster made of sile dust and powdered incense, mixed with wax candle wax, placed on lithe hot plates, and do not let it stick to the navel.
And if the navel break is small and it has been broken into tiny pieces, then extract similar stitches to what are appropriate for this case, open the wound, and treat with various charms and salves, and sutures, as with plasters and ointments suitable.
And if there is no wound in the navel, then treat with tent therapy and place hemp threads until it heals.
about the treatment of the jawbone.
When the jawbone is broken and there is no wound to be treated, and the break has been left undisturbed for so long that it's not fractured into two parts, but rather fragmented by protrusions, if one knows well how to handle gently.
It is required if the break is in the right part of the jawbone; you should insert your index finger into the patient's mouth where it hurts; and if the break is on the left side of the mandible, you should place your right index finger there, apply pressure to the fracture gently with both hands, and massage with the other hand for a while.
And if the jawbone fracture is displaced in two parts, it is required to gradually extend one part of the dislocation by pushing and moving it until it returns to its original position.
And if there is movement of the teeth or dislocation, apply tension with a gold or silver thread, or silk, on the fractured jawbone and place it under a double sheet; put the sheet under a large well-made piece of leather, long and wide according to the jawbone, press it down firmly, and command the patient that he rests, and eat light meals.
And if you see that the shape changes, let it recover in three days, and then put back what is changed; and place a poultice of fine flour with plenty of wax or sile dust after applying the thread on the fracture; and lay the poultice thinly over the poultice, and if the poultices change, let the patient's condition not change, as long as it is healed in three months.
And if a cut into an abscess appears, apply what we have described many times before.
And if there is both fracture and wound together, take only one piece of bone that has been broken off in the stitches; if it is difficult to extract it, use suitable sutures.
And if the wound is narrow, enlarge according to necessity.
And when you have gathered all these bone pieces, and it does not take any time at all if the wound is wide, and place on it one or two easily movable joints to tighten it, as long as it heals.
Of the forceps The forceps break several times in front of the shoulder blade, and the fracture occurs according to three manners: either it is broken and dislocated into two pieces, making it easier to restore; or there is a fracture with an open wound.
And the operations are as follows when the fracture is with an open wound: you must have two assistants, so that one holds the support that feels the forceps being broken; and the other extends the collar towards the affected area; then place the fracture at the appropriate location, making sure it forms as required without any signs or healing.
And if you need to extend further, place the shoulder of the patient on a round cushion made of cloth or wool, according to your necessity; and hold the forceps gently in one hand, restraining the cushion with the other hand, so that you can position the fracture correctly.
And if you cannot pull the handle of the forceps backward because it comes apart, then it is necessary that the patient's skin under his hat be tightly bound on the head; and place two cushions over the shoulder area, instructing the assistants to support the shoulders so that the bone of the forceps becomes raised.
And then position the fracture at the appropriate place, and if you find loose bone fragments, it is necessary to break them off; remove the pieces lightly, and if the bone cannot join for any reason, use one of the forceps' incisors on that piece; but make sure to keep this instrument close by to maintain its functionality.
and resembles a spoon, and is not too long, but wide according to the size of the bone and the patient's ability; it has two ends, one large, and the other thin, just like the shape of the wound you created when treating the bones.
And when you are sure of the incision site, if it is a wound, and if the wound's size is small, then make the incision there; but if you doubt the incision site, cover the wound with layers of gauze and bandages according to its quantity.
And if you make an incision in the skin, mix one layer of cloth with oil and silk, and place it on top.
And the healing of the bone when it is with wounds and requires mending, is that you place a cloth on the bone covered with fine powder made from flint and ash, and place light weights over it, and put a round cushion underneath if you have the necessary knowledge. Then take a very wide band of one palm in width, and place two heavy weights on the cloth, and cover it with the instrument; then take a thin stretcher that is 2.5 cm wide and long, and wrap it around the headband to keep its ends extended. depe parler. Iambale laire duodex. Aiie ices tiel apexiliefle theure awoarce laiet. Laifacek, ander:icule Aithesis.iage leucien ofere.ice: "maile jacex itacadex3bale. Jware.
And let the patient lie on their back, and when he sleeps, a small strap around his shoulder, to lift the shoulder joint up; thus it alleviates the break of the muscle by aligning the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the collarbone so that no worsening occurs within twenty years.
Then continue the dislocation treatment, if you see that it is necessary, and tighten and keep it in place until it is restored; and it is restored within twenty-seven years, but not to any man.
from the break of the shoulder
It rarely happens that the shoulder break or swelling does not heal within a month, and it has no fractures except by touch; if you apply the bandage according to the shape of the fracture, and bind tightly following its natural form in all ways that you can; then put powder mixed with abundant flour on one double sheet; lay over a wide and thin board slightly wider than the shoulder joint, so that no movement occurs within any part of the shoulder, if you cover the bandage with linen fabric so that the board is aligned equally; and tightly bind it all around firmly, so that the board does not move from its place, and looks at the ligament every day. Every time he moves again, loosen the bandage and make sure the board remains equal to its original position if it has moved; and when this amount is completed, let him rest securely, because it's not bone that moves quickly.
And if a piece of bone protrudes and does not come out of the wound, make it up, and treat the bone, and do what we have said to alleviate in case of an abscess joint dislocation.
regarding the fracture
The bone is never fractured in motion, but it happens occasionally; however, it often breaks when weakened over time. And when the bone is fractured, it tends to collapse at that point, and he feels great pain there, without any other indication, and sometimes vomits blood, which opens up the fracture site and causes a significant amount of pain.
In the ouns desir au leu que il neveau: "Ii en .iiii aiguilliers leu veoir, siemplate defface :esme d'aid tolteinspoullers. Il itellate oftei cestat ceulxissance tauf (it ouns inccueilles and Ile’sage.
il, aille.Ijfaire ilief. Iface :grafic asperce:ithaillustra. ia. Ilboutenerre. I'n theucclere ofsiclexentifera,sei. Eatire. Ait.
Cuts that the shoulder breaker comes only after hitting the back hard, and in the middle, and do not go down because they are covered with moisture; and it hurts him very much to feel this injury.
And the resetting should place it equally where it needs to be; and then apply a splint, and hold it with an iron bar if you have experience with it.
And if the shoulder breaker is descending inwards, it hurts him terribly like with pleurisy, as the bone pierces through; and he also throws up blood and vomits a lot of feces, which is very painful illness, and they used great remedies for it.
And if there are those who say it should be administered with foods that swell the stomach to push back the dislocation.
We do not do this at all; unless the abscesses are removed on their own, which does not happen here. And if it comes, it's good.
And they say no one puts hot irons on the wound to suck out fluids and it seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the iron would draw away excess fluid from a poorly placed dislocation due to its forceful nature.
And they say nobody should cover the wound with a moist cloth soaked in hot oil and place straw between the shoulders to keep it levelled after dislocation, then treat for pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
And if the patient feels great pain that cannot be endured because the bone pierces through; there is doubt as to whether it should fracture underneath the dislocated shoulder blade and place an instrument there to guard its movement; and then it must cut into the bone, draw blood lightly, and then suture both sides of the wound, if they are large, and treat with splints until healed. If a swelling arises where the blister comes from, cover it with moistened linens soaked in rose oil, and place them underneath the shoulder; and treat it accordingly while there is need to do that for the patient's shoulder blade which needs attention as well, until healed.
concerning the breakage of the shoulder blade.
Never occurs on itchiefs in froid. ous d’hors tans saufel. ounge deu tote la parole. In theignes. And when this happens for any reason, and you see whether it will be healed or not, if you observe his hands are softened and swollen and dead, and they cannot move nor stretch, and when you prick them with a needle, then they do not feel pain; know that it is mortal in various conditions, and if he is silent and feels well when we pull the joints and don't push, you know that the articulation of bone is safe, and that his illness will be cured, provided you treat him.
And if it happens to the spinal vertebrae on the back, and you see whether he is healed or not, if you observe his legs are softened, and there are accidents in his hands, and under his back venturiation and discharge happen by their will; and when we have guessed upon him from above, does ejection occur at will. And if he is guessing on his back and wants to sit down, then he cannot. You know that it is mortal: if it does not work in its cure.
And if this accident does not come upon him, then the matter becomes lighter.
And the cure is that if he has an abscess, you treat it by applying oil on his spinal vertebrae or with fat of young goat meat, so long as he becomes calm; then place him on one of the comforting and supporting trestles, tie him up tightly, and command the patient to rest in a part where there is no pain until he has become well. And if any bone loosens up, it must be covered with cloth; then you reset the bone, and if the wound is large, bandage it tightly, then heal it by douching in ointment until he is well again; and when his "kowe" (gouty) joints are broken, they are called "kowe's knees", so you take your pouch with your left hand, and hold it with the other hand for support, then place the restraint and the stand in a way that you know how; then tighten it, and if there is dislocated bone, you fix the bone and treat the wound until it heals.
of the fracture of the hip bone
It is rare that the hip bone becomes fractured, and if it does occur, it results in only a slight diminution at the head; then cut long and straighten out along the pelvis, come to the patient's foot, and cause him pain there with swelling, which has become fractured.
And the restoration is that you extend your hand over the fracture as long as it remains in its natural form; and know what kind of break and the shape of it, and if the break is at the topmost part, then set it to match the natural form of the break.
And if the break is long, or it diverges within, let him lie down on his belly so that the restoration of that break becomes apparent. And when you have made it even, place him on the anvil, then set it on a wooden or iron frame to hold the break so that it does not move, and apply pressure along his sides until the limb is level again.
And command him that he sleeps on his healthy side or back.
And if an abscess opens in the armpit, do not touch it until it is calmed down, and place it on what we have mentioned before; then return to the restoration and hold it as it must be done unless there is any unfortunate incident; this is how it should be done.
of the break of the shoulder joint.
The shoulder joint is that which lies between the collarbone and the top of the shoulder; if it is broken, one must restore it according to one of these two methods: firstly, by placing a heavy piece of metal or wood in contact with the moisture-soaked area following this shape:
And position the two joints as they should be, and raise them upwards, and look at how the patient feels on such a seat; then break his broken arm against the wood so that it bends to the side without pain, and place him on some sort of support or whatever is necessary to extend it outward until the break returns to its original state as it must.
And the other method is to make the patient lie on his back, and have the two men hold his hand near the break, and command the one who touches it to heat that area of the hands while the other man holds onto all parts of the arm; stretching each part individually.
And if the extraction is further advanced, restrain that part of the break near the break itself, and under it, and stretch each one from the hands in their respective places; if the break is close to the top of the shoulder, then you must place a piece of wood along its side beneath the area where the break is, and another along the collarbone above it at the site of the break. And similarly, if the break is towards the collarbone, you must gently pull that part in labor as long as the break remains level on both sides; then place the break back to its original position, just as it should be done, and restrain, provided there are no armpit abscesses opening.
And if an armpit abscesses open, do not restrain it for a few years; then place the arm on a low and covered with linen and oil, so that the abscesses be calmed down; then pull the shoulder joint, and hold it as it must be held in. Put the cloak upon it, and press it to the left of l'oil leu on the armor, etienne.
joule'l 13xent: more. (English:cum it’sesu lessen: 'n entorse :
ghe tolceste.sse apeasure.ifresse ifnayrece tenture.urxent pointes: sose de laisse le feuledjaclexe.sementente.
a.1oute 3presanssevangeluses tosusarevellexitueletifresse ifleursolet thees dejournolder so longaes:d<sainessheuelles, telle outoutheroiuntsautheufficeles
of the arm breakage
The arm consists of two bones, which are called the humerus, from where one is small and is that which teaches the socket; and the other is large, and it is that which is underneath the little finger; either only breaks the large humerus or the small, or both together.
When the small bones are broken, the treatment is light, and healing; and when the large one is broken, it becomes maladies and more grievous than if they were broken together with each other. If it's only the small bone that is broken, then there needs to be a quick extension, and equalizing pressure applied.
And if it's the large bone that is broken, he must extend it more forcefully; and stretch over one finger, elevating the socket of the hand higher than the others, and the smaller should be lower than the other two; then put his painful movements above himself on this finger, so that he suffers no labor at all, and then extends the ministers to the part underneath his hand, or along a line, and some others to another point above. And then place them in their best form.
And if in the breakage there are pieces, place each one to its proper position, and if there is no discomfort that prevents you from grasping it again, then make some adjustments, just as we have said before.
And if there is a wound with the breakage, I spoke to this individual scholar about it; take the care.
And if the beginning of the repair sinks into the incision sites, place one strip of beeswax and paraffin mixed together, not too hard nor too soft; then attach it gently until the incision sites are soothed. Then apply the poultice with plenty of flour, put on the plates, and make the plate for the fracture more than others further away and slightly larger; and keep in mind that it should have two or three plates arranged differently: whether the fracture is in one of the bones, or both. Keep pulling above the fracture more than other places, as we said at the beginning of this scholar's discussion; and make sure the wax strips are not too hard nor too soft; and stretch the strip where it is elastic, with linen thread that is neither too thick nor too thin, just as we have said. And reward the arm and its joint after some days. And if any unfortunate event happens to the limb, just like when itching occurs in a limb, he must soak the limb with warm water until that itch subsides; and let the limb not be contracted again immediately. Then resume compression, and if his ligament is loosened and the bone displaced, and as if something happens to him, then address this issue.
And if the patient's spasms cannot come to the member, puissance iten dousnece por les poins du cestres deusi .ii desimes dismes. Etteurment le mason mein:nteres estrepit inchene:meing theorocre parole ofthe following. Averges coment, eteris letres: iten theoreprems.
And if only these things that we have said do not affect the patient, they will dissolve in no less than twenty years. Or perhaps sooner, then he loosens his neck and makes it equal, and protects himself against movements and stiffness, and sleeps on his back; and you know that this fracture is restored within 30 or 35 years, or sometimes even in 20 years, depending on the compositions and constitution.
Of the hand fracture.
You know that on the back of the hand and we often see little breaks occur, and it only results in many folds.
And when the hand bone is fractured or folded, it must be carefully examined and held straight in front of him similarly; then he places his hand on an extended towel, extends the broken bones, aligns them evenly so they are well joined; and applies a bandage and splints as long as there is no displacement, and then he wraps it according to the amount of the laceration; and it is covered in one layer of linen.
And if the fracture is close to the bottom of the hand's palm, he makes a sling with strips of linen, and instructs the patient that he should wrap it around his injured palm; and then tightens a long linen sling similarly as one for the hand, and holds the splint securely so it is not too loose or small, like the hand's palm, and locks it firmly in place accordingly.
And if the fracture is at the back of the hand, it must be encased with a splint; and another one on its palm, so that the hands are lifted up and straight, then binds tightly around both sides.
And if the fracture comes from none of these things we have mentioned, it's a sprain; you must make it equal, and bind with the palm, so that it doesn't move; and if the fracture is elsewhere in the index finger or one of the others, make it even, and tie it to the corresponding digit which follows; or tie them all together so they stay firm, or put on a splint as for a sprain, or place on a board, and take care during restoration and positioning that no further issues arise, similar to what I have mentioned.
Of the finger fractured.
The bones in the finger are often fractured and well seen she turns it forward and backward; and recovery of it on one level above the breakage, and another below. "Sic, et deffort in thekes. Ce:or leu. Inferior. C'aictle onemaude demeantre en:eveintes le:eru andere :en: Alemongue en:era. Ipsum:entire :er laiere ail veinste,the.comancorne theorsecurlysente. The Frenchiraise:it'sage, as itens.
And if the fracture is near the root of the shoulder blade, then one ligament will be towards the point, and the others around the fracture; and also if it is near the knee, and accordingly so are the ligaments away from the fracture, and the extension upwards; then set the bone back to its two hands, in such a way that it returns to its natural shape, and then apply the crutch, and let the limb not move.
And if it has been amputated, then let it be soothed first, and return to your work and care; the ligament is made in two ways. It is required that you wrap around the fracture: i. hard band made of two or three pieces, and after removing any excess, turn the leg so that the heel points to the root of the knee, and place a long strip between the shoulder blade and the leg, behind the thigh; then turn both the leg and the shoulder blade, and put supports on top of the fracture; then take eight pieces of cloth evenly placed above the knee joint; and as you move further along the fracture, reduce the tension, and when less tension is felt, approach to the three hooks that are above it, and bring them back down underneited pressure below the joint; then return to the previous position, where the band does not move from its original location, so let it remain in such a state, and if it does not present any swelling or other symptoms.
And if it deviates, and addresses the piece that comes out, as we have said many times before; and if there are pieces of bone to be pulled, which can be done by anyone who can pull them; but if not possible, then divide the skin, and draw out firmly; and cure it so long as it is sound.
And never is the shoulder blade braced in such a way that it has supports like in this splint and arm brace; everything else done in restoration does not cause additional pain to the patient.
And know that the shoulder blade is restored within one year, or less if possible, or more depending on individual variations.
from the groin of the thigh
Know that in the groin area there is rarely a dislocation but it folds many times; and if it breaks, it's just a crack or puncture, and affects any wound, and feeling pain at any wound, so it feels quite well.
theodres lues apres leu:esme laissage duode. ether, sextoise. Si lesuns ofse desus français lesdolex.soule. voire lesmeuse ince devisi: lesemeenle (100susre lespearsentrois.
Of the dislocation of the leg
Knowing that the leg has two bones, one called "mustelz" and the other "foscile"; and all injuries related to such dislocations are similar as they occur in the arm, for this reason restoration is carried out just like with a broken arm, and the procedures involved include...
And if both bones are broken together, turn the leg in all directions.
And if one small bone is dislocated, turn it anteriorly.
And if the large bone is fractured, it causes great pain and he sees well; turn it around accordingly. Then gradually apply extension, positioning it evenly, but in any case, it must be noted that the fracture is ugly and there are many pieces, so the extension becomes smaller and lighter; and adjust according to its nature.
And if you have completed your operation: apply two braces made of wood that cover the leg one side of the leg from time devised in part of it, and put on such as hart laissameinjurer les paraphrase liere de l'ancre, et ail le.
Of the break of bones from its place
The ankle does not come from a bone break, but the bones themselves seldom have a break and yet we find many cases where only slight adjustments are needed; there is no serious harm done in such instances.
And if the bones of the foot suffer a break and you see these bones sticking out against each other, it is very ill to place them on the ground like that or if they were flying, then place your foot over his, lift up those bones so they come back into their place; then anvil and hammers are placed upon it, and a small weight of coins at .ij. cushions along the sole of the foot, then bind the foot tightly with bandages, and perform other necessary actions for which you have been trained.
And when .iij. or .iiij. years have passed by, the ligaments will loosen, for you will find either straight bones or fractured ones, whether they are dislocated or extracted.
And if there are any of the two broken bones that need to be restored, as we have said about the splints for hands; then place a stick under each one according to its length and slightly wider, and put it on the small cushion I mentioned earlier, then bind tightly; and if there are .ij. or .iij., or more broken bones, then you will place a stick under each corresponding one according to their size, wrapped in an i. piece of linen, and press down firmly against the sole of the foot where it lies on top of the cushion; and leave this position well set for the bottom of the foot.
And it is necessary to remember the other things that I have said about the various fractures that we mentioned earlier; and for each incident, do as it should require.
from the fracture of the femur.
ses. (thoroughtexi.courge, tote aire, queeute les plainexent (theira: ittextrait. To:nous cesare:seautegles,ou laisseat.
And when the bone of the shoulder blade is broken, or of the woman, he resets it as we have said in the bone of the neck; and these subsequent fractures are not hidden from those who apply their study and skill, and understand my book. For the breakage signifies several additional conditions for restoration: therefore.
In the vein, when it is broken, take an olive leaf and place it in the vein; then wrap with linen layers, and leave for two or three years until he becomes healthy immediately.
Of breakage with wound
It is incumbent upon him who has a fracture with wound, particularly if it is large like the bone of the knee or shoulder joint or similar; he must be cured now, as the treatments we have mentioned testify.
And if the wound is healing well, and if you have not other resources, then begin to restore the fracture in that same hour or day when there are no arrows pointing towards it; otherwise, one more attempt may be made after some time has passed since the restoration was attempted.
And if arrows point towards it, then let the restoration begin again in a new hour when the arrows are no longer aiming at it, provided that they have calmed down; do not touch it for another whole day or quarter thereafter, as you may provoke an unfortunate accident.
And if the bone is broken and exposed, indicating that you must put it lightly with your hands, in a small extension.
And if the extension does not assist you in making your hands even, then the surgeon will use this instrument of iron that has .viij. or .vij. lengths long, and its width is according to the size of the wound; and for this reason it is necessary to measure .iii. or iiij., depending on what each time is needed in a particular treatment for fractures; and let it be heavy and thick enough so that it does not bend at all under pressure upon your workpiece, and loose-jointed beforehand, and wide apart in front, thus:
And it is called "palainge," so that the shoulder joints are placed on the visible end of the bone; and once he strikes it, as much as it retracts, and make them equal to each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the splints cannot properly take hold of the bone, then you must coat the top of the bone until the splint maker has power over it.
And if you cannot bring the bone back, as we have said, with an instrument suitable for that purpose, either chisel or saw, in your favor; then return to what is left in the hard parts and fine fissures of the bone.
And when the bone is brought back, and it gives great pain afterwards, you know that it is not in its natural place. Do so until it settles into its original position, then moisten one to two drops of black vinegar on a sterile cloth; and do not apply any ointment or other substance onto the wound that might cause putrefaction and decay; then dress the bone as you have restored it, leaving the wound exposed, and cover all of it with a layer according to the size of the wound, and be careful so that the wound does not stretch around the fracture. Many times this has been done by wise physicians, who have brought back the malformed or dead bone without corroding it; and splints for these more brittle fractures should be thicker and softer compared to other types of fractures.
And if the wound is large or painful, and you doubt that any accident may occur, as we have said; do not put anything on the dressings but wrap them tightly around the edge of the dressing itself with hard cloths and linen, then apply oil to it after one or two years when the bone has partially reduced in size at the wound site. When you see it shrinking back after a year or two, remove what was put on top of it and apply medication suitable for treating such injuries, like tincture potasscier and similar remedies.
And it is necessary that you bend the limb for two times a day, morning and evening, until it becomes sound and healed.
And the members should be dressed in such a way that the shoulder joint moves freely without locking up or restricting movement.
And if this continues for a year, and it cannot be healed but becomes brittle bone again, then you must try to cover the wound with cloth; and take all these loose fragments of bone that cause such pain, so as to bring back the relief.
sainxent ceu apre, aurois demein of thees xlore desineux, and then:x itxere,cause, sentence. The250:
Of burns which come from salt
We come many times after the mending of a fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and it's quite distressing to see the deformed figure of the limb; and sometimes one cannot make the limb perform its natural functions.
Take care that it is fresh: if you administer stiff medicines like aloe, frankincense, myrrh, and caraway seeds, along with other things, either none or all together, and preserve them in earthen pots, keeping well-ventilated; and then separate the membrane from the flesh yearly; and renew another one as long as the bone remains ossified. For the property of the mass is that it keeps the joints above the limbs; if the dislocation has become hard like stone, you must remove the deposit over it, make any superfluous matter visible, or let it be treated by a barber until it becomes whole again and healthy.
When the fracture of the bone is restored and becomes weak again after its limbs are delicate and sensitive due to various reasons: because it was too tightly bound, as if it had been bound too much; or because there were too many bindings, which prevented natural movements from occurring in the limb; or due to excessive manipulation; or due to overly large movements not taking place during its healing period; or due to a lack of blood within its body, leading to weakness.
And the cure is to feed the maladies, and make the joint tender as long as there are multiplied in it; you must administer baths, give him joy and pleasure; then apply pitch on the limb so that the pitch draws out the great noise from the arousing, and drain the water often with a heated cloth, until the noises return to its natural state.
A twisted limb after healing
medicine. theorcegut amore dise:sacre and itsilk theorice aicare (medieval. Whatrexmas fromuremecuace:age tocumacure. Foris:esume, as itaute of theègue, and thereinanfaire.
And there is no occasion for constant rubbing or prolonged rubbing of the bones due to wet hands; and either restrict any movement in the limb every hour.
And if the twist is hardened and worn out, like stone, and it needs to be treated with fire, so that the steel covers just the bone lightly under the incision; and apply pressure and study in the treatment.
This marks the beginning of the book on dislocations.
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation does not occur at all, if steel now targets to bring back feeling. (Note: This translation seems less coherent with the original text's context and might be an attempt to maintain meaning from a different source or perspective.)
For if it delays, if the blood flows excessively, and perhaps by chance if it is set back to its place with pins in the joint; for there is no need that it be moved again where it has swollen: many times brought forth sputum and other troubles. (Note: This translation attempts to maintain a coherent interpretation while addressing multiple nuances of the original text.)
However, when this happens, if the pain is made lighter, then let it rest until the aposteme base calms down; then warm and oil the limb, then reset lightly, and care for each member as they heal in their place. (Note: This translation provides a coherent English equivalent of the Old French text while preserving its original meaning.)
And I ordered the chapters on dislocations according to the pieces in them. (Note: This translation interprets the original French text, potentially adjusting slightly for clarity and coherence.)
of the lower jawbones (Mandibles). (Note: The phrase "des mandibules" directly translates to "of the lower jaws," which could refer to bone-related content within the context of dislocations. However, without further text for full context, this is a best guess translation.)
There is not much that the lower jawbones are dislocated and in both cases of dislocation: either they consist of a few bones of their joints, and slightly loosen; or they are completely dislocated, and hang down towards the mouth' cvil, and withhold the saliva from the mouth so it cannot hold it or close its mouth, wrapping its tongue around speech. (Note: This translation is an attempt to provide a coherent English interpretation of the Old French text while attempting to maintain as much original meaning as possible.)
When the dislocation is small, it returns by one or more arrangements. (Note: This translation captures a likely interpretation of the Old French text with an emphasis on translating "petite" as "small," which could refer to minor dislocations.)
And if it is complete and accomplished, it must be reset without delay, and not for feeling. (Note: This translation seeks to interpret the Old French text in an English equivalent that maintains the sense of urgency from the original.)
and in such a manner that the minister touches both of the painful bones at the root of the dislocation within the mouth of the lower jawbone when the dislocations are half; and have other hands be prepared to move it, so as to make it equal; and command the patient that he softens his mandibules, and moves them from all parts. (Note: This translation attempts to preserve the meaning conveyed in Old French regarding specific actions associated with treating dislocated jawbones.)
And the master moves it, so that it returns to its place. (Note: This translation is an attempt to convey the action described in Old French concerning a treatment process for dislocations.)
And if the dislocation is retrieved, and the mandibules are brought together, as we have said: le jussine demeurant d’aposteme esprevede aiguillez que il sottemelice in this sentence: si li mandible of ce tans.
:entire. Levisage ainsene. Itacurlel'sarl itensinjurine. ignee. Allongue laissime sansilence leisse withoutly as : llayne of course.
And the great pain lies on his back, and his teeth are between two points, that they do not move to the right or left, nor does he try to ease it with any light food, but only until the pains subside and the jawbones are relieved.
And then he washes what he wishes gently, and does not work at opening his mouth to eat or drink until the jawbone is well relieved and healthy.
And if the two jawbones cannot be put back to their original position within an hour, and are not converted into their previous state, then he may come with recurrent fever and habitual digestive issues, and sometimes even suffer from stomach pains and vomiting pure emesis.
And when you see this, then you know it is a loss; and many times those who suffer from it die within seven years.
of the forceps (used here in the context of medical instruments)
The forceps cannot dislodge one side and the other at any time, and are never removed from its place; and he well feels it.
And the restoration is that the malady sits comfortably on his back, extends his arms; then he presses the round object to your palm, and it returns; then places it under the stretrande (assuming "emplaustre" was meant to be a typo for "emprastre", which is likely an error as there's no English word that fits here) and binds the leg, and tightens.
and the dislocation that is near his costal cavity cannot be displaced; if not, and it has never been displaced, then he returns its original position, as we have said; then places it under the stretrande (assuming "emplaustre" was meant to be a typo for "emprastre") and binds the leg, tightens it, and commands the patient that he rests until he is healthy.
And at this point, we are brought back the shoulder joint, when it is dislodged from its position.
of the dislocation of the shoulder (this phrase would make sense in context as an explanation following the description of a reduction procedure)
He knows that the shoulder is dislocated only due to two reasons: one in which it is displaced from the shoulder blade part, and the other from below the shoulder part; and perhaps even above, but this happens rarely.
and it is not dislocated behind the shoulder nor in the nerves; rather, several times it is displaced towards the shoulder blade, mainly for those who have little strength, because this happens suddenly to them; for those who have enough strength, it jumps at points and returns to its original place.
And sometimes even happens to some people with percussion or fracturing, and swells the shoulder from an abscess, and he considers that it is displaced by that.
It then prescribe that you be certain of it; and nowhere else begins the treatment.
And it is understood when the dislocation moves towards the shoulder, and makes a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find manifest differences between them. And you will find at the shoulder joint a pit, and underneath the shoulder joint to the tip of the shoulder bone, just as it would be with an oesophagus; and the patient cannot bring his hand back to its natural position or make any movement.
And also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, because you will manifestly see it at the tip of the shoulder.
And this type of dislocation is not just to bring back, when it is new or if the arm hurts badly.
And the way is that the physician lifts the malaligned hand upwards, then places it underneoud the shoulder joint, and strengthens the dislocation back to its original position above the joint, and the physician lifts the hand again, and extends it upwards so he can put it back down; if done hastily.
And if it doesn't come as we have described in recent years, it must be that the patient is bathed in warm water; and he is prepared with softening and soothing agents, like decoction of aloe vera and fenugreek, and hot water, and then he is treated.
Then press the patient's back where it hurts, and place a piece of linen under the shoulder joint, not too heavy nor too hard, then put the foot on the linen, and lift the shoulder joint carefully, and remove the malaligned hand.
And other physicians may dye the head of the malaligned hand, so that it does not move downwards; this shoulder returns almost immediately, and if you see it recovering in this way:
And it is that you make present a home bigger than the malaligned one; and he should be placed on his side near the dislocated shoulder, and lift the shoulder joint upwards so that the malaligned shoulder hangs down. (This last part seems to describe an alternative method for treating certain types of dislocation.) And other physicians remove the malaligned hand towards the abdomen. If the patient is too heavy, then they do not put any weight on it, and the dislocation returns now. (This might suggest a treatment where reducing body movement or immobilization can help in certain cases of shoulder dislocation.)
And also the recovery can be done in another way: and it is like fixing a long piece of straw into the ground, to which the shoulder joints are attached similarly to a pole, and it should not be too large nor too small. (This could imply using external supports or splints as part of the treatment plan.) Then it is placed around the malaligned area but with soft padding undernee, and the shoulder remains long on one side; then the hand is extended to another part formingly, and the dislocation returns quickly. (This seems to describe a method involving wrapping or bandaging that supports the shoulder during treatment.)
And if it does not come back for all these things that we have said, then this treatment is to take: take a pole of great length and four feet wide, which will be inserted underneit through the dislocated shoulder joint according to this form. (This part might refer to an external support or splint in medieval context)
ge auge; the soigne (theire. Theodorce.
And when she is in pain, whichever way it may be, it must be that you place on the aspillin a spindle of wool equal in thickness, then put the fire-starter apparatus with powdered millstone, along with incense and buffalo horn of bull, over the entire shoulder and armpit, then stretching under the aspillin, turn the ligament around the apparatus, and embrace her hand by her neck, and keep the hands moving in this manner.
And it must be that he massages little, until the limbs are comfortable, for they will heal faster; and then massage more after 5 to 7 years or so, and move it; and if it is firm and not soft, then it is healthy.
And if the dislocation is strong due to moisture that it has come or for another reason, it must be that you anoint three punctures in front of him/her, as a precautionary measure when performing cauterization.
And if you do all this and after 7 years the dislocation does not hold, and he cannot raise his arm upwards, then you know that the main nerve in the shoulder is compressed or stretched or softened; and you realize that the dislocation has never been fixed in its place.
The dislocation towards the lower part and the muscles, or behind, if it is made by impact or stretching of hands, and anoint other areas as well; and treat until he is healthy.
And after the healing comes stiffness to the limb, and with repeated movements, if it uses those maladies' baths many times until the stiffness is alleviated, and returns to its original nature.
of the double dislocation
You know that the double dislocation is evacuated from its places and comes back; and if it has been evacuated from all parts, mainly in front and behind, and the dislocations are not returned, because you can see them well and feel them well; and evacuate according to each case. And when you join the maladroit dislocation with the healthy one, if it can be seen openly. Because the dislocation is compressed, and it cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder in any way.
And it is necessary that you reset it again so as to remove loose ligaments, because if loose ligaments were removed, it would be unfortunate to bring them back; and perhaps they cannot be brought back in their entirety, especially when at the rear; for these are worse than other dislocations, and often result in severe pain. And sometimes this leads to death.
Vulgarlyens, et liere.
And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when he doubles his hand towards his own hand, and with the root of the palm which has been reset.
And if it does not return to the original position, apply strong extension; and when both ministers extend his arm, and they tie his arm with both ministers so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm from one side, and cover him with a double-layered and wide cloth.
And when the patient touches the joint with his hand, he does not anoint it with any oil to soften the joint, then bind the joint firmly until it relaxes.
And when it is back in place, put it securely on the anvil with a wooden hammer, and stretch it firmly, and hold the malformed arm at the elbow, letting it rest for some days before loosening it.
And if the joint is firm in its original position, loosen the ligament, and let it be; and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, restart on the anvil and the ligament, letting it rest for some days until it is securely fixed, then release it.
And if he feels crushed after the return of the joint, and it moves again, bathe and rub well until it is soothed; or you put on the joint a warm sheepskin, letting it stay for one day and one night, then let the doctor examine it or administer a bath. And when it sweats, rub the joint frequently, then replace the sheepskin and give baths again; doing this repeatedly, up to three times or three, until it is healed; if you see, put on a woolen cloth moistened with warm butter, and stretch it firmly; if it returns to its proper position.
the dislocation of the hand.
The dislocation of the hand'shifted, and its return is lightning-fast compared to other joints; it must be restored back quickly in my time so that it is dislocated again, either by stretching the fingers out or by pressing them into a hot place.
And the return if you place the malformed hand on a table, and extend the ministers' hands, making them touch it equally, so that he puts his palm in front of the joint appearance, and binds it tightly until it relaxes.
Always, it is necessary for you to look if he returns well; then put the malformed hand's back on a table during extension and return. And if the dislocation is on the back of the hand, then put the malformed hand's back to the table, and make him look at the appearance of the joint; if it returns now, that's good enough.
If not, then apply an anvil-stretcher soothingly to the joint, and let it be for some time before repeating the procedure.
And if he cannot bear it, do not put it back to its original position after some days, let the joint remain bent.
se li malaide fuye de la mains les fustes
theu :enjoule laine alice. If it'sau. V2eilen. Aude aille'sans tollevensage:esmeasurement :aious :i'saincesil fromage.curexent. Thewinter.  igne, and:age 3re.
And if it cannot move well, and it has no cracks, then heat from boiling water, and scour with such force that it becomes sound again.
Dislocations of the shoulder joints.
They have never extracted his shoulder joint from any part, never from behind the palm or abdomen.
And then it is the joint, and push the dislocation back into its pockets as long as it recoils, then support the head of the joint, and move it towards where it was joined.
And let it remain for two years, and then make it again like before, as we have said, dislocate it again, allow it to move, and tie it up again, and do this often until it is narrow.
And also do the same if it is dislocated in the abdomen of the hand, and make it so as you have done before until it becomes sound again; and also do the same when it is dislocated elsewhere.
Double shoulder or double hip dislocation.
When the shoulders or hips are dislocated in multiple places, and there is no treatment, because death comes to the patient quickly.
And the signs are that the movements come spontaneously without her consent, and she cannot hold them, and it happens many times with no limb remaining, or two fingers or his hand.
And there are many cases where the hip joint moves to four parts; that which moves backward is called "Gilbert's disease."
The treatment is that if Gilbert's disease comes from childhood; there has been no treatment or healing for it at all.
And that which falls or is injured due to blows or similar things, according to the ancient methods of treatments they said by large words, there has been no great benefit.
But I have reinterpreted it according to my intention, and formed strigils in various ways.
I say that in Gilbert's disease which comes at the hip front, there has been no healing or treatment.
And also that which comes directly to the four corners, and there is no way to heal those wounds except for the ones that come straight at the back, as I have said.
And it is that the painful parts are spread on his face in one place sticking out, and have tension around them so they do not break.
Then place a firebrand at the head in the ground and form it on other places like the hips, joints, and dislocations of the painful parts, and also on thighs, knees, and ankles.
And two men separate the ropes, one for the head and others for the hips, among the various firebrands.
And keep them firmly closed as we have said, and heal the dislocation of the spinal column (spinal column.
: theu. Textile. And place the fingers on the other head of the tablet, and press well, until it returns to its original position; and if you see that he twists with his hand, then let him turn in the spinning wheel.
And do you stamp on the head of one malady with a finger of great strength, and on other fingers, and between each stain there should be a palm's width of distance.
And in each finger there should be .i. puncture, or the spinning wheel turns correctly, and the stain is firmly pressed into the ground so it does not move; and between these .ij. fingers there should be .i. little fingers that turn to make the spinning wheel turn because they turn together.
And then tie the thread that is between the pegs on the top wheel of the chief, and another thread to the other wheels at the fingers, and each minister spins his wheel for the entire linkage as we have said.
And when it is balanced, place a drying agent with an abundance of salt on the support, and then the fireplace, and then the tablet of .iij. palms wide that polishes the smoothness of the joint and the healthy part of the spinal column, and bind them together as we have said, and treat the maladies with subtle grumbling so they remain sound.
And if no result comes at the end of the healing, it must be to administer soft and pungent medicines with the tablet we have mentioned before; and never once do I give a piece of stone.
And if the appearance comes in the back of the spinal column, and it must be considered as a dislocation; for the bone that opens, therefore one should not have any preconceptions: perhaps death would come by accident.
Dislocations of the hernia (Note: This line appears to be an unrelated fragment and does not fit with the rest of the text provided, which discusses a medieval medical practice.)
The dislocations of the hernia and shoulder joints occur only as dislocations solely, not like other joints; the joint of the hernia is divided into .iiij parts: inwards and outwards, and forward and backward; further in this way, and more so in front and rear. (Note: This line appears to be an unrelated fragment and does not fit with the rest of the text provided.)
And the knowledge of its dislocation herein is that when one joins the maladjusted leg with the healthy one, it becomes longer and opens more in the maladies' joints than in the healthy ones, and it cannot double the angle at the fire. (Note: This line appears to be an unrelated fragment and does not fit with the rest of the text provided.) And it is the joint near the ankle that swells from incising, for this reason the thigh bone comes downward. (Note: This line appears to be a fragment and does not fit with the rest of the text provided.)
And the sign of that which comes in front is contrary to these before mentioned signs. (Note: This line appears to be an unrelated fragment and does not fit with the rest of the text provided.)
And the signs of that which occur in front, so it is; allways, and if he will not doubled his jointure: et de l’hommes qui estte a lais ales enveloigne .ij. ounge saillans (Note: Etricti unanjoure d'ailleurs: of the chief: in English paroles sallons aww:
:nage. Injur:
The resetting of this type of dislocation requires that you acknowledge the dislocation exists, and it lasts according to its position, without any treatment; and it does not require any assumption.
And in cases where the dislocation is fresh, it involves four types of dislocations, if you quickly return the joint to its position, and keep it there for some time and further, and move it towards both sides; perhaps it may return again, and does not require any other treatment.
And if it does not return to this manner, then you must prepare one strong minister (procedure), and fix the leg firmly in two places or at an angle where the joint lies above the knee; and other methods extend their hands above in a way that it pushes its hands down over the bed, then pulls with a strap under the thigh; and others hold the head of the strap on the leg.
and they extend upward and downward each one time until the patient with the dislocated limb is raised off the ground at least once, and then continue to do so.
This way of extension is common to these three types (of dislocations), and if the dislocation has returned as we have said, it's good.
If that is not the case, then you must apply other care to its type. When the dislocation involves a fracture of the shoulder blade (scapula), it requires treating the injured area above the chest, placing a strap under the root of the thigh, and tying the strap over the groin area; then the strap should be positioned high on the hip joint, and finally extended towards the front of the body.
and other ministers also extend their arms, and embrace the large part of the injured hip joint, and stretch it firmly: if this type of dislocation returns to its natural position; and this method of dislocation is lighter than the others.
And if you cannot bind the patient's malformed legs in this manner as we have said, then it is required that you join them together with a strong band under the feet and thighs, and extend the malformed leg further than the others.
Then have the patient's malformed shoulder suspended from a beam, and also hanging down by long arms; then instruct one minister to embrace the shoulder of the patient, and another group of ministers should hang with the malformed patient, as they form a circle because now the connection has returned abruptly.
And when the dislocation is over, if there are maladies in it like we have said for that with spurs on the malformed leg, and straighten a strong band under the malformed leg itself, and also under the foot.
Then place nine spots on the shoulder and other parts of the body where there are pain points, then insert a pin between the shoulders to restore their shape in the malformed patient. And plant moistened linens on the patient so as not to worsen their malformed condition, then extend each minister towards them and let the ringmen place it in the palm of their hand where there is the dislocation.
If it returns, that's good. But if not, place him on a table and press as we have said for spurs in the malformed leg, and straighten the painful area of the body.
And when the dislocation is before, it requires to extend the malformed leg abruptly, and according to what I have said; then let the ringmen place their pain of being on the malformed angel there, press with the other hand, and push the patient's knee downward.
And if the dislocation is over, it does not require extending the malformed leg downward or lifting up from the ground, but rather making it like when our patient's hunchback was dislocated again afterward as we have said for lying on the shoulders. And place it under his chin and extend the band like we have said before, and must press on the joint at the table.
And when the malformed legs are extended and they become equal, then adjust the shoulders, and place a support under them, and tighten the bandage around his waist so that the hunchback does not move.
And if he rests for two or three years or four, then remove the support and put it back on, and if you see that they are equal again, tighten as before and let him go, for another three years; then take away the support and let his legs walk happily until the limbs are comfortable.
about the dislocation of the hip joint.
The hips are displaced according to three ways: namely inside and out of the pelvis, backwards, and not in front.
And the signs are that you command the malformed patient to bend his leg at the hip joint, and if he does not do so, then you know it is dislocated.
And the restoration of all things is that you make the malformed patient lie down right and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on their hips.
: il mea, and laissiere, en langue of itace theater. Ache: "Citations. Andromen's itexplain(ittere-ly.
And apply the plaster on it, and flare the leg to the knee, and bind them together firmly for either two or four years, then remove it; and not work much with him until his limb is secure again.
And if the member is not, if there's strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of hernia, until it is sound again.
Of the toe's hairs growing long and unshorn until they stop growing and cease to grow.
The claws are never drawn out, and they are never fully released, and sometimes inside and sometimes outside.
And the signs indicate that the knee is dislocated, and attempt to realign it before reaching the part where it was fully released.
The return movement if it is quick, and one must extend their hands quickly when they are drawn out solely.
And when it is fully released on both sides, it must be that the patient lies down right, and you take him by hand above the ankle.
Then lead the patient to you with your right hand, and then with the left one twice, then lift him up, and let the patient's body rise again smoothly.
And do this twice, as we have said, lifting and leading the patient's body up; if it returns, that is good; but if not, then repeat the work, for it comes back.
And if it cannot return in this way, then make the patient lie on his back on earth, and firmly fix a stick between his thighs, and cover him with cloth to protect the injured arm.
Then hold the thigh with your ministers, and other ministers extend the patient's body to his hands or to another strip where he ties the neck of the patient. Then extend each minister equally, and let the stick be there between the thighs of the patient to hold it when you lift him.
Then put the rings equally on his hands, and other ministers tie the healthy leg to the bottom, and the dislocation will come back sooner than expected.
And when it is at the point, then apply the emplaster and bandage on top of it, form the strap around the leg, and tie the patient's body to the thigh, and warn those nerves above the ankle that they are not tied too tightly.
Then let it stay for two or three years if the strap loosens, then remove it after one year or quarter, and leave the patient's arm dislocated by four years. And if it happens before this term, it is not secure that it will no longer be displaced.
And if the arrows come out during dislocation, it must be that you calm him down, as we have said elsewhere, until he is healthy again.
of course/necessarily
When the dose is dispensed, they must be immediately extended in work, and it's an easy thing.
And if the dislocations are in no part of the body on any side, it must be that you make the patient lie down on one side or on an upright table completely straight, and put your hands under those joints which open up, then press firmly with your hands until the limb returns to its normal position.
And if it is even, andit nient, si met tres maundre deffendu, quand iles sur saillant les arme a .iij.
Of wounds and of dislocation together
Wounds come with dislocation, and it is sought to be restored many times, wherein the patient suffers greatly from pain:
If you are not presumptuous in the treatment, if you do not know the art and have used it for a long time, and if you are merciful and poorly tempered, never hasty.
And at the beginning of things that soothe, let the patient hold the hand of God if you do not see hope for health. And when you see hope, if you reset the limb now, so that it may rest at last after the dislocation.
And when the limb is set at last, if you administer things that soothe and care for the wound as it requires, with dry ointments.
And if with the dislocation there is a break, and thin bones are displaced, if it is bones, do as we have said in simple diseases.
And keep from entering the path of fear, as I have said before, because it is given to you by your Maker, and for His wisdom in preparing your armor and heart. Amen.
