Oh you dear son, I have completed this book which is the second part of the teaching of medicine in its entirety, and I have made the end with explanations and statements from it. And I was given in my vision that I completed this treatise with this subject, which is part of the book of surgery, namely "cryotherapy".
And because the book of surgery is well-known in our region and is essential everywhere, if it were not for this science, it would be abandoned and forgotten; therefore, there are no delays in attacking these wounds that ancient books have described through their practices. And it is because of this mistake and arrogance, and the meanings are closed and have been distanced from the science.
Or it seems to me that I have revived this treatise in its entirety according to the path of exposition and declaration; and I will bring together the forms of fire cupping, and other manipulations from the book with the adjustment of the declarations and preparations as well, since it is customary.
And because there are no good masters of hands found in our time, the art of medicine is prolonged. And it is necessary that one who engages in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, knows correctly about the bodies, forms and conditions, joints, separations, muscles, bones, nerves, and veins, along with knowledge of their movements, resting positions, and sources; this is what he must understand.
And for this reason, Epicharmus says that we do not with it much (referring to the book), and in the art of hands also little is done.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that who does not know these things beforehand, he will avoid making errors and harm to others; so I have wanted many times more people involved in this science and do they abandon it with its wisdom and experimentation.
Because I see a foolish man who performs an apotome of the scrofulous ulcer or swelling on a woman's neck, and removes her arteries from it, so much flesh comes out that the woman dies in his hands.
And another wise man who transforesmeentures of the art and toge ofxor trechiefs cestinement defface dexpresence le maladies leu in aigne itin: comen.
And I had already been called for his treatment, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the wound, and if he were to die from it, I would know.
And I saw another man who was in the care of our land, who had his leg broken, and with the break he had an open wound; and the physician's ignorance constrained the fracture above the wound as if by strong pressure, and let nothing go out from the wound, and so commanded him not to remove it either; and remained until his leg was completely amputated and his knee joint came to its end.
I was called upon to come to him, and hurriedly came to set his leg free; and when I set it loose, he was at peace and did not feel any pain.
But all ways of curing had already been declared to be confirmed or a limb or body part, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease until every member was lost completely.
And I saw another physician whose abscess had opened and then inflamed due to the malice of his lordship.
For a purulent ulcer, when it is full of black bile (representing melancholy or bad spirits), there is no need to touch with iron unless part of the wound has turned into liquid and you can completely cure what is corrupt.
And for this reason, cutting hair, you should know that the work of hands is divided into three parts: it means, heart or it has danger in several circumstances; and I will show in each part of this book where there is fear and danger.
For this reason you must take care, so that the foolish physician does not speak ill of you.
If you take up your arms in defense, and undertake your maladies lightly but firmly, and use the best way so that by the grace of God you come to salvation and are praised; and leave those diseases that cause grievous suffering unattended; and arm yourself lest you doubt, and do such things that you may be brought out from this world into another one of glory.
"Do not treat any illness badly, do you not call such a physician."
I have devised this treatise according to .ii. chapters.
The first chapters are about fire and moisture cauteries, and they are ordered from the head to the feet; and regarding traction therapies, cautery tools, and all that is necessary for the work.
The second chapter is about wound cutting and piercing, and the use of suction cups and wounds, and extractions of arrows, and similar things; and it is ordered along with traction therapies, likewise regarding their forms.
The third chapter is about the treatment of dislocations and twists, and similar things; and it is ordered from head to feet as well regarding traction therapies, and their forms.
And since our memory of the work, it is required that I state the quality and harm of each type of condition.
I say that the quality and harm of help is the longest word and most subtle science and hidden answer; and from this topic, several experts spoke about it, and agreed to it; and they don't bother with many words, as I am wary of lengthiness.
I say that fire cautery helps every type of condition, since there are two types of conditions: hot temperament with matter and dry temperament with matter.
In hot and dry temperament combined with matter, no one designed it, and they said that fire cautery is great help; while the other said that cautery is not helpful for disease caused by heat and moisture.
Because fire is hot and should not be a remedy for diseases caused by heat and moisture, as stated by those who said the opposite; it does great help for warm and dry diseases that come from the bodies of people. Because when you compare the body's constitution to the hot condition, your flesh will be bruised.
And I agree with this saying. I have found it never by experimentation. (The medieval author asserts the effectiveness of this method, noting that its efficacy was observed through experimental trials.)
And all ways, not in any way do those who have tried it harm themselves, and who know from long use the physician of cauteries, and the diversity of human complexions, and the dispositions and causes of their diseases, and remedies and space between tens; for other complexions we fear not, mainly illnesses cold and moist. And all the wise men agreed and settled on the use of cautery.
And know, young one, that with fiery flame combined, (A)
Forsooth the heat is simple in its pure essence, (A)
The fiery cures do draw from other parts their might, (A)
By virtue of its power and the warmth it bestows, (A)
I found this through trials and length of service's might, (A)
And know, dear youth, when cautery's time doth arrive, (A)
I decree that cauterization' Written in Old French, the translation maintains its medieval essence while adapting to poetic form:
nent:esbyte ofcause, sachia of utic. voire malice of theur eslementen asme itaurexent pas cautures, comestrai, ache de letainlyseuticate ofu.com estimexumeas fromage ofsacuteine, andescribe.
And there is that the disease never changes according to the constitution of the sick person and the nature of the illness and its virtues; and it gathers around in him excesses through acquiring meats and other things, unless cauteries are applied at that time when he has few excesses and moisture, as cauteries for pain, and similar things, and little pain does not return anymore; but this happens rarely.
And many do not understand that the lower limbs of medicine are called cauldrons; it is seen, but they do not believe that cauldrons are effective after medicine, rather their understanding is false, and cauldrons of medicine because we administer various treatments for any disease and none of them are worthwhile, so therefore we use the cautery, and it is valuable. And it is opened well because cauldrons are indeed part of the lower limbs of medicine, not according to the beliefs of common people. This statement reaffirms that despite widespread misconceptions among laypeople, the author acknowledges the legitimacy and necessity of cauterization within the scope of medical practice during their time period.
The ancients said that instruments of gold were more effective than those made of iron, and they only spoke about the quality of the gold and the highness of its substance; and they declared that the wound healed without any porridge (properly 'purulence' or pus formation), but this is not true because I have tried it myself, and found in some cases that it does not work. This sentence provides insight into the beliefs about materials used for cauterization tools during medieval times—gold was considered superior due to its perceived purity and effectiveness compared to iron. However, the author's personal experience suggests that this belief may not hold true in all cases.
And in any case when you heat an instrument of gold, you do not know how long it will stay heated by the color of the gold and if it suddenly cools off almost instantly; and if it is heated too much, they put it on fire, and thus there are enough difficulties. This passage reflects concerns about maintaining the appropriate temperature when using gold instruments for cauterization, noting that overheating could lead to rapid cooling or other problems with the procedure's execution.
And for this reason we use iron cauldrons because we have made them appear useful in our work. The statement acknowledges the practical application of using metal cauldrons, likely iron ones due to their prevalent availability and cost-effectiveness at that time despite any theoretical preferences or beliefs about gold's superiority for certain medical treatments.
But I have ordered this chapter to be divided into sections by reason that the text is easier to find. This suggests an editorial decision to organize content for better readability and navigational ease in written works of medical knowledge from medieval times, possibly to enhance comprehension among practitioners or scholited readers who may not have had extensive training in reading complex manuscripts.
double-edged cauldron (or instrument)
These cauldrons are valuable in coldness and heat under the skull, and for many causes that cause "soda" (a term possibly referring to a headache or fever), among other symptoms such as numerous dreams, pain of density (perhaps alluding to chronic conditions like paralysis, sore throat, and inflammation, and also various diseases.
The form of this cautery is that the patient must be purified by medicine that removes the head, either two or three nuisances, according to what its virtues and strength allow the malady to endure; and then again put back the head of the malady.
And then it will sit between your hands, and put its hands on the skin; after that place the root of your palm on the root of his neck in two places; and when there comes a time to apply pressure, if blood flows from within, heat up the cautery called "olivare," for this is its form:
And when it is marked with ink, and you withdraw your hand slowly and remove one piece at a corner, then lift your hand gently; if you see the bone .iij. little solids, then continue using the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you; afterwards take .i. length of silk, put it in a wet and soft cotton bag inside, place it on the mark, let it stay for three years; after that place the bag over it, allowing it to soothe the ostea (bone) until it is healed; then cure the wound called "tetrapharmacia," as long as it is healthy.
And they said the ancients that as long as more blood flows from the wound, it cleanses itself; and for this reason helps healing.
And none of these said that the cautery must be so used as to break a piece of bone off and then treat that which is broken from the bone; and then care for it.
And the other said that with this cautery it must be used so lightly and hard enough to bite into the bone just as wide as .i. bradleys (a type of brooch), because then the humors come out from inside; and one must allow the wound to be irritated for a long time overseeing, after which it must be cured satisfactorily.
And these .ij. manners of caulteries do not seem very good in the whole; there are no fears that men have seen them anywhere; I think it would be better for me to leave them, because the shoulder-blade is weakened by repeated infusions of natural solutions as we know from others' experiences; and my own maladie's first appearance has been feeble and frail, and the first caulter used more salve and ointment with me for that purpose, and in this way I seek salvation.
Of the arrow wound pain in the head chief
Whenever in the entire head there comes chronic pain that lasts long, and it should use his maladies for "cochies" (medical terms), and drainage of the chief and oils and plasters; and if they perform the cautery we have mentioned beforehand, and it is not.
Be wary if the shoulder joint of the patient is of strong nature and not too cold; however, cauterize over that cautery a little bit as we have previously described.
After performing cauterization on each horn of the head bone just at the os (bone), as we have previously said, and then apply a second cautery known as "vasselz" (medical terms); additionally, insert suction cups; and position your hand so that you do not see into the bone: in this method, the patient experiences much greater pain than with other methods I will discuss elsewhere; it is necessary for those performing cauterization on the horns to be more subtle than they are when cauterizing most of the head'ran.
For two types of cautery at the head: When in one part of the head there comes sudden and prolonged pain that extends the malady to the oil (ointment), and the shoulder joint is emptied by pharmaceutical medicines, and all other treatments mentioned have been applied as discussed regarding the division of diseases; yet none of this benefits: therefore, perform cauteries according to two manners, namely in medicine and fire.
When performing medicine cautery, you must prepare a dozen of alum, and strip the skin and scab off slightly; then make an incision where the pain holds tightly so that you can reapply the dozen of alum inside the leather cover; and when it has been reapplied well and firmly, let it remain for about 10 to 23 days; then remove the bandage and treat any fissures with a poultice made of burdock root, leaving the wound for another two or three years.
After the ointment, ensuring it's healthy; and if you see to make any medicine combuste a peuplere of alge, et estenduinnece en castres et dame deffondre les arme d’estende :10es.
The fire cautery is done according to this manner. Heat the iron cautery as follows:
And it is called "close" because the head is made in the shape of a clover or has little bushiness, and in appearance being small; and put on the wound tenderly with your hand and generally loosen the fist slightly, until the edge of the pain has been rubbed away completely; and keep your hand so that the arrow does not burn, but goes further, and a stream of blood flows abundantly.
After applying cotton on the wound with silk thread, and placing it for two years; then I place moistened cotton in burlap and then heal the ulcer until it is sound; and if you wish to cauterize this ingrown nail using a cautery called "cultellum," at the point of the instrument, and be careful not to touch the artery in this ingrown nail which is not ancient.
of ingrown nail
When curing an ingrown nail as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and it doesn't profit from treatment; nevertheless, you must heat the cultellum so that it is white; then draw a line across half a dozen centimeters on the next tooth, and hold your hand once, ensuring that you don't hit an artery while moving along the bone; warn against murmurs of the jawbone when moving, and let neither tic nor spasm appear in it, as well as warning about the removal or significant pain and danger from blood flow in the artery after cauterization, especially for those who are untrained and not experienced, and leave the matter to your discretion; but I will tell you how sutures come off once the arrow is removed, and I will show you where on the body it appears in this book.
And if you see that this cultellum does not suffer the disease, and the pain of the malady persists, then cauterize it again in the same manner as we have said; and heal the wound until it is sound; and if you see, administer with the cultellum mentioned by us or a chirurgical instrument for artery extraction, with the cultellum that has two knives; and these cauteries are better than those and more helpful.
: theursin:enchantment. You canteries. Andes:mein itaience deaunque, ous tolere :faitre lesiement encontre. Ifaire. Ire:coule a ounge auroles (14, circaire :give it:coudur jure. Thejour:
When pain in the ear comes from cold, and we have applied remedies and other treatments as mentioned earlier for division, and the pains do not subside, hence this caustic which is called "punctures", for thus it has the form:
After piercing the maladroit ear, or when pain is felt in both ears, and you move it slightly away from the root of the ear by wiggling the lobe; then give .x pins to each ear after curing the lobe until it heals.
This phrase, "de la torture de la bouche," could likely refer to a form of dental or oral manipulation. In the context of medical treatments during medieval times, this might involve using various instruments or techniques for purposes such as adjusting teeth alignment, relieving pain from abscesses, or even extracting impacted teeth. The term "torture" here does not imply harm but rather refers to a therapeocentric approach where the patient's wellbeing is prioritized despite any discomfort that might be experienced during such procedures.
The torture mentioned here is curable by caustic, which refers to treatments involving corrosive substances. These are specifically for those that involve movement of blood or fluids (as indicated by "muevent de fleume"), and not similar methods such as cauterization from seeping wounds ("sechor") or discharge caused by sneezing ("spame de ners"). The statement contrasts these caustic treatments with other types of procedures that are not mentioned, which are considered to be beyond the scope of this particular medical approach.
When you cure this form of torture that silently releases blood and expectorations from the head and gargling, it requires that you caustically treat the maladroit ear with .iij. pins (where .iij. is a placeholder for "three"): one in the root of the ear, another slightly behind the temple, and a third on the alignment between the ears; place the cauterization where it's openly clean, perform the caustic treatment on the head above just below the prominent horn (assuming .ij. refers to "prominent"), and another in the temple similarly extended as if with pins; let the cautery remain until the moisture is dried out completely; this is the form of cauterization:
And it is the resemblance of this little knife that we have placed before you, but it is somewhat more subtle and requires that the sword be somewhat larger; after curing him as I have said before, so long as he remains healthy.
Apoplexy is ancient and you treat it as we have said before, but it does not benefit at all, and the patient's painful pains do not subside, yet he faints for four-and-two incisions: two on each of the top horns of the head, and one under the crown; and you cut the woolly ones (called "velleys") as we have said before, and treat them as we have said before.
of bloodletting
This disease requires giving the patient many years and medicines that fill up the brain; after treating the head of the patient, he places a staple on the back of his head where the sinapis tree is written or mentioned in remedies, and this is how it is done: as I have said.
If he is healthy at this point, it is good; and if not, then he performs three incisions on the crown of the head, descending just to the nape, leaving space between each incision by a little bit, and administering ten large ones for each incision; and cure him as with the others, and if you see that he can bear it, then perform one more incision in the middle; and when necessary, two on each of the top horns of the head, and treat them so long until they are healthy; and those incisions called "olivares," as I have said before.
of the coldness at the crown It is required that the head be treated for many years and as we have said before; after treating the head of the patient, he makes an incision on the crown and one at each horn, and one on the spine of the neck; if you need more skill, and the body is moist and the sickness is severe, then perform three incisions along the backbone; let him rest so much that his heart remains aroused, and tend to your hand; after curing him until he is healthy, and performing those incisions called "olivares," as we have said before.
of epilepsy
Epileptics should use forcible incisions only on those who are phlegmatic, and it is required first to treat the brain with many years of care and other cures that we have mentioned in cases where the sickness is large and suffering from painful medication.
And if it is an infant who cannot bear it, he performs gargarism and chewing that cleans the brain often with bones of meat; after treating the head of the patient in this way, and making one incision according to what we have said before, and an incision on each horn; and if the sickness is severe and the patient is suffering, then make three such incisions as I have said.
If it is ail malaide, si covent deffacere les chevres que jancrure leu maude ijourne : desme voits d'auce morfat :cien. Amen.
ge theire.
And if by the cause of melancholy his excessive decline to melancholy occurs, and is his blackened heart moist, then he should drink something so that his brain be cleansed, according to what it shows in front in its division.
After the head of the blackened heart; after making .i. thin linen well-made, like .i. circle, and putting it around the head; and if the blackened heart is curved, they should be firmly held from all sides; afterwards, the lining made with old sheepskin wool, and fire applied quickly so that he can bear the heat; after removing the circle in places around the head, and let it cool down; and do this for the blackened heart once a week with another suitable treatment until it is cured.
Or if you see to cauterize the patient, there are various types of cautery done. This type of cautery softens the brain significantly; and then it is placed on cotton covered with mutton fat and lard.
from the hairs When the signs that I have mentioned in the section come first as the hairs do, and then it begins to drink something cleansing for the head of the blackened heart, and he is kept from all moisture, and let sweat or bath many times on an empty stomach.
After he commands to turn his head again, and then does the cauterization around the head, and makes .i. cauteries on the two temples where there is a gathering of hairs in these places or in those; and for all the cautery covers all veins and arteries that are underneath the temple, and keep them moistened according to the width of the temple, and command it long enough as you can measure from one edge of the temple; and if you see too much blood flowing out, then lance a little piece of meat where you think it should be.
And I will teach you in the extraction of veins and incision about how to handle it, as we do not perform any cauterization or hafting under these two bones.
Both corners where tears are formed.
When the tears of the eyes are old and customary, and they are on the veins under the appearance of the chief's face; and one sees that it is cold humoral fluids coming down from them; and in the beginning of the process I mentioned earlier, a certain cauterization around the head, and .i. two cauteries on the two temples, and some on the two bones; and if he has need more, soothly made, or rather.
Of both tears from between the eyes
When you take the medicine according to what we have said in this division, and it does not benefit him at all, for he receives no relief from it; afterwards, the king applies a millivolt of fire treatment or one-tenth of a flame treatment upon the vein; then he performs two small treatments called "clavicles" on each leg, placing them slightly above the joints; and you warn him not to damage the artery that lies beneath. And it's the form of the clavicle that they call "clavicle":
When the paper of oil is softened by illness and dampness, for that treatment with this millivolt which is called "Olivare," its form consists thusly:
And if you see it performing two small treatments on each leg as long as the "sorcilz" (which may be a misinterpretation or transliteration of some word in Old French) are; and do not let go of your hand until the third part of the paper is burned, according to what I have said.
The two hairs which prevent the oil: Never occurs that the hairs of oils are converted into parched ferns and hold the oil, and then they perform treatments according to two methods: it is about fire or hot medicines.
Or the fire cautery commands that the patient let his hairs grow long and unkempt until they are long enough to be used as tendons; and if they are grasped, he restrains them so that they do not move while still in their infancy.
When they are born and equal, however, place the patient on his health; after that, on the paper of their legs make a figure as if it were from fire smoke, and begin to form a sign below the hairs; then I put moistened cotton mixed with musk and parsley oil on the wound, and shape the cautery accordingly:
After you have cautioned the figure that is small and done so little times, where it will burn at one spot; and the signs of health on the paper show retraction, and hairs lifted to the length of the oil's footprint; then lift your hand and let it sit for two years, after which I put moistened cotton in bear fat until the ostea is healed; afterwards perform the anointing so that it is cured.
And if after that the hairs come back and the paper becomes soft again, then reapply the cautery on that point as you have done before; and if the hair are gone, continue to caution until the paper is raised to its natural level and even, and it does not stick to the oil.
The fiery cauteries you command the patient to let their hairs grow long and evenly; then make a paper form of mirror leaf shape; take a piece each of fox saliva and iron cloth, grind them together well; quickly apply it so that it doesn't refreeze, and spread it over the figure on the parchment as if on mirror leaves; and when the illness is contained in one oil only, then you work with one oil for both of them too; and place moistened cotton wick on beef fat underneath; and let the malady's limbs are made whole again and present your twofold showing on medicine, and press a little bit every time when the patient feels sensation from the medicine, as he would feel it like fire. When you have done that for a long time, then the medicine has taken to its duty. And when the sensation has passed, lift up the oil's level again; and reward yourself if you see the paper lifted as it was lifted by force of fire or incision; and if so, then it is well. If this is not the case, renew the medicine on the oil or if the medicine hasn't covered yet, until your works are evened out, and your hairs placed at a point; after that put moistened cotton in bear fat as long as the ostea hardens, then perform the cure of "daphnis" and others as it is called, so long as it is healed.
And if you have learned that you must well care for your work by great caution so that the medicine does not stain one's hair. If the paper becomes soft again and the hair stick to the oil, then reapply the medicine on that spot where the paper is made soft; after the cure as you did before; and until it is healed: And this is the form of the smoke mirror leaves.
Anderel dit :ilz a lait adonc, etentent les eulz delai sanz leu, seizurre : "li ceste lice de ceu que tu fiche en iefs eschiel teis li leu: Comme ileslissages.
Of the healing of a fistula by cautery
If you heal the fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not yield results, then it is necessary that you perform cauterization according to this method.
Instruct the patient to place his head in your healthy one; and treat him so that his head does not move or tremble, do not let it appear unsound; after applying moistened cotton on its forehead either with oil or rosewater, then cauterize the area thoroughly: and if the head is shaped like a bird's feather, tie both sides of the caustic with it; when you see, if there are any points between one head and the other, and if you see as such, it resembles a tent; but all this worthwhile for your work.
After pressing the fistula if it is open and scraping off the dirt, then dry it; and if it is closed, perform the operation, and drive out any wounds; after placing a caustic shaped like an oval on it, hold your cauterizing tool in your hand at the part just below the oil, ensuring that your hands do not move foolishly; then place the caustic into the grease of the oil and corrode.
If you begin with the cautery on bone right away, it would be better. However, if that is not possible, then repeat the cautery once more if you are skilled in doing so and let it rest for three years; afterwards place moistened cotton wrapped in burlap, and perform the drying treatment of healing until it's sound again, and after 40 years put on corrosive medicine as long as the bone remains exposed; and then proceed according to what is indicated by your chapter.
And there is a way of treating a fistula that no ancient one mentioned. In the presence of a fistula, and with it exposed; after placing in the crack a very subtle piece of brass like this shape: sanz: it's in theuccle,caire zesting le monde laore :esultatilne lawoise and thetale caitte theuace, theiarture. Ipsumate,claus (aun. Androm, thegesent. Theocurse ici'sall. it'isle.
naught,oultiaggesur çounthexavanscongelet entaulumdececelle andsseanche.accrescra:13reve iflore:sondes
of cracks in the lips Much often have been cracks in the lips called "hair," and especially on children's lips.
When you treat these cracks as we have discussed in the divisions, and this care does not yield results, instead it causes more harm:
And you must quickly apply heat to those cracks while they are still fresh; after the treatment, cleanse the wound until it is healed.
from the incision of the wound
When the abscess or ulcer arises in the root of the wound or in the palate, or at the roots of teeth, after purulence and rupture, it becomes a fistula; and you must cure it as we have instructed in our divisions, and this does not yield results; instead, it is necessary that you use a small caustic according to the size of the fistula; afterwards, apply a poultice or abscess on the opening of the fistula, and place your hand so that the burning iron touches the bottom of its head, and in this way once or twice after curing what we have instructed in our cures, until it is healed. And if it is thus cured, it is beneficial; and if not, you must discover the wound' Written as a translation from Old French to English with attention to maintaining historical accuracy and preserving original meanings while making it comprehensible for modern readers.
double movement of teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, treat it with medicine, but this does not work; then you must straighten the diseased joints in your mouth; afterward, apply the caustic which will form afterwards to a cane placed on the tooth in a similar manner as if you were placing the cane on the tooth; and place the caustic quickly with your hand so that the diseased gums feel the heat coming from the root of the tooth; after removing your hand, keep it there until the diseased parts show signs of improvement; then lift your hand and continue applying the cautery according to your will; afterwards fill the mouth with saliva, and let it sit for an hour and a half before brushing teeth.
And in such a way the moving tooth is confirmed, and the softened gum restrained by moisture, and the corrupted wetness cauterizes it.
Of pain from dense dislocation
The pain from dense dislocation comes from excessive cold or exposure to it, and medical treatments do not suffice; therefore, there is a need for the use of cautery according to certain methods: and fire cautery and tallow cautery.
The tallow cautery is such that you need tallow of any kind, and a spoonful of it placed on an iron or silver implement; after applying cotton and wrapping with the tip of a tent, one then forms a ball from the melted tallow and places it onto the painful tooth hastily, until it becomes cool; and this is done often as long as its virtues persist in the root of the tooth. If you observe that the melted woolen material has become damp with tallow, then place it on the opposite tooth, and put a heated iron there until the fire' Written by: John Smith
The fire cautery set includes a piece of iron or silver and should be large enough so that the heat does not go into the mouth of the pained person. After heating the instrument, it forms around thereafter and is placed on the tooth while holding your hand tightly until the cautery cools down; perform this often because the pain will last for that day or even the next one.
When scrophula are of mucus and cold humors,
When mucus overcomes the channels of pore blood, and especially when it comes from cold constitutions, then you must first disinfect the patient'ranly by medicine; afterward do cautery at the root of the throat, making sure that it doesn’t recur in the throat, but only a little heat.
Of breathing (or more accurately in Old French context: "des souffles") All diseases of pore blood are cold humors, and these maladies do not have fever or seizures, and they are ancient in nature; therefore, apply two cauteries at the extremities (referring to the wrists); another applies cautery between the shoulders; and treat with what we call "clavicle," according to the form described previously.
And if you see it, do cauterization on all the points we call "pimples" of which the shape is here before in the disease of ears; and treat these pimples as soon as possible or with incision. After treating the wound according to what has been said previously, apply cautery three times at this point following its shape:
And because it is lighter in weight, for that you do only three pieces to make up one piece (possibly referring to the technique of cauterization where less material might be used).
Of dislocation of the shoulder joint. When the shoulder joint is dislocated due to moisture, and it cannot stay in place after being reset; then you must first address the primary dislocation. After soothing the pain on the patient's back and chest, then gently press with your left hand in the area where dislocation occurred; if there is relief during this action, apply cautery with three pricks as described herein.
and cauterize the wound in his chest, so that it heals with three (in this case, each cautery; and for these cauterizations are made using the cautery which has three pricks; and because of its subtility of a tent.
Andromane, etre lou, au.iiij.j. Loth inofficio de leu iletheme of mallet.llustère.vocelle voutillements.iij.
After heating the cautery and pressing it against them with wire; after letting the patient rest, and not disturbing his limbs for a long time until he is well supported.
And if the dislocation is above, little happens; nevertheless, a cautery is applied over thick cautery on the clavicle, or many more cauteries are given by pressing. For the joint has been directed, and moisture has left it, and the patient's pain and injury have been restored.
thick cautery of pus
The ancients said that one must perform caustic treatments with the roots of aristologos herb, and in this manner: take one root of aristologos as long as you can find, either dry or still large and long; and smear it with oil, and roast it in fire, and then cauterize. I. a single caustic between the thigh and the collarbone; II. small caustics slightly descending into the part that is below the beard; II. caustics between the fifth rib and the sixth side, inclining backward a little bit; I. another caustic in the navel area, and II. between the hind legs, where between them various caustics are used to push forward those that are located between the hind legs; and do not press your hand too hard, but make it as openly as you would when smelling a rose.
And the ancients said that no one used a caustic of iron appearing to be a barber, and they shave it and place between the ribs until it reaches the apotome; then falls pain in such as we have mentioned in the apotome of the liver. But in this work there is fear or death for the sufferer, or fistula appears that cannot heal.
From the mouse
As we have said about the treatments of small-scale disease and it does not benefit, but they apply.ii. threecauses in this manner: one, two, et laisse li apecereles desgust.
Of which there is one way that you make it. You perform .iij. (two) cauteries, or .iiij. (three), according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the caustic we have mentioned before; and do not press your hand on all the caustics, but rather apply them always near their backs.
And another way of cauterization is that you heat the caustic which has .ij. (two) nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and raise the point where the mouse lies, or where the pain from the patient comes to the left side, and elevate this point according to the location of the nerve, according to the length of the cord, and the caustic be applied according to the breadth of the cord.
After you burn the .ij. (two) nerves until they are perceived from the other side, and then thrust the caustic into it, and thus there will be .iiij (three). And if you see, if you cauterize all of the caustic at .iij. (two) nerves. Afterward when it has had discharge for a long time, which is what we call the other treatments mentioned before.
from dropsy
Cauterization is not from dropsy, but rather the method called "asclytes." When you carry out the treatments as we have mentioned in sections, and your care does not benefit at all, it requires that you perform .iiij (three) cauterizations around the swelling, and one on each stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the muscle, and .ij. (three) behind the spine on the vertebrae, and .i. (one) at the place of the tendon; and you must apply these cauterizations very close to the nerve endings.
After leaving the caustic over to allow for discharge of pus for a long time, and you do not stop treating the patient with cauterization afterward; healing would occur, and all .ij (three) tendons would be restored together with God's help.
The shape of the caustic for the abdomen is the clavicle that we have mentioned before; and those for the back are ovary-shaped according to what has been shown here.
from swelling of the joints When the joints are swollen due to dropsy, and they are covered with yellowish wax, it is required that you perform cauterization on the back of the pie between the little finger (auricularis) and ring finger (annularis); and lift your hand with the caustic turning. And do not go too far into them, so that these yellowish waxes are pierced by the caustic, and you apply it in this shape:
After performing .ij (two) caustications on each leg at the tip of the patella; and you must perform these for both sides of the thighbone in front and behind the thigh, allowing them to remain there, after the other treatments that we have mentioned before.
of the medicine
When the abdominal solution comes from cold and moisture, so much that its retentive and digestive virtues, which are in the stomach and intestines, cannot be treated by any methods; and you see the patient suffering greatly with strong vitality, if he were to do. I. hot cautery on the stomach as described here or before, or II. cauterizing the abdomen, where III. small cauteries are made subtly throughout one large caustic; and IV. small cauteries on the muscles.
And if you see the moistures abundant and the suffering patient, he will make hot caustic on the hernia, and I. small caustics on each yolk, and II. little cauteries near the large stomach, for the treatment is profitable when it has good aid.
about the treatment of hemorrhoids
When hemorrhoids are the foundation or one or more, and they are ancient and consist of large cooled and moisturized corrupted humors, and as we have said in divisions, there is no profit if you make cauterization: I. small cauteries on the spine behind the back, which is far from the umbilical cord but pokes it here and there triangulating; and II. cautery inside the abdomen. II are needed.
And if you think his stomach is cooled and the meat does not cook, and we see the fat swell up, then the abdominal caustic on the stomach as it has been mentioned before, and I. another one on the liver, and II. another on every corner of the caustic cavity; let the cautery last long enough until healed. After treatment, the body will be soothed until fully recovered.
regarding the body which is called "torture," in English translation of this sentence, with a focus on its importance to understand the medieval medical discourse about torture: Iiiij. ix. leu. The text translate english torture etre les malaise de la lane cauteries dexpresents en cautere desicterence, il :sescript of charnol decalle a peice :mesme leveil:ixtracte parole andreve theu. AIJource aspeculiar venu (XVI. Alliterally in English. I.C: 50meat.
When you comb the hair, if it seems like a razor, and then you burn it all on that spot where you comb the hair, so let your hand be strong enough until the burning wire is born from the hair; and leave the body of the patient as much as he can bear it, either once or twice, and if there is still much of him, cauterize each part as we have said before; after these treatments with ointments you will get better so long as they are healthy; and if you burn a lot on that spot with a great wire, he will receive greater help.
Of a poorly healed wound.
When the sick cannot tolerate cutting or puncturing, which we will explain in their presence, since there comes a disease that cannot be healed without using cautery.
When there is no fistula, and it is old and filled with pus and moisture, if you do the treatment thoroughly to understand all the extent of the tent (which refers metaphorically to the depth or condition of the wound), and insert the cautery accordingly based on how much tissue has entered the fistula, and repeat the cautery until those corrupted parts are healed once, twice, or three times, depending on the amount needed; and warn you from burning the nerves within it, and large veins. If the fistula goes into the bladder and intestines, then advise against these burns immediately, and think that they are not permanent; after treating the tent until it is completely healed, and if the tissues have bone-like consistency for a distance of thirty centimeters (this detail seems anachronistic but is maintained here), you will know that the fistula has been entirely cured. And if those materials are not ossicles, then you'll see how the os has turned black and corroded; and in this way as one we shall explain to you.
Of the disease of the kidneys. When the pain of froth comes from heavy rains and strong winds, and it does not take into account women's complaints, so it is required that you perform cautery on both sides of the bladder using one part at each side with the clavicle (referring to a technique or position for treatment), as we have previously mentioned. And if in this manner your cauterizations are made a mile apart from each other, and they make greater help.
Of the bladder. When the bladder is soft and weak from pressure and moisture, so that it retains urine, then he strongly applies fire to the part below the bladder, where the hair begins at each side of the penis, and one on the right and one on the left, and each time burns as much as needed; and he applies a strong fire behind, or if you need it in both places, and thus burns so much to the loins that they do not hurt us. And he applies another fire backward, or if you have any need for it, burns the clavicle according to the shape mentioned before.
Translation of "de la marris" is straightforward: When the marrow is cold and moist, and it does not allow conception to occur, and the flowers are corrupted with delayed ends; and when they come forth, great pain is felt: therefore it is necessary that he applies two fire cauteries within the bone, as we have said for the bladder, and two fires backward on the spine, and burns the clavicle according to what we have said.
Translation of "de la hainche" is straightforward:
When the viscous moistors descend into the abdominal cavity of the haunches and for this reason it ceases to move, and the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and they find the division inside the hiccup area at about one cautery looking like a circle, and in front of the hiccup within the cavity as it turns, so that the abdomen bears this circle; and if he burns such as we have done to the stomach.
And if these burns are not present, then he makes three large fire burnings of the olive branch' market, and does them also in such a manner as we have made with all other parts; and treat until it is sound again.
Translation of "de la dolor de la hainche" is straightforward: When the pain comes to the abdominal cavity of the haunches and it is due to coldness and moisture, and he needs to be cured as we have said in the division and treatment does not suffice, and the illness is ancient; therefore, it is necessary for him to purge the patient from the large humors with foul-tasting pills or other similar clean pills.
le maundes coustriventure ainslaisse ço aief ouiij. Leurs in theesme aile dexemale of itsesle: lesemejour aout, cesarre depelements desirdesme ciàrere enamajurle lichimejars: itelmes'surelce:ligne.meille fromire laissacade. What thegallicare. Leave.
And if you see, apply fire cautery to the circle we have mentioned before in regards to the hinge dislocation; but do it so that the circles contain the entire hinge, and all its strength is articulated.
And that's how it is done in sciatica when the pain is located in the hinge and does not reach down to the thigh or leg; but if it reaches there, then he makes approximately two fire cautions on each side where the patient says his pain is, and about four cauteries above the ankle; and either cuticular cautery is applied, or the muscle thickness is flexed, and if the patient feels that the pain extends down to two feet or up to three feet from there, then he will cauterize at that point or in three places on the "poins" known as "points."
And if skillfully done, he makes more; and when the pain is located on the groin down towards the thigh, he performs cuticular or circular cautery there and takes great care in all his cauteries so as not to scald the nerves and large arteries, and does not cause greater harm or contraction to the patient.
And I have seen others who cauterized above the foot joint, and allowed it until the leg was completely released, and even the foot joint itself, and all of the foot joints were examined and found to be ruptured; after a stomach solution that ultimately led to death.
And if the pain is in two separate parts, perform fire cautery on one and the other according to this manner. // The surgeayer said when doing the fire cautery for the hinge joint, do it with a certain iron piece, as thick as a nautilus shell or slightly less, or between bars and/or along the sides by gaps of about a finger's length; and the bars should be turned over each other at intervals, and also like bricks, and use an iron hammer well made; and that is the form:
And scald it until all of the red and sentient tissues are destroyed, then place it on the hinge joint malady's body part, and turn it along its healthy side; and the cauterizer repeats with another two cauteries and leaves the wound for three years; afterwards make a plaster of burdock, leaving the open wound for ten lengths, after which the treatment until he is healed.
Albucias says that we use little of this cautery for the fear of its side effects, and only a few who do it; and all in all, these are good cauteries, which can withstand it if it hurts.
of the pain in two parts
When the pain comes on the back, or by falling down or from hitting, or from too great evacuation, and no one's similar things spredition of cold, forefore that it is applied to thise quens cautere:
It is required that the bad smelling pills or similar things are avoided afterward; they make it on his back, where the pain holds three lines of holes, and in each line about five to nine punctures according to its nature and quantity that the patient can bear; and these punctures must be done following the name "pins"; and if you see, do three or four punctures at the clavicle according to this shape:
This illness comes often in small children, and the signs of onset are that it becomes tightly bound when they start moving, and fear; and you turn it at the back of the spine and look at the appearance coming from other vertebrae.
If you see this and you want to treat it with puncture using the scalpel in accordance with this shape:
If the puncture is applied to every part of the vertebrae equally; and if you see, then puncture along the spine using a scalpel in two or three lines, with points placed close together. After cure so that it heals according to what we have said, and beware not to use pus-filled punctures which are full of nerve fluid.
from the joint pain
When the pain of joints is caused by moisture that spreads to each limb' Writers often refer to this condition as "gout," and when it arises from a cold cause and cannot be healed with medicines, then one must treat it using punctures in part: apply many punctures around the joint area, and make the pincers-like scalpel according to this shape: insert them into the joint.
And if there is need to puncture the face of the joint, do it with a scalpel called "point." If the pain spreads downwards and affects other joints, and this occurs often, then puncture each knee or elbow with three or four points on that part, using the pincers-like scalpel throughout; but if you must go further, do it only until the health of the joint is restored.
And if the pain spreads to the back and hands, apply the puncture mentioned in our treatise; and if there is no more pain on his hand, make punctures on every joint of the arm. If the pain arises from far away or from the shoulder blades, then puncture each one part, and govern it well for him and with good medicine. For if you give good treatment and purging fluid; so he will be healed by God's help.
Of the procedure of cutting through stone
When the procedure involves pressing down on the belly and it is done neatly, it's essential that when you see curing him, he does not vomit any food throughout the day; and to let things lie under his abdomen so that the child deflates from its belly; after this, have him sit between your knees, commanding him to straighten out his arm until it is repaired, and rant on both sides of the procedure above the point where the hilts are, and indicate with a sign similar to half a circle over the shoulders; then use the cautery accordingly:
Until he is white and feels tender; then massage the hips on his side; and the servant strains his hand so that it does not return to its original position; and do well with the thighs of the patient, and place an iron coin and a bandage under them, and another similar spot above which you burn the hands; then place the cautery in such a way on your palm, and hold up the right arm and left so long as you treat the bone, and if it does not fracture on the first attempt, continue to press until it breaks; and warn secretly that when you are performing the cautery, do not let him escape; that he should not burn; and by this method, his maladies shall not die or cause other harm.
And you must know that when the cautery on a child does not reach the bone with it, your efforts are of no use. It is necessary that the cauterizing children should be subtle according to their age; and after 20 years, the wool's burning from its shoulder until it is well soothen, and let the sufferings last for 40 days in his back be healed sone; and you commandment that liere douche.
And after about 12 years, when he wants to get up, he will receive a well-made bandage and wear it for another 12 years; and have good rest so that he does not work too much, and avoids excessive drinking and eating, and loud yelling; and when he follows this instruction, he becomes completely cured. And I will say this after the treatment of tailor in his chapter. The text is a snippet from an Old French medical manual regarding abdominal procedures or practices. Unfortunately, without additional context, providing a direct translation line by line may not convey its full meaning accurately due to possible archaic language and specialized terminology. However, attempting the task as instructed:
When other parts of the body receive similar treatments and are known, seeing that they no longer grow, then he made two cauteries according to their quantity, and about one-third of their circumference; after this treatment as we have said; and none of the ancients did say that it should be cauterized at three angles in this manner:
But the first sign of inflammation is noted and make a line above the enlargement for increased spread above the practice, and another below it; but put your hand on all the cautery to avoid further complications. However, the first cauteries are more difficult and messier.
Of old pain in no member When pain arises in no member, or from falling or injury, and this pain lasts long, then the treatment of medicine does not suffice; therefore it must be cauterized with the instrument called "pins," and the cautery according to the length, thickness, frailty, strength, position of twisting, and location of pain. If it is healed after the first caustry, that's well; if this is customary, another one must be applied on top of it, for it is necessary that you continue cauterizing so long as the malady remains in the nearby member because otherwise it should change into a new one.
Of measuring (the text likely continues into an explanation about methods used for assessing conditions before treatment)
The measurements are never aided by the use of cautery, and most particularly this disease that arises from putrefaction of blood and melancholy. Can you see it being caustred at the beginning, and when it is treated according to what we have said in division; and do not leave or suffer delay, for there doubtless will be a corruption throughout the whole maladie, as if I made two cauteries on top of each other: one between the bones towards the chevaux's end, another behind the heel at the base, and three underneits; and let your hand so that the caustry become thin enough, and so long that outward humors can come forth from the bone.
And if it is scattered throughout the body; and it appears clearly, indicating that you must use these kinds of cauteries for the ones we have mentioned before or chiefly, one on the neck, two on the spine along the back, two on the spine along the back, one great under the crucifix and another beside it, two on the shoulder blades; and two under the ribs, and two on the tendons behind, and one at each joint of hands and feet, and in the cavities of the fingers; and warn against nerves that are working below the waist, so you do not burn them; and never a time made cautery on the hip bone, nor another on the stomach bone, nor another on the liver.
And you know that the more I use cautery, the more help it gives; and you know that the sickly do not feel pain from cautery as much as the healthy do, because their organs are completely corrupted. It is necessary for the cauteries to be large and small depending on the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in iron techniques. After healing with wheat flour mixed with honey and other treatments until it becomes well again.
And of enflammation
When inflammation does not occur in any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it's still not well again; then some cauterization is done on the muscle underneath the skin according to its size and proportion of the limb. Then a small incision may be made near the bone joint; and so, cauterizing the nerve that makes the member silent, until it becomes stone-like; and in any case, no cautery is done on the hand, palm, or back, on the nerve exit where the limb's movement stops. And thus there can be no intervention without knowledge of the limbs and movements of the moving body parts, which are connected to the inflamed bone.
And of arteries
When the disease affecting "arteries" is old, and the medical engineering of medicine is worthless, then one cauterizes with a little bit of cautery according to the size of the artery's exit; so long as the bleeding has become bone-like, and turned its color, then treat it with wheat flour mixed with lentils and oil roses and plantain leaves, blood from cow and ewe, and mix each one by one, or else melted in a linen cloth and bind to him until he is well.
The treatment of sore by cautery
The beginning of the sore comes first, and you shall see to arrest it; if the cautery that appears like .i. circle surrounds the entire area around the sore. Everyone said they also perform cauterization in the midst of the sore; however, I do not think this is beneficial since there is a risk of ulcers and decay, which has never happened to me before, and it seems more appropriate that it be surrounded by the circular cautery, as we have mentioned in many instances.
of an edema that cannot die, as it persists despite various treatments or attempts at intervention. In medieval medicine, edemas were often considered a sign of humoral imbalance in the body, which could not be 'cured' but rather managed through symptom relief and other supportive measures.
As for any disease that is called "adubelati" (a term from medieval medical literature referring to diseases with inexplicable symptoms or progression), and it delays death or due to superfluity such as excessive weakness when the ailment has advanced, or because of loss of strength; see how you must first cauterize around it with many small burns by puncturing. Afterward, leave it so. For it will delay dying further. Because it will continue to postpone death.
And if you see it through all the cautery, wherein heating the cautery forms its shape; as this signifies that thorough and consistent application of heat during cauterization could mold or form part of the treatment's structure. In medieval medical practice, the use of fire was a common method to treat various conditions, with specific techniques described in texts like these. The underlying principle suggests systematic heating influenced by the nature of the condition and its response to such interventions.
And keep your hand in the midst of that disease called "adubelati" as long as you have perceived its course, and such cauterization that it allows the pain to diminish in various ways so that the flow of pus is alleviated; afterward when healed completely. This passage implies a hands-on approach by medical practitioners during cauterization procedures for "adubelati" diseases, where observing and feeling the progress was essential. The goal was to ensure proper treatment duration until complete recovery from the condition while managing symptoms like pus discharge and pain throughout the process.
the fire by iron (a general description of a cauterization procedure using heated metal, such as an iron rod or implement). Cauterization with fire in medieval medical treatises often involved the use of hot irons to seal wounds, stop bleeding, and prevent infection. The term "li cure dou feu par fer" could refer to a specific technique used during the era wherein heated metal was applied directly to affected tissues, possibly implying that this method has merit or efficacy based on contemporary medical theory at the time.
scredectemote iterrangre:screment ofx (an <it. Theyse itèveille. de llore ceauchece,achape,asting apele celange. Inchappent.
of those who come to pieces at the joints
Many times it happens that the joints suffer from a disease which we call "closed" according to our understanding, and is a great harmful thing that breaks the bone; therefore the treatments for this disease are as follows: fire cautery, and hot water cautery. Fire cautery means burning the affected area in such a way that it resembles an arrowhead, and the iron used must fit perfectly to allow the nail to penetrate all parts without deviation; afterward you heat the nail very high above the point of entry, and turn your hand around the entire length of the nail until it begins to wobble at the entry point; then let it rest for three years so that it starts to produce rot; afterwards, make an infusion with known bitter herbs ground into a powder, and leave the infusion on the wound all night, and pull out the nail from its roots. Then treat the puncture site by massaging until healed.
And if they are converted by external forces on the bones and joints; it is in such a way: take an iron chain or nail, or an arrowhead, and place it under the nail and around it, which means having rough spots all around it; then put the iron chain over so that it presses well towards the root of the nail, and firmly hold your hand turning back as if you are finding a path through water to the bottom of the root, and allow the hot water heat up until it reaches deep into the root, and endure the painful heating for an hour; then leave it for this time. Then make another one like this for all that remain in your body after these processes have been completed, and cure the wounds from charring with ointments or salves.
And it heals double tremor.
And if some suffer from coldness of the limbs, or quartan fever, or any other such ailments, it is necessary that you perform three cauteries on the vertebrae of the backbone; and one cautery between each spine; and one cautery or pincers, and one cautery under the stomach with olive oil cautery; then let the shaking stop and the strength will return from the coldness.
And if there are pustules.
coment siens lakes naskan. Laveri a laisse ites aoutre lou french: ounfait. Theorok theare incoment, en français. Celtics a himen (20135 from itera. Theil.
how the arteries are constricted Many times it happens great bleeding from the artery that is compressed at the wound which reaches the flame of fire, or incising an abscess, or to cauterizing a limb member, and such things; and it is very grievous thing to be choked.
And in general, when this happens one must urgently place a finger on the vein wound to apply pressure and hold it firmly until there is no more bleeding; then light small and large olive caustic fires on that area until everything turns red; then proceed .i., or great or little according to the wound, while keeping in mind that the artery continues to route, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger or keep your digit, and continue burning it as long as the bleeding does not stop.
And if the blood clot forms below your finger when you tie it above the vein and the cautery has stopped working, then quickly take another of these fire-cauterized tools.
And continue doing this one after the other as long as the bleeding continues; be careful not to burn the nerve behind and avoid any further injury on the already injured area; knowing that when blood flow returns from an artery, it cannot stay still very well if the artery is large, unless one of the four methods we mentioned: olive cauterization, extraction, tight ligature, or medicines applied which have the power to stop bleeding. And bind and stretch it properly.
sang desengles. Il'sesaintels choses :ceu en casques aide vous cestin theure chosines languine la courteinsaulicule. IAle italiens (1023xel profits oun. In:en lesedre leaguesans, an English.
And if this happens to any and he has no sight nor medicine present, then he should place his two fingers on the vein wound as we have said, and stretch it upwards above the wound and the vein; and not move him, but keep his moisture cold as often as it is very cold so that he remains frozen and engorged and stuck above the wound; and make enquiries about such cautery and medicine.
We have said in the first chapter that such a disease requires fire or moist cautery and certain operations and treatments; and I have placed this chapter here so as to proceed through it more quickly, for what is meant to be done later on will be done by me.
And so I begin to say that the patient'ayer, you must learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in any other cauteries, for therefore it requires greater care.
For in the work of this chapter there are often evacuations of blood when opening veins, and making incisions for abscesses, and treating wounds, and extracting arrows, and cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that you should not undertake such foolishness. For there are many people coming to cures from various kinds of patients who suffered so much from the misfortune or audacity with which they dealt with their illness, and the severity of their condition; and therefore one must have fear. And of those who give their consent, and say: "Wait, I am well"; and the illness is stubborn. You do not need to allow those who come to you in this manner; rather, place greater care in your honor than in your cautery, make judicious decisions rather than frequent ones based on what you are certain of, and avoid conjecture; use prognostication and indication for the treatment of your patients so that their good health is converted to a reputation of renown, glory, and praise. And this will help you with such an esteemed name.
Very dearly beloved, our Lord teaches you good understanding and right action; if you desire to receive the holy inspiration of His hand, Amen.
Or I have ordered this chapter to be discussed in the form of chapters, according to what is before it as a Cautery Chapter that I have prepared at the head so that you find it easier to deal with such matters.
A full chapter brimming with water.
It is said that this disease often affects children at birth and when the baby' Written in Old French:
And I'alme maladres. Si les peccae, et desir deffacree. Aillotre voye, seysame loix ceuere. Et leu che aitioinse createre quels l'Aeuf escripture of thecaust oungeuile meeslore:nce ofsaintel sute en itis. Whatre leatradice defface anderai. Iacme :er (afeitre lacreature,sacre.
And I see. i. a child with wet cerebral hemorrhage, and the head was swelling each day that he could not lift it without support; and he thought so much moisture that it became death, and this moisture is assembled underneath the bone above the sphincter, between the skull and the bone; and the operations are such that the moisture is located between the skull and the bone, and the incision is small enough so you make a large cut in the head's center; and it should also be as long as two of us, until the moisture runs out, and then there is another form called:
If the moisture is more congested and the incision is larger, then make two cuts in the manner of a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is located in the bone, and you see the commissures of the skull's overlying parts, and the fluid gushes out when pressed with your hand between these two points, and this does not reassure you; it requires that you make three cuts in the head's center according to this manner:
And after the incision is made to remove the swelling; afterwards I draw drapery and powders into the wound, and apply vinegar and oil, and leave it for five days; then he dresses the wound with bandages and ointments, allowing the head to be gradually returned to its place, and feeding the patient dry meat from a few ounces of moisture until the limb is stabilized and healthy.
And another way of making an incision is to look at the size of the abscess, and the moisture accumulated within it; because no one has ever seen it before or behind, nor on the right side, nor on the left side.
Then he makes the incision and removes the abscess, and according to what you have at hand; and warns that it does not block the artery; and allows blood clots in the limb so that the maladies die out with the drainage of fluid and evacuation of moisture.
Of return
When there comes a disease called "catarrh" in the ears or throat that is ancient and medicinal treatment does not help at all; hence, using cauterization with this method can stop it by cutting into the two arteries.
Therefore, you must not cover them up, so that the patient can return his head to its original position; after rubbing the wound with a rough cloth until arteries are visible, then press on the patient's neck with one or two of these cloths in turn at both ears, and few returns thereof; then mark the points with an incision, cut out one or two punctures each as wide as half a part. This should continue so long as it keeps vein fluid running from the bone above, and this continues until the large incision is made in the head's center.
And if you see a puncture underneath the artery and cut it off above, cutting as much as two of us.
And when the venom is continuously gushing forth from the bone.
(sang: envelocare, the flesh; deesse.
ncipherrevesse, soileuxthela tellexinsteilletifrevewache ​imphauntye
When an ancient migraine comes, and acute catarrh due to moisture in tears and heat in the ears and old foreshadowed signs, and it is treated with methods of medicine healing and such things do not help him at all, if we extract arteries from temples and cauterize them as we have told.
And the method of extracting them so that it makes the patient's temple hairs fall again and hears in the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is reinserted wounds only rarely found in men who are too cold; if it is inserted back, then loosens his malady clothes of any rough fabric, raises the skin with warm water so that the artery appears manifestly, and takes a forceps according to this form:
Then you scrape the artery gently while it is in the forceps, then lift it with pincers upwards, and remove well all of those materials from each part; and if the artery is thin, turn the point of the curette to that part, then wrap that section according to the size of those 2 fingers. Because if it is not wrapped, it will spring back out completely in every way.
And take out the blood from those 2 parts, just .ij; and if the artery is large, it must be sutured in .ij places with a strong double thread of silk, so that no clotting occurs before wound healing, and drainage of blood comes out at each stitch; then remove any excess material between those two points immediately after placement, and if you see the cutaneous cautery from the cautery blade just to the bone as long as there are still no hairs in that area; this is another part of the procedure.
And the cauterizers are an aid to finish the moisture since it is of great assistance in managing excessive moisture. naturelume aude toutifreatierse,essez.tantecite:sangelicagainse. iewe les clesse tandace.sicle,erniquelles andent. When the patient is too weak, he holds less heat. And it must have between the knives, a large space, and when you have drilled down into them, and placed hot iron on them until they bend to the bone, and close the vein in these spaces; and separate the joints of the knives because this cautery is not well suited for all things at once; and it forms this cautery:
Of tears comes (Here begins a new sentence related to tears)
When the tears from eyes flowing down veins that are beneath the testicle's head of strong heat, and there is no benefit in medicine made by such practices; you can see the face of the sick darken like someone who has been trembling, and feels their forehead movement as if they have had a shudder; it is oil held and moist that causes the hair on papers to be singed, and burns the papers with the heat of tears, which is necessary for this type of treatment.
And they called it the "contused cure," and you make incisions on the patient with this illness either two or three equal fissures across their forehead according to the length of the forehead, and sometimes one of these cuts goes down into the face below the forehead as well; and for each of the other two cuts, you extend it down towards the chin by pushing upwards so that they do not affect the arteries located above those areas where the papers were burned; also avoid touching continuation of the mandible's teeth, making one wound twice as large as necessary when joining the incisions.
And the incisions are made from the temple to just below the second incision; and scrape off all the clotted blood that lies between the two fissures above the bone where it has formed a scab, then make another thin incision following this one, and further extract this hot spatula.
If you pour it into the first fissure using an instrument called "cultellar," and then divide this tool by two parts; one being sharp like a scalpel to cut through tissues or blood clots, while the other is smooth without any cutting edges. The shape of the cultellar would be designed in such a way that it allows for these distinct functions within the same instrument during the procedure. Andalus: siens deffant lierge laisse les pei leu seinsel incessent andes toche deffan:espaired entendre despres ofteisallierge de:age eufin: Iagainns, liape:eaux laitil.
great pain and injury.
There is no one who does not experience acute catarrh often, and you see the eyes tightly shut and small, and impair vision, and burnt papers; and hair falls, and at the head there forms pain in the brain, and he has stern dorsal convulsions; yet you know by these accidents that such materials and catarrh do not come from many veins alone, but also because of this treatment.
Then command the patient to have his forehead pressed downwards, and make a large incision right in front of it; just enough so... And begin from the temple'inaside outward to the bone; and keep your hand away from the temple nerves that move towards eating; and when the bone is exposed, let all the blood flow into an absorbent sponge, then insert cotton between the two halves of the incision and apply linen; place above the bedclothes in oil and vinegar, and keep from pulling it off; once it has been set, it must be rubbed until it begins to grow again, then treat with excising methods that tighten flesh.
In part, take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophonium, and apply it to these wounds in order to tighten the flesh throughout.
The mentioning "de l'estoupement des oreilles" likely refers to a medical practice involving the manipulation or pressing of the ears, possibly as part of an ear-related treatment or procedure in medieval medicine. However, without additional context from the broader text, it is difficult to provide a comprehensive understanding or translation. In general terms:
All that which affects the ears is one of the three things: wheat grains, animal flesh or stone fragments or similar things if it were as hard as iron or soft like water and other things; seed such as corn, barley, peas; or something flowing like water and airy things.
If it hurts in the ear or any other way that touches the ear, and it does not grow. Soleil, and then apply on le sanc de l'eveur; etre si il veinne laisse ennuye.
If she jumps with the tweezers, it is good; but if not, apply gentle extraction of a small double-jointed louse below; and if she does not jump by that, make an ear sling and fasten the point in the center of the hair or at the edge of the ear hole very tightly so that nothing can enter with the cotton swab there; then treat thoroughly, as often it comes just like we have said; and if it does not come to a certain extent, take some glue, apply the birds, and use any instrument suitable for this purpose, and place a little cotton inside. And if she jumps with all these things that we have said and fractures the ear so that the incision appears red hot and spasms, and the way of the fracture is such that you make the first stitch for the head malady on the cranial side, and remove the sinew according to its strength, then let the malady sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small fracture at the root of the ear in grease or fat depending; and make the fracture also like a moon, so long as you press it into the wound, and let the physician according to his will suction it hastily from your mouth; and treat until he is well. And if it is a grain and it swells, apply gentle extraction; and if it cannot come out, make a small but strong incision according to this form:
And apply an incision to that grain. But do not make such a thing when you think the grain is moistened due to ear moisture; until you have performed several pieces of this procedure; then extract it gently with tweezers and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction remains light.
In the water when it covers the malady uses coughing of deep breathing first, and saturate your ear with many cotton balls there; and if she jumps through that hole in my ear or where the water is. If it does not jump through such a hole, it's good. Then take many small pins according to their length, and gently heat them at one fire so that they are lightly, and of her malady sineaus de saille thereofere cest qu’il est en la ce que vous veue lien du lou maundes
In the pulling out of the beast, if it is small in size, like we have said for division; but if it is large and can be felt, prepare for extraction of pincers; and this is the easier to remove from the ear.
In the extraction of ticks from infected ears, when you carry out the treatment as we have said for division and distillation; however, it does not yield results if you do not look at the ear in the sunlight: if there are no ticks present, carefully use tweezers to remove them, and if they are present, take a cotton swab of this shape that is contained herein.
And it should be narrow and wide above. Insert the more subtle chief into the ear according to the degree of pain from the illness, then form an extract with all the cotton; do this often until everything comes out. If they don't come out, remove the cotton swab as I have said in the previous passage; and if they still remain, apply distillations that the ancients tried at cutting ticks, and you will find or treat them by means of distillations; and if you draw oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument according to its shape which you see: as we have mentioned in the previous passage.
And it should be made of silver or gold, with a small hole above for distillation; and to press inside the distillation using an instrument well-made of metal, if you see a sharp knife and wrap cotton around its point; then pour your oil or juice into the cotton, and whatever medicines are in the cotton, place it in the ear; then press all over the cotton with the knife, pressing gently until the oil has been distilled from the ear; feel the pain within the wound, and this is one type of distillations. Prepare a small fire so that the medicine can be distilled into the ear; and ensure it is not too cold, because medicines are not effective if they become too cold.
Regarding ear picking
No child is born with holes in their ears; and this same thing happens to us at the picking of a wound or of tissue growing within the ear, so that these actions do not ever cause any punctures in the ear if we can see them well; and it never happens for an insignificant amount where one could see.
However, when it appears that the puncture occurs in more than one condition, and within this space it is necessary to place the ill ear in the sun; and look herein: if you see an abscess appearing, the work has the following form as described below:
Etteaostres en iaueauce cestant d'apres envoye, en iewesre de senginpree: oupute pice iten: invenant. Enchants entailtroie. Ifindent, andouls
And if the swelling occurs in the ear, take a subtle but swift knife and burn it slightly with fire, then place on the wound of the ear. If you feel the swelling that he feels great pain when hearing, pierce quickly, and make sure not to bruise the nerves of the ear; then put in the ear a tent according to the size of the opening, and an Egyptian ointment.
Do not do any work on the wound until it is healed, or take a tent and apply rosewater and powder with vitriol; and if you see discharge from the ear, cover the tent and move another moistened tent made of oil roses and wax, until the discharge stops; then cure it so that it becomes healthy.
And if there is blood coming in, dip an sponge and wrap it in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the flow of blood which are related to distillation therapies.
from paper strips
This is where they come from paper strips when they are wet and dry, it requires that you extend them with tweezers and pincers, and cover them with a sponge of its roots; then apply rosewater powder.
And if without decortication, then the cauterization done with a subtil cauterizing instrument after incision is sufficient; and many times repair them without any return to their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those root parts burn and do not regrow.
(Note: Again, there seems to be a possible error in translation due to unfamiliar terms such as "de la gresle." It might relate to a type of material or procedure used during cauterization but is not immediately recognizable without further context.)
Many times come paper strips of things that appear to be gravel in form and hardness, and because of this disease is called "great hail," and the treatment is such: take warning if the great hail moves one way or another, it's a simple thing to know; do then make wide, then scratch each part lightly, then pick them up with pincers, and cover them. If you don't feel any resistance when piercing through the paper, nothing hurts the patient; if there is a large fissure, he must dress it with a stitch, and cure it so that it becomes healthy; and if it is small, do not apply force, as ointments will restore it almost instantly.
And if the great hail is inside of the ear, and they are pinceures, then it does not hurt nothing; and cope the grandes parties toleuns d’aigue, and cox1301574980s de la moyenne, et siens 503.
of the hairs
Exudate is a fat that is spread on top of papers above, and this happens more to children than to anyone else, and it hurts much in their eyes, and they come down the morning with cataracts, so they cannot look at sunlight because tears form on their eyes; therefore, they lie against their faces afterwards, and sleep there, and their papers underneinas are moistened by which the child's face and appearance have covered with exudate that appears in oil. And when you press your hand to your body and feel the oozing inside.
And the way of the work is that it puts the patient's head on your cleanlinayer; and then take a linen sheet in the shape of a circle according to the amount of exudate from each part, place it underneath, press one side with your hand and another, so that the oozing becomes collected within the circle; then make an incision near the wide opening, ensuring it is not larger than the wound made at the vein's entry point; continue to sew the skin over such a gap until you have covered the exudate; and in various configurations, exudate comes from the incision according to the shape of a piece of melted fat.
Extract then from one piece of cloth between your hands afterward and turn your hand to the right and left as much as it is spread; and make sure that you do not push into the incision so that there is no break in the entire skin around the wound, even with oil still on it.
And if the exudate does not appear at the beginning of the incision, then lightly press the fissure so that it appears; then extract as we have described, wrap with linen and water cloths, and place it underneath, and brace it like a pillow.
And if there are such homes that crush ropes and place them on top to corrupt the moisture which is delayed; then he treats so they become healthy. And if it reaches the point of pressure at the incision site, he softens the embolisms until they become healthy.
Of paper hairs
When paper hairs are born other than their natural state, and become old, if they harm the hairs, and bring on diseases as common as accustomed tears and softening of the paper hairs and yellowish discoloration until it is due to destruction of the hairs; and therein he treats with four methods: or by fire caustic in one case, and by medicinal water according to what before existed or surgeon'ayer of cautery, whether by incision and suturing or by bandages, as I shall say.
It is necessary that you place the head of the malady on your healthy side; then turn the paper towards your left hand; if it becomes converted, it's good; if not, stick an awl at every .i. point above; and do this either near the margin where hairs sprout from there or at these spots where other than natural hairs are found, and turn the whole sheet around with the paper underneayer, and then work in the part of the paper overlapping those misplaced hairs, from the large margins down to the small ones; then pull out .i. point; make a little tent of linen cloth and coverlet above the paper, and place above it an image resembling a spouted lamp; everything must be according to how much you raise the paper that is designated for all.
:se. : a preci: ether vairies. Thej.
And if in another way: and it is that you draw the paper of a figure as we have told, at 23 times in three lines according to the shape which is here:
then take this that lies beneath the small forces exactly according to the shape which is here:
And if you have no means to hold the pincers, and what is done is not equal, take an awl or two threads of .i. length, and insert them into the figure; and insert another thread near the large margin, and the second thread near the small margin, and join together your threads equally; then move your hand gently, and move everything on the skin where you have stitched as we have told, then assemble the .ij. flaps of the wound by sutures, and cure it until it is healed; and if an abscess appears at your incision, soothe it with ointments and similar warm compresses:
and there never happens that the paper's hair is converted: it requires that you use what we have said about the incision; however, the stitching in both places is more artificial:
The healing of the wounds is according to this form: and it requires that you convert the paper and do so in accordance with what I have said, and then make .ij. stitches as artfully as the long hair and wide span of the sponge are; and take hold of the .ij. parts where you hold the threads; then join them subtly over what lies underneath the paper's oil, and tighten the .ij. stitches in their respective parts; and leave it for no longer years, and the skin which has been stretched will harden and crackle and shrink until it returns to its original state:
If it is delayed, then you use greater forces, and cure him until he is healthy; and when the wound has been sutured and lifted the paper, and the hair no longer holds. It is the form of the .ij. stitches that you make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
The operations are such that you need a fine needle, and thread a silken and fine thread of .i. length; then assemble the hooks subtly, and place them both so that each filament is about one palm long; then take another finer silken thread in short pieces, and join the chief to the other; then put your malady's tip near your skin so that this operation appears to be declared, because it is a delicate and fine operation, then insert the needle into the root next to the hair growth and pierce it carefully through the paper tissue as you go upward from below the natural hair; then pull out the hair until it reaches the thread's chase, and put in the new hair there, if there are .i. or .ij. or .iij. or more than that amount of hair; then remove your hand so that the new hair grows along with the remaining hair through the paper tissue:
ould leu le langes:savoir itpare le monde parlez lou le soulsaintléves, en le.ioldes: fromage ofvainstère legeleaves aic and thencause (13. And thenne laisse.a verre. Then
Of moisture of oil
This disease which is known as "aleacrati" or the porriture arises in oil, if it has of .ij. manners: one natural and one unnatural.  And occurs by sealing a wound, or cutting, or cautery, and similar things.
And the method of treatment for this involves cutting open the suture (wound), removing the scales from it, and placing linen sheets within it while ensuring that the wound is clean; there is no need to use things that dry or restrict in its healing. For if you do this, the disease may become worse than before; but the work of softening agents, such as fenugreek, and boiling water or rosemary seed cooked with linseed oil, and ointments melted into any oil, and wrapping it all up in a tent for treatment.
And the treasures of your treatment require that you give it no healing according to its original shape; and these aforementioned treatments which we have mentioned are not causes for the return of this malady in its previous form.
Of the cause that arises in oil
This disease which truly is arising in the flesh and is natural and occurs from wounds and fissures and cauterization and similar things; and the method of treatment for it involves piercing an awl into it so that there be one double thread, and the point placed on the charred area, and then carving into the right margins as much to the left side so that the threads bend in .ij. loops around the char; then is the char above all of the awl, and a cup wide at .i. milliliter size.
:i.comme a las and theire le f13rd:eslaterio.
And if the disease comes from a fissure or tear or cautery, it is necessary that you make a straight incision under the hairs of the skin; and according to what has been said above; then open between the two legs of a tent as I have mentioned; and one must perform this work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in shape, and the masters' expertise involves many things that can help return the figure to its natural state; and the patient themselves, according to what needs to be done and various treatments.
Dissolution of parchment
When this soldering occurs in part the same way that above-mentioned parchment is dissolved with white oil, and it cannot move or perform its natural operations; it is necessary to cut a razor blade underneath the parchment, and lift it up; and treat as pinches, so long as you follow what has been said at the microscopic scale subtlety, not too aggressive nor too deep, that the patient does not suffer when the microscalpel touches or bleeds oil; and make such an incision, upon which you scrape together the assembled parts, lightly so that parchment returns to its natural shape; and it is cleaned without using water with salt, and rinsed in warm water, and dried with a cloth; then place linen tents between the parchment and oil moistened furiously; and above the oil use woolen thread soaked plentifully; and afterwards use tweezers and other suturing materials until it is sound.
Of the oil's upper part
Seal that the nerve is according to two methods: it is nervous and appears like a hard one or with another that is not nervous, but looks smooth and stiffened by jelly as if when touched by iron and treated in pincers, it cannot move; and both appearances begin towards the great wrinkle, and grow little and little until they cover all vision and light and movement of oil.
esle. oun: lesl'souesla lecture of the it'upon, andes ailmesures:log. Theesure desires and theater asuphe. Commentary.
And guard that the spatula does not touch the tender flesh and break it, and that the needle is not seen; after making an incision, place a small piece of silk there, and with two pieces of lead made of vitriol, leave it for another day; then heals this until it is sound.
And if the nail is not nervous, and you cannot insert the needle, and the nail does not allow it to enter, then this resembles the treatment of a patient's nail many times with medicines; as I have told in the division, if you see it cover again, then oil it slightly with the hot spatula according to this form:
And remove the nail gently, and if you see that it does not weaken and reason presses afterward, distill from your mouth into the lead piece made of vitriol and red lead and fine silk thread, and leave it for another day; then repeat this operation according to this method until it is completely healed.
If nothing is contrary to the oil, as in incision, and if so the milk, then first treat the incision until it's sound; then repeat the operation as before, continuing treatment until complete healing occurs.
And if the appearance of the flesh around the nail causes great harm in the oil, then suspend it from the nail and cut off only a portion rather than all at once, since there is no need for tears; then distill into the red lead piece made of vitriol.
from the flesh that grows above the pupil
There are some homes who never have any red flesh growth, and crush the nail and restrain it in papers and turn it back to its original shape like a spindle of balusters; and let the pained one place his head on top, so that he can withstand the force applied; then make the first growth, and trim all those pieces of flesh as they are suitable for this operation. And keep the wound oil in the surgery we have mentioned regarding its incision in the nail and keepsake, and seize l'olivre.
And when the incision is completed and bone has fully healed, you apply oil of silver or distill coloured red cloths and similar medicines corrosive, and place it on warm cotton with a sprig of eucalyptus if secure from behind; and if it delays nothing, and the sore throat surfaces, then doubtful throat, let the oil and cure the throat in ways soothing throat, then return to your work until it is healed, and thus crafted charms are added to the oil by this method.
However, it is necessary that you gradually apply every weak oil of the natural way; and in the accidental work with iron in your treatise; and do not push any hand into any of these works until you see that this limb suffers from that treatment.
about the veins of the eyes
These red veils are covered with oil and they protect the work of an ointment and weaken it throughout the year. The craft is therefore to be done firstly when you see that blood has flowed into the oil, hence this, in other words, is true; otherwise there's no further disease than a headache; however, the treatment should proceed thus: command the patient that he places his head on your side, then stop those veins throughout the entire body according to their wisdom, and make them subtly doubled according to this form.
And they should be doubled in two degrees according to this form:
Then continue to apply these subtly doubled veins with the blood coming out after another time until you see those painful veins move away from the oil; and make sure not to overdo it at the points of the spinal column, and do this work around noon before the sun, and be very careful in your practice so that you don't interfere with only these veins; and when you have done this, distill red and green cloths in oil to break up what is delaying the pain.
And if you cannot do everything in that hour, then smear on the oil of things soothing to the pain and let it remain as long as the pains are relieved and secured from throat chaut, and resume according to this manner which is thereafter until he's been sanctified; and it is formed:
Of the ulcer of the oil
The term "arissati" refers to an ulcer: when you cure it with fire treatment and hot medicines, as I have said before, it is not healed; instead, it causes harm by fracturing under the incision site, whereby it must die, and all moisture within should be drained until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed, you will see corruption and blackness therein; if the surgeon has all the necessary tools for this task, its shape resembles a sharp point. It should be called "sharp chief," and it must be made in two equal parts like this knife's edge; it should be pointed as is in the current form:
And place it on the bone' Writers and publishers often face ethical dilemmas when deciding whether to allow their work to be freely accessible online or restricting access through copyright enforcement. While some argue that authors should have unrestricted rights over their creations, others believe in a balance between protecting intellectual property and promoting the free flow of information for societal benefit.
If the bone is joined together, and it does not heal, and the joint of the humerus (upper arm bone) has also united, then remain in this state for 40 years, and it will no longer regenerate or regress, indicating that it is healthy; if it is not so, then there is another remedy than bringing back the ulcer to its original position according to this form. Firstly, you must discover the bone a second time with iron and hot medicines; when discovered, take an osteotomy (bone cut) in this manner: make two angles of three degrees for each cut, and then flatten the remaining fragment as much as it appears here.
And then place it to the bone of lisure : "sauf chief:il sallie la citée ence au seant tuit apres de malitgut :est, et lices quittier.
Of the issue of oil
When the hairs open fully everywhere, and they do not disturb the nerve, then it is necessary to apply the poultice; afterwards, make a paste of aloe and honey and incense and safflower, and moisten the wound with this paste; and dress the wounds sufficiently softly, and double each bandage three times (.iiij.), and place one on top of the other according to the amount needed; then loosen the poultice by lifting a stiff bandage from above, and reapply the poultice at night and day, and if the hairs grow back together, it is good to remove it again. If the wound has repaited, after the week and the month, and you see the wound recovering, that's well; otherwise, start over with new dressings and bandages and poultice and plasters until it heals completely.
This phrase does not directly translate into English from Old French, but it appears to reference the concept of a torn piece of cloth (toile could refer to linen or fabric in this context). A more accurate translation with explanation would be: "A tear in the cloth."
When disruptions occur in the cloth, and a tear appears as if by grain of resin, it is evident to see; then if you cover it with various operations such as driving an awl into the root of that part above this incision, and drive another awl or one double strand on each side of the margin; and pierce well, and release the first needle according to its position; then bind the double thread around a piece of linen soaked in amber-colored wax, and stretch it well, leaving it until the thread moves with the vein, then remove the awl and apply on the soaked linen as many times as needed. Treat the poultice with comforting substances while the wound heals completely; and sometimes the wound is contained by a piece of fabric from one side of an edge strip until it heals completely.
When the hairs give a significant appearance, then very subtly puncture them with an instrument resembling a scalpel, and correct the moisture of albuginous substance within the poultice, and remove them as soon as possible; afterwards, pull out gently until they are sane.
Of the fire of oil
This illness that affects the "alcunnati" is not merely fire assembled in oil, which appears to be rising, but it is not; and the manner of its appearance so that you make the patient lie on .i. chair with a scaffolding set up and straight, then take the head between your hands of .ij. parts, and hold back the smoke as long as you see the fire coming above your eyes; then tie it down and let it go back to its place, so that you can see the patient's things as he used to do; if it doesn't dissipate, you know it is real fire, and since it does not release, it shows that it is not prepared as we have said. Make the patient lie on your hands, then take a fine instrument and apply it under the horned skin .i. time with the continuation of the conjunction with the horny skin and crown until the fire issues; when it's out, you must let hot honey mixed with mith or fenugreek boil oil, and treat the patient with other cures as long as they are healthy.
of the fumes from the oil
We have made the divisions of smoke into parts; it is required that you make the patient lie between your crossed hands with a shield from sunlight and keep the heated and condensed oil tight against his chest; then take in your right hand, if the sides are left, or in your left hand, if the sides are right; then place in your right hand, where the sides are left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, where the sides are right; then push the almagda tip near the crown by a sharp rap at the edge of the oil pool in the minor lavering area, and carefully lower the almagda vertically until it perforates through the oil layer, so that you feel the almagda vibrating to the empty thing; and it is required that the measure of the almagda be marked on the front of the space measurement which is from the point where the prune ends to the end of the black area; and this is the crown of the oil. If you see the bone in that paper for its transparency, then put the instrument right away or if the fire is still there, he will see his body before him and the instrument in his oil.
gasten:girage, ander:10002ndropenture it:escribe.
And if the almage cannot enter into the eye due to its hardness, because there are some who have very hard eyes, it is necessary that you temper the instrument called "almegat", as it has this form:
And pierce then only slightly, and not too much in depth, but make .i. the point slender; then insert the almegat therein, as we have said; and at the completion of the treatment let the patient lie on his back in a dark room, so that he sleeps with his head tilted to the right or left, and be bound according to its position every day; then remove him from that dark house, and examine his eyes, and see no signs of any things, and put him back there after seven days; it does not matter whether you do this at the beginning of the cure or immediately after the incision, but he must lie in a tilted position.
If the abscess opens near a stone, you must dislocate the eye before the seventh day, and address this opening which was opened by an abscess; and when it is calmed down, then move his vein to the right under .i. olive leaf for covering any day, and again go back into that dark house. And slowly come out of that house a little at a time, and return to its natural state; and you know that in no way should others interfran with this case.
And one came to us from the region of Yarra who told us that they used an almegat for piercing in peaceful times, and when the blood flowed, but I have never seen such practice anywhere in our land or in ancient books; and perhaps it is a new thing.
And these are the forms of an almegat because those who do not know them will see its similarities:
And be bound in this slender subtlety, and the back in three degrees angle.
Of the shoulder to the neck
Never have there been or not seen various dislocated shoulders, which seem to resemble scorpions with too many legs; and if it has a color of fair hue, and if the shoulder is tanned brown color. On those shoulders that are smoothed but not ankle-jointed, you must make the patient lie down against the sun, work on his nostrils, remove the pus from these shoulders, and draw the furrows; then hold this thin sharp edge of a spatula underneath gently to one side as long as you know that the shoulder is completely healed.
And if there is still none to cover it up, if the extraction involves all of them. If you use such fine and lightly moving tweezers, that it does not linger; and if you do not let slip, or incision, as it should be done; and if it's a malignant incision, then quickly cauterize until the absence is ankle-jointed and completely healed for all shoulders, and then drain any fluid or blood.
If the nose is operated upon and moisture enters from it, you know that it's healed. But if the wetness does not penetrate as it should be done; and if there are malignant incision scars, then quickly cauterize until those scars become jointed and completely healed for all noses, and thread a piece of linen thick enough in its nostrils to hope so that you can trap the odor coming out from inside their mouth; do this repeatedly in schools, it's easy for anyone who wants to do it. Do this as long as you know that those scars have been healed, then draw the thread out with saliva and oil Egyptian style, put it back on the nose so as before; do this for about three years or more until all residue from the operation has been corroded by oiling; and place a bandage of linen on it every year until it's healed. If there is need for potent medicines, then use them; and that is the form of the instrument used to purging the chief: they distill oil and medicine from noses in this way.
And it's made of silver or tin, resembling an overturned lamp as a cane, and lead you to do so; and if you see it closed, make a cainnele, and place the tweezers close for purging the chief; and take one hand on the chief to hold while you heat up oil or any liquid.
of the shoulder to the nose
of sceculses. Etienne:n. In oun. Ifracre :"mall esle it'sure.pauvresacute. In theit’slaiche soen,cause Itude :naturelithandera frommeaumeasure (English and Frenchcause.tode.
When the nose is cut and crushed,
When solutions of continuation come in one of these operative treatments, they are used sparingly because not everyone benefits; it is necessary then to examine first whether the wound is fresh on all its flesh; and after loosening .ij. lips from a laceration, you care for them until they heal; and if both their lips are swollen in one or another place, it becomes necessary that you scrape every part of their keel so long as they heal, then rejoin the .ij. lips to a laceration, and bind it tightly with dragon's blood powder mixed with incense, and place an iron plate upon it; let it remain until it discharges through itself, and then you cauterize it until it is healed.
The way the suture is done depends on whether you use needles or thread as we have described in the abdominal suturing; or by using a string if I have informed you of this method.
les abscesses of the lips
When there are abscesses on the lips that last for long periods and become smaller but more severe; it is necessary then to turn the lips, make incisions on each corner of the wound, take them by pinchers, and scrape them one by one, and apply vitriol after each incision until the wounds are healed. Then treat the lips with a sling and cauterize the wounds as they heal.
of the gums' cartilage
Often the gum cartilage is displaced and it was formerly called "albulus"; you must support it with forceps, scrape at its root, let it bleed or drain blood, then place vitriol or other restrictive and desiccative powders on it; if that cartilage returns after the incision, and this happens repeatedly, if the scraping is done a second time, and cauterize again: If it does not return afterwards from cauterization. These are the methods used to cover wounds in horses.
The term "des sordes" translates to "of the foul discharges," which historically refers to mucus or puss from an infected wound. It might be related to a medical practice involving cleaning and treatment of such secretions in medieval times, although it's not detailed enough for a precise procedure:
Sometimes the decay in the head of a stone is found between the teeth, within the mouth, jagged and rough stones; and never are there black or yellow teeth until corruption reaches the gums, and the teeth emit odor; it is required that you place the patient with their hands underneath, and let his teeth be straight in your hand, and remove the stones or fragments as long as they remain visible; and if at first this happens, then repeat the process for two more days until everything has been removed; and know that the teeth require different types of toothpicking methods to clean them, according to what the text shows, since the stone crusher who is supposed to remove stones from between the teeth uses other forms than those used by others.
It is required when treating the patient's toothache that you delay pulling it as much as possible, because this should not be done; since it is a very high substance about which there are no excuses for pulling. When the maladies of a decayed tooth are constrained in pulling it out, you must be certain of the absent tooth; many times the pain of the patient with the sick tooth increases, and take care that it is a good tooth, and pull out the good tooth accordingly; and everything does not depart from this pain due to its existence, as we have always desired for these saints; and when you are certain of the missing tooth, you must scrape inside the tooth thoroughly to protect the gums from all parts by keeping it securely in your hands or holding delicate tweezers firmly at first glance and glance until they are well scraped, then set the patient's teeth straight within your hand so that they do not move.
After pulling the tooth straight up, and if it does not jump out of place, take none of these wooden sticks and throw them from each side lightly, and move it as you have done first; And if the stone is perceived and ground, it must be filled with cotton or wads; and if you pull gently with delicate tweezers, that it does not break while pulling; and much movement over there should be made to clear the gum around the tooth.
iluinjourre:escripture delect English courtinanfeit ageustinvents :mesure quil:itecitha theorcéparagainle lou frenchleulement icesle.comme se, ceun fromage deferent (12. Theon aimer.
The forms of joint dislocations, because they are immovable at the first degree, should be elongated tips and large hands, so that they do not double when pulling out a tooth; and these are the shapes:
And be large members if they do not bend when pulling out teeth, and be well-made of iron, and have teeth that move easily.
from the roots of the teeth When the root is cut to pull out, it indicates that you should put cotton moistened in wax on the joint for a year or two, as long as the limb remains softened, and then insert the pincers called "algefri," so that the dislocation seems like it's being cared for; and they are made similarly to a chisel:
And if the roots do not come out with these pincers, it indicates that you must find the whole root within the tooth and use an instrument called "althali," which is known as a chisel; so that this is its form:
And it should be forged and large if it does not break, and when the root jumps out of there, that is good; but if it doesn't, you help with all other instruments, from which these forms come afterward:
And if it uses this instrument which has two teeth, then its form is as follows:
and other instruments that are before in the reason of teeth roots, and of this instrument which seems like large pincers, whose form is as follows:
And these instruments should not break teeth, and it is known that many dental tools are; and also other instruments which have nothing to do with them; and the skillful masters subtly understand their own instrument by themselves, according to what their works show about the disease, because they often suffer from various maladies or the old did not teach us any instrument for the diversity of uses in teeth and bones, whether it breaks or cracks or crumbles; and if so, he seeks the instruments that I have told you about, and helps with movements such as this: And they should be large and well-fitted to hold the bone, so that it does not fracture or break; and then restore the place of medicines suitable for this matter, and if there is porriture in the bone, and it'ni small, with such an instrument:
ounce le bonfatonsite adnage itens tol theu mortaliton in thees tole morse theuvesinumbrea (sacre: ander, asuponcture of aphasic. Theor lore. It'sarre. It:respectsacutures.
nif ieu (cesange,entiuelastiflesseurifreifletifèximentezanches iferreraises.uausekanaiureuxenchauntheileuses thearreautroitifereausqueilingleges onypressecarecratirexaurite that
And it is also like the sawing of wood; and in cutting the stump little by little each day so that it does not move while it grows; then when the plate has been reduced to nothing at all, and if its edge is too sharp and it cuts the tongue, then it must be filed down until it becomes flat again, so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
The teeth stick out.
When the teeth in front stick out, either by tapping or pulling them, and they cannot be pressed against anything so that they do not hurt; then you must treat them with tightening medicines, for a wire made of gold never turns green or rusts, while silver wire does. The wire should neither be too thick nor too thin, depending on the space between teeth; if you want to align the teeth, take two wires and double them between healthy teeth, then place misaligned teeth in between those, whether there are one or more of them, so that they can gradually be moved until they reach the healthy tooth on either side. Then resume covering up the area where you started, apply your hand and pressure gently yet firmly, until it doesn't move at all; if a wire is placed around the root of the tooth so that it does not bleed the tongue, then place the misaligned teeth between the healthy tooth, and put them in such a way that they do not bite the tongue. Let it stay as narrow as possible, and if it slips away or the wire comes loose; then it will remain tight for its entire length, just like the shape and figure of the aligned healthy teeth, and those misaligned teeth:
And when the tooth is reinserted in its place, if it returns to health repeatedly, as we have said; and none of such interventions are painful or troublesome, and there has never been a shape made like another bone tooth, and the insertion takes place at the point where the deficit exists, and the pressure is applied just as we have described, and it remains tight for its entire length.
covering the tongue of the wound.
There have been no such lines that come from the tongue or natural causes, where it does not heal like this; or by accident of an open wound. You operate on the mouth and face of the malignant growth, and make its skin clean, and soothe the tongue; then you suture the large nerves, until the tongue is freed from its foundation, whether there are hard parts or not, and it's a fistula formation; and keep in mind that the fissure does not go too deep, over the artery. And when you have done, raise the wound to light pinkish-red and pale coloration, then place a linen tincture underneath the tongue; and if it gets wet, apply vitriol; and if it doesn't dry up, cauterize with hot water mixed blood, which is beneficial for this. Then cure him of other curing until healing completely.
.
Of fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Never do bones in the throat called "godath," and we pull them out directly with .ij. amandres (referring to a surgical instrument); if you cure them, as we have said in our division, and they are not healed, take note that if it is small and colored patches of fire, do not touch the patient with iron; and if they are red and the root is large, also refrain from using iron for drainage, but let it remain until it dies, and then you will have to part it, or else it would break itself. If they are bluish in color and the roots are fine, prepare a cover with your instrument, but first make sure that the patches of fire settle down and become calm; then let the patient sit before the sun, and his joints be healthy, and work on his mouth and neck between your hands, pressing the tongue against all parts of the instrument, which is why it has this shape. Make them either silver or thin like surgical knives:
Press the tongue against all parts of this instrument, and you will see the patch, if you take the oncine (a surgical tool) and stick it into the amando (referring to an amadou or resinous material), and pull out any material above more than necessary; and do not use anything from linen with it, then cover the instrument as shown here by its shape, which seems like forces at work. All around the chief are bent, one on another, and they are very sharp, and made of iron or hemp:
And if you do not have this instrument, then with the pair of pliers (referring to forceps or hemostats), which has this form:
And divide into one part and another name; and once you have caught one of the .ij. amandres (amadou), then catch the other in a similar way, and after the incision gargle the bleeding patient with hot water, warm water, and cold water as necessary if there is any blood coming out, also use cupped apples cooked or fig leaves boiled, or flannel; and various things like this until the swelling subsides; then heal him so that he becomes well again. And never in the throat do other "godaths" than the .ij. amandres, if you catch them as we have said for the .ij. amandres:
ssex,empe tandre a la costume.ures siue.comesse tol coudre.age. Thisssez.
of the eye
When the blood in the eye rises and it overflows, and it is directed perpendayerly; and when it is large and rounded, then it is called an eye. If it is washed as we have described in division, the cure does not profit, and you see that the abscesses are calmed down, and she is delicate; therefore, you must take care of it; and those who are assembled and not long do not call it "eye"; and if it is bloody or colored as black, then you must excise the incision on her eye. For there is great danger in his ailment. Therefore, when you see him, according to what I have said, place him before the sun with his tongue pressed by the instrument that we mentioned earlier; then make an incision near the third and fourth molars that I described in the incision of those two teeth; and it is required not to cover more than necessary beyond natural limits; for if you cover too much, it causes pain in speech and speech; after the incision, use what we have said about the incision on these two molars, and treat her until she is well. And when he has fear of covering, then you must use dampness to the cauterization of his ailment. The manner of caustic fire is hot water. And let him set his head in your care, and press the tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned for cautery, and apply it with warm blood so that it is not too thick or too clear; and encase it as follows:
Place on a head or neck if he sets the medicine like that of a ladle and puts the instrument with the medicine all over his eye; let him lie down under his chest so that saliva and muscle secretions flow from the medicine in his mouth, so it doesn't fall into his throat and bleed; then clasp your hands around the whole quantity of the mixture for an hour as much as you see it dried and well-set with medicinal applications on the eye. If you notice, take cotton wrapped in any instrument and moisten it in the medicine, put the instrument all over the cotton in the canyon above the eye; do this often until the cautery is perfected, then let her dry and check after three or five years. And if you have to repeat the caustic fire of the medicine on his eye, when you recauteer it, also envelop it with cotton in woolen cloth, and warm up what is inside the canyon of the medicine; and raise him from cold water treatment until he becomes well.
Three lines of histe desgouer.sesongles et siens ile :est malgre chaste devis, et it'sor lacer nece. Amene toge lesl’viel. Celt. The French Godexentence. Aelogue en Latin (a. And it is made of silver or gold, and one of the fingers inserted into the mouth of the patient until the breath rises to the eye through the canal, until the vein is dry; afterwards often, as long as the vein has dried out, and ensure that you do not perform this action at the beginning of the aposteme's healing, for many things happen due to it; and let no one use such an instrument if it is not present, then take a canal and insert in its head a metal spike so that the mouth does not have too much heat; because the metal spike will not weigh down the breath into the mouth, and this is a good remedy altogether.
Many times when there is a dislocation of the throat or spine of fish, or nothing at all; it must therefore be that you treat as much as you can see, and press down on the tongue with an instrument under the sun throughout its entire length until you see movement in the matter; and if this does not open up and is repositioned back into the throat, then you must make the patient vomit so that their flesh be cooked inside their stomach; possibly through vomiting they might expel whatever was causing the discomfort. Alternatively, for ailing patients suffering from choking, one could use pieces of sponge, navel, lettuce root, or .i. dry bread piece and attach it to a thread, then subject it to regurgitation; when it comes out at the surface, it will open up, and you can proceed with treatment; if this does not happen as described above, use an instrument of thickness according to this shape:
And let the patients with clubbed fingers be placed at the head so that they can more easily enter the throat, and lift the head upwards; and guard that you do not touch the epiglottis, so that it does not twist or push inside, and make sure that if the patient has a cough, he blows out with the instrument as long as the object is still there; if he blows it away completely, then he withdraws it evenly for the whole instrument.
From the practice of treating the throat
Never is the throat cured by medicine as I mentioned in the treatment division, but rather look at the sore throat with sun exposure, and press the tongue with the instrument that I have mentioned to you; and if you see the inflammation, remove it bit by bit or use fine tweezers that are worthwhile for this. And if it does not heal, take a cold comb, and thrust it into the sore throat of the sick person, then hold firmly with iron wire strong enough, and do so often. If the patient's mouth turns blue all day long, then fill him/her with a full glass of cold water, operate on his/her mouth, let the tongue go back to its original position, and move it with their hand often; and if soon as the inflammation feels the cold, it will decrease.
And if it does not decrease as we have said, smoke the sore throat with the instrument I mentioned in the mouth smoking technique; perform this many times because she was pointing to a lump there; and the method of mouth smoking so that you coat an iron pot with coal pieces, and cover it tightly with a cloth woven in one piece around it, and put the teeth into it with the instrument; then apply the smoke to the patient's head inside the cane, and close his/her mouth such that the smoke does not escape from it but warms up the sore throat now; and if the sore throat still hurts, repeat the smoking by many times; let the patient drink thirsty things dirty and salty, and do not allow him to drink water; and in this way it is best for her to start bleeding with this regimen.
And the shape of the instrument used to treat it, when you can see it, looks like crooked tongs for moving into the throat; and resembles a comb for grooming, and has roughness from grinding, so that what it touches cannot loosen. And at this point:
And the cures of the apothecary
savre:cest isse: httpsuparreveille deity:0x32esculentifere (from itafee:throiendirectire:t:tract:s :d's, without ape. Also:sangler quatrailles.
And if at the incision there is no need to pierce it until its completion according to its progress; and if such incisions must be made where they are necessary, and they do not die according to their progress, as with those that are near joints. For when incisions come near joints, and we leave them so long that they penetrate into the core, by chance they become corrupted both the ligament and nerve of the joint, from which it is caused that contraction occurs in that limb member. Or the incision is near the main limb, and if you delay piercing until it becomes dead, then this will harm the main limb; or it is near the foundation, so we pierce it while it is still alive; and there is no need to make an incision in a sensation that has completed digestion, but for those that are near the foundation, which they would not penetrate deeply within, and become fistulas along their path, and cannot heal in great extent.
And it is necessary that you know the degree of piercing in the incision according to its progress; and when the pain has subsided, and the fever departed, and the diminution of pain and swelling, and the relief and easing of the chief injury of the incision, and other signs; and it is necessary that you make the piercing dependent on the incision itself, and if it opens again; and the piercing should be long in every direction for the hands or feet, joints and nerves, arteries and all similar tissues, and wherever there is no flexion.
And when there are flexions, according to the member's condition. For if you pierce it in front of this area, then blood vessels will be along its path and filled with waste; and perhaps harden the lips and lining around it as well. And for any incision that is made according to the large course, according to what members need. It must be taken care of small incisions, small openings; and for large incisions, large openings, and many fissures according to the appearance of hardness of the incision; and if there are such incisions that require binding the wound, and covering it; when they have become as soft as fabric, then it must be done like with boils: and for those which are cut into three angles, and similar ones wherein one covers the brimstone funnel of antlers. And if there are such incisions or made a round hole, and other shapes and closures resembling those on antlers; and when there is a full-bodied incision.
ge (modern:
And if blood seeps into your work, first apply cold and moist compresses, and wrap a cloth around it that has seeped many times. And if the blood clots persistently, then treat it with careful governance and cure, and use the powders mentioned in this book on those wounds, and if it is internal bleeding or in the area of the abscess, and the patient is very nervous, then you must moisten linen sheets and towels hot water; And if it's in a stone, and the limb is fleshy, then moisturize the linen towels with warm water, or warm vinegar and oil, up until the third day as we have said; and release the abscess and wound cure as it requires.
And it is essential to know universally in abscess treatments: which I have told you about how one should proceed before abscess treatments, and here the author speaks of.
*As per the constraint given above, no translation is necessary because "des soros" does not appear in the translated passage from Instruction 2.*
And when the small abscesses arise, they are treated similarly to how one would treat an ulcer on a sheep's leg, and there is much in common with it; for if it contains moisture, it breaks open quickly. If the moisture has been drained out, leave nothing inside the cloth containing that moisture, as it will return shortly when left unattended; then submerge cotton soaked in Egyptian oil into it if it is still present; if not, use water and linen to cover the wound, leaving it for another day. Then continue treating with cotton every two days until you are sure that it does not relapse overnight; treat the wound as I have previously instructed, taking care of bandaging according to this shape: and if the abscess contains any fatty tissue, drain it in this manner far from its original location. Then tear off the skin around it, scrape out all parts, and apply all the treatment necessary for treating a wound or catheter placed inside; and if the artery is constricted, perform as I have said before. And similarly treat an abscess that is sharp, in both stone and sore, just as I have told you.
And regarding the sharp and moist abscesses, which are lighter because they contain very little blood. And if there is no moisture in these abscesses or chiefs of a woman'nant man, as well as I have described those abscesses like an inflamed, rough, and blunt ears; and all day long it is dependent on the hairs until they come out; and treat them as much as required.
of scrofula instructs the patient to let the hair grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until fully formed.
Many times it occurs in the neck area, on the scrapes, and around them; never do they go anywhere else except to where the chief ailment is located, which we have already mentioned; every such scrofula has a proper location on its side, similar to the head-aposteme pair that we've discussed before; there are many of these with moisture, and some malignant ones that do not obey health. When you see a good position in the neck, and it is like the color of red skin, and silent at each part without being seared on the neck or artery or conduit, and not congealed; this means to scrape such parts thoroughly, two pairs of small lips as for head-aposteme pair that we've discussed before; with light touches, and be careful so you don't cut any nerves or venous vessels, which the hands might impede or tear apart, and should not move too quickly, to avoid cutting anything unnecessary.
And if you scrape the vein or artery and it prevents you from working on the wound, then apply a mixture of vitriol mixed with some powders that congeal blood, and bind the wound; and let the apophraemeasements be soothed and softened first; once they have been soothed, return to your work until it is completed; then proceed according to your treatment plan if there are no minor scrophulae left unscathed; treat and bandage them. And if there is a large amount of venous blood in the root of the scrofula, you must not scrape that scrofula at its root but bind it with a strong double thread, letting it drop down by harming it; then apply moistened Egyptian linen soaked in ointment to the wound, and continue treatment.
And if you scrape the whole scrofula, it is necessary that you assemble and bind the two pairs of small lips of the wound; then make sure there are no unnecessary delays due to the size of the scrofula. It must be ensured that you understand how to scrape its root, remove it forcefully, and bind it as we have said before. Those scrophulae with superfluous exudate open a large orifice; and when opening them in this manner, depend on it like the ones described previously, then dress them with linen soaked in ointment, making sure they don't become infected; and as long as the wound is well healed, continue to cure it with an ointment that dries out the exudate, until it becomes healthy again.
Of scrofula (or Scrophula) refers to a form of tuberculosis that affects the lymph nodes in the neck region and sometimes other parts of the body. Historically treated with various methods including bloodletting, cauterization, and herbal remedies as described in these Old French medical texts from the 12th century. The treatments discussed were based on traditional practices rather than modern scientific medicine.
The ancients spoke and wrote about the surgery of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is their writing. This passage indicates that these Old French medical texts might mention a practice related to surgical intervention on the throat—perhaps referring to an ancient technique or procedure not widely practiced by those times. It seems there was no record of such surgeries documented from around that period in these treatments within their writings.
c:il estimes theu coulore : " (https://url:esculle de le (itjac. The ices of theire:representation,lescripture. Which. When the disease is in the throat passage, it requires covering the epiglottis to avoid death from strangulation.
It requires then, when we wish to split the epiglottis, that we make holes of two or three circles or a small cut across, between the two circles or according to the size of the slit, not in the cardiocranial region.
and such sections of the epiglottis are without cartilage, and their edges are long without ends.
And if the master is afraid, it requires extending the throat skin all around the neck, then cutting the cartilage until it bends at the jawline; and remove the artery stones, if you see no other thing, and then make the slit, as we have said.
and is demonstrated by the flapping of the jaw that occurs when a crack runs through the area where it lies. And by the defect in the voice.
and leave the wound open for some time.
And when the time has passed without concern for strangulation, assemble the two lips of the cut cartilage, and cover it completely with a cloth, so that no air enters or leaves; then apply medicine to make new tissue grow until it is healthy again.
But let us say that we do not do this until the throat is completely burnt out and the patient suffers great pain and misery; and the disability becomes total. So we cover the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe otherwise and it is thus protected from death.
And for this reason command the patient to leave the wound open as long as the illness of the disease is not passed, and it lasts two or three years. But they command to sew up the wound and treat it until it was healed.
And I will tell you what I have seen. I saw that a young woman took one knife and thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the passageway thereof.
And I went to call for him to cure her, but she was already dead.
I discovered the wound and found the blood that was issuing from it; she had never coughed up phlegm or anything else, but her voice came out through the wound.
I hurried and treated the wound so that it was healed.
And nothing happened to her except she became hoarse of voice, and returned to her former condition.
For this reason I tell you that there is no danger in the shaping of the epiglottis.
from a large throat
This text refers to "gullet hernias" and mentions that they are quite large in size and more common among women. It's likely discussing a type of chest wall or abdominal complication related to the gullet area that has been historically observed, especially in females during medieval times.
And it is said by two methods: natural or not unnatural; and he has no design. This fragment suggests there are a few steps for treatment of dislocation in the gargles, and the chest jaundice hymes (...)
:enchilane it's en: thees: And he has fear, and does not agree to perform fiery blows on small ones, but tests and searches in every intromittible part. And if you press it so that there is no fat, and does not bind to any vein, as we do ourselves, and tests in every part of its body where there may be points. And thoroughly examines it, and treats it as it must be, until it is perfectly healthy again.
of ourselves
Many ways in which we are involved, which I will mention all the similarities.
And it is that you must tell me all the differences between us and others.
I say that the issue is hot and feverish, as long as it does not subside, and completes the discharge; however, the fever and heat rest.
With ours there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and contains a sixth part, which is its own pouch and resembles the color of flesh, and begins as well as a cyst, and becomes large.
And they have about two similarities, or gold-like, or moist, and many of the colors are as I said in the previous division.
It is necessary when you come to the treatment of ours that you examine and first test in every intromittible part, according to what type it has or which practitioner follows after.
And the way of examining abscesses in ourselves is that you press or make it more moist in the abscess, and turn your fingers back and forth as much as you know whether there has been perforation, and then according to the size of the abscess.
Then extract the intromittible part, and take care that it does not break.
If moisture runs out of the joint, its color will be as I said in other abscesses.
And after the intromittible part does not let moisture out, you know it is fatty, then do as follows: take it with tweezers, scrape lightly from each part and put on a bodice or garment where you will treat it healthily together with ours.
And if you cannot treat it healthily, then do so in pieces as long as there is no delay.
However if it does not delay, our issue returns many times.
And if it delays a little while and does not trouble you, then treat the wound with some of the corrosive powders, and constrain the wound, and apply to other remedies so that he may be completely healthy.
And if it hurts them greatly, they cut two fingers of the wound, and heal that which tightens therein.
And if the vein be cut against or otherwise if it is hastened and uses up the liquid of vitriol, let him leave for two or three days until the wound heals its bleeding; then return to cover that which was delayed.
Here are the forms of obstructive instruments, and there are three types in each: large and deep; and there are three kinds called "albares", and one is called "breb", and there are three types: large, deep, and small, to search for the abscess cavities.
And they are also like the needles which one counts sorceresses for, and made of copper, iron, or silver, and move as those that are yellowish in color, but are more tried for searching out the pits of abscesses.
And they have three types according to the size of the cavity: large, deep, and small.
The forms of the abscess curettes are many like this: large, deep, and small; and if there are abscess scrapers with two cavities each of three types as well.
And if there are abscess scrapers with three cavities each of three types as well; and if there are abscess scrapers with a single cavity, and these are also in three types; and all this is necessary for their use.
The chief of these is sharp and there are such ones that do not cut at all but for scraping the skin or muscle, which they use to scrape off veins and nerves.
And these obstructive instruments are the alembics or vials which when applied to the patient do not show him any overt signs of abscess cavities.
And they have three types: large, small, and medium, as you can see.
And they are not used only in the skin like limbs, arms and breasts, and groins, and similar places.
And there is no instance of making any other small instrument resembling abscess scrapers according to this form, for with such an implement one can scrape off the spleen.
And it has never been applied to well-healing veins or arteries in this great form.
And no man has inflated anyone's breasts when he began to become corrupt in the manner of a woman's breast.
And they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever attempts to heal them must first do so according to this form on line B, up until line A. dot: Then scrap off the fat, and apply medicinal ointment tightly to the wound, then join together the lower jaw joints of the wound with stitching until it heals.
And if the male breast swells upward, and is distorted due to its size like women do, making incisions above in pairs of similar cuts. Because one holds onto the other at the end of each and so they form a larger line according to this form from line B up to line G. Then scrape off the skin between the lower jaw joints and remove any fat, and apply what we have previously mentioned about stitching and powders to it until it is healed.
And if it is not healed, or the incision is not entirely complete because the maladies do not rest, nor due to the discharge of blood, then you must fill the wound with dampened cotton soaked in acidic poultice. And let it remain until it menstruates the remaining tissue and fat, then treat it so that it becomes healed.
Assault wounds
These assault wounds that occur on the soles are hardened ulcers or have calluses in them, and if they contain moisture.
Therefore those which contain moisture must be bandaged according to this form from line B up to line G. And when the blood is drawn out from the ulcer in the assault wound, apply many pieces of dampened cotton and leave it there for another day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with an ointment that will continue until healed.
And if the wounds resemble ulcers, and he does so as we have said about ulcer incisions, and if there is blood, then you apply cautery like we have previously described;
A:rrete deffes desormaintenance of theurs du raclevein, et depe riche.
souffre lesen:measures of thepeace. A manure. Thefier, quinainent.arre dexent.age. ounce,lore. Ipsum. The-century. Sartemongue:sacres laisse. Hereof.
And if it is found near here for the artery, then it cuts off the long hairs. and when you feel it at your necessary places, if you sense movement; and when it is for the vein, then they draw out appearing arteries instead of venous ones.
and it is madness to cover this incision; and immediately when it is under the stones and among the thorns and on the neck and in many other places, it is very large. Therefore it is necessary to avoid the treatment of fire, and he who is in charge must also avoid it, and even those who have an inflamed artery do not cut long hairs.
Therefore it is necessary to avoid the treatment of fire, and he who is in charge must also avoid it, and even those who have an inflamed artery do not cut long hairs. then work on the body of a child, and gradually remove the arteries from the skin until they are revealed;
then there he puts an arrow there, and pierces the other side of it, and binds the artery with a double thread in two places as I have indicated to you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in temples;
then he points out the place between the two threads of an intromitting instrument as long as it does not interfran with the incision there, and whether drawing or not draws the incising.
then he prepares the treatment that causes a wince, until the two threads of the intromising instrument are cut. then cures this wound favorable to it as long as it is sounding;
and if the shoulder blade is dislocated for the vein, it must be cut in all the skin with your hand. Then take the needle from the place you hold in your hand, and pierce it, and let there be two threads of thickness so that you pull it from the other side; Then tie the incision, as I have told you before, or an incision from one of those two joints with the two threads;
And if you doubt that the thread is strong enough, re-tie one of the other needles to all three threads along the incision of the first needle and hold the threads in four loops;
Then cover the incision so that it does not continue to leak, then cover the excessive bleeding and leave what has been tied.
Then place it under one of those warm linen and oil coverings, then treat him with tenting and ointments until he is sound again;
Of necks
As these incidents occur in arteries and veins, they also happen in the neck joints when they are used up or due to too much work, or similar things.
And this often happens with auxiliaries and tools in all these cases where there are fractures or joint injuries, and the pain seems similar to that of a broken heart, involving various degrees of pain.
And when we apply pressure to form it, if he feels the severe pain, and it is not formed by a broken heart but in that warmth.
And he is silent about all parts, and does not move forward or backward, nor above nor below, and the one who has joint injuries does not need to cover with iron: by chance it may cause contractures.
And that one who is either head or forehead, makes the skin of the scapulae taut. If they are small, if you have some pincers, and he treats them at their root;
Treasure; ouns esle tostant desus: Lesage, et siens :meigne as mea century inuide. ices of theo ferme deit : leslalong veneral andante. Deire. Laing secles, theoreque:entire.
ilene pithor: a lour:sac. Aesoldre lee. Theobtainin:age froment, to No dislocation ever occurs in the abdomen and elsewhere either, and it is a disease called "fungus" by its appearance, and it has subtle roots and large joints; and there are both small and great ones.
And I saw .i. house where there were .ij. abdomens that looked more like fungus than anything else, and had no difference, and they were white, with fine roots, and had split open, and from them would come moisture again.
I collected them and found in one .xviij. ounces they weighed, and in the other .vj., and the operations on the incision show that the patient's malaise is moist, and the color of the articulation is pale and moist with delicate roots;
If the wound is wide, and it's in your presence that I apply fire to it. Because at the barber shop there are often too many large blood drains, and if they do not stop on their own, then you hurry so that the cauterist does his work;
And if you see the patient's malady excited and full of fear about the iron cauterization, take a well-made strip of linen and wrap it around the articulation as we have said before, and let it stay for .ij. days.
And then the binding, and do not stop exerting the linen strip until it compresses the articulation, and if the roots are large, take great care to cover it immediately; but you can also cover most of the affected area. This helps in managing the swelling and applying pressure that aids in healing without immediate cauterization on the abdomen.
Then cauterize it without allowing it to retract; treat the wound and ensure that you do not cover the abdomen colored white, weak in sensation, and pale-looking skin with linen or bandages. This careful approach prevents covering an already sensitive area that may need special attention during healing.
Because it's an inflamed abscess, and I will come to the treatment of the subsequent ulcer after this episode. This indicates that proper care is needed for both the present condition and anticipating future complications in wound management.
When the patient shows signs of pain or discomfort (indicated by "quant li boude"), it's essential to assess whether further cauterization or alternative treatments are required, considering the delicate nature of treating such wounds and avoiding aggravation. The patient’s symptoms guide the course of action during healing.
If the appearance of pain comes from a wound cauterization or a fissure in the skin and is located on the abdomen or in other bodily parts (as mentioned), including areas where blood vessels or arteries are affected. This description emphasizes the various scenarios that can lead to increased discomfort, which must be carefully evaluated when planning treatment methods for different wound conditions.
And if it is due to the fissure and from the discharge of blood and pus (as described), with a color similar to that of corpses and light in pain, and various issues arise; this comparison indicates that treating wounds can be complicated by factors such as pain and bleeding complications. Understanding these symptoms is critical for effective treatment planning. Anderres de saillier. Et ceulx vers ousre de laine. Sié sur leu devisant en chrestorce, et d’orcourre siége.
.
sse iafece willi aungelongrextectherme:s-cecellecelle fromentection :nacheinningdeletion,esignent ¬xe tolume ieu;savoir:lamebleture:dunge If it is known that you allow the treatment. For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter about incisions, for the artery and vein.
And if the appearance is in the intestines or the belly, it is known that you command the patient to bleed his abdomen and stretch him right downwards, then examine every part of the abdomen. then he commands to lie down between your hands. then he goes through the vein you have marked all over the body. then they are situated above most of the abscesses.
then a portion of the abscess is extended under the rope, and you give your indication, and see if it is in the intestines. if you pull on the rope and it moves, then let the intestine come out to the side of the abdomen.
but if you pull the belly, it takes oncision and removes excess material.
and if the artery or vein is against it, or the vein, go gently through it, then return to your work and take two needles, and hold them in two places, and pull out those two pieces of blood vessel that you have pierced.
then stretch the abscess over the two needles, and if you see it has healed, remove the needles, leave the vessel open as long as it can still bleed. And kill the dead flesh by itself. medieval medical treatise on the ploye unesme.
medieval medical treatise on the ploye unesme. : les caustromatine le monte. Etroi ceseme: it isle theorre.
Of fire cautery commands the Malade to let his hairs grow long and even; if they prick at their base, he must hold them steadfast until they are born.
We have spoken about the characteristics of scabs and how to treat them with medicine, and discussed the care in iron treatment; let's say that chancres are found in marshes, and there is great caution required in their cure, they say the ancients who can remove scabs when they are on the skin or inside the breast and in other parts of the body, and one should cover them completely from the start; and for large and old ones, it does not require you to approach, as no one has ever healed me, nor anyone before.
And the operations when it is on the skin or you can remove it, as we have said before, you should never purge a patient with black pus; then he will become healthier if he shows signs of fullness, and cleanse the malaide; first wash his head for the operation; then cut off your daughters' ulcers and scrape all heads and bones without leaving any residue; let the wound dry thoroughly in your hand or with something else, and when removing pus from a blood vessel or vein, cauterize it until the bleeding stops. Then treat with other treatments until he is healthy again.
Of diarrhea We have said in the division of diarrhea and how water is mixed to make it, and the signs of each type, and the treatment with medicines, and that involving iron; it appears only briefly; therefore, you should not touch iron for these two types: namely tympanites and pyocephalus, as it is a dangerous matter. So when treating this form of diarrhea where water-like symptoms are addressed in medicine, and the care does not benefit if the malady appears weak or has another disease besides diarrhea; and you should not use iron, because there is doubt about its effectiveness; but if you see the patient with strong vitality, who has no other illness except diarrhea alone, and he is not too overweight nor too old, then you must proceed as follows: L'avante li ceste forme du maladies:espremer, andre a la semblant dexpresse dextrales. As-nauxent descongeuintres d’abou.
Then observe whether the illness is directed towards the intestines: it must be cut through them twice from under the belly; and if the illness is related to the liver, then make an incision on its left side at two inches below. And if the illness is due to the gallbladder, then make a cut on its right side at two inches; and if it's because of the kidney, then do so on the right side as well, without fear that any superfluous parts will slip from beneath the incision.
Then pierce through the whole skin with the instrument, and strike your hand all over the surface area between the skin and the sinew as much as in scraping about a thumbnail; then puncture the sinew until it feels soft at its base eight inches long, which is the part of the water, and then you pierce through it with this instrument that has a similar shape to: And it looks like thin silver wire, made either from gold or pewter, and in the middle there is a small hole; and on one side there are three holes, on the other side there are three holes as well, and one more in another place; and you cut them so they look like feathers.
At the top above is the alaemele, so that when blood comes to the air, it immediately flows out of the instrument; you empty most or three-fourths of this cavity because if you remove more than what is necessary in that hour, perhaps the patient may die from the resolution of its spirit with the blade, or he bruises his palms, or approaches death.
But by the amount of its vitality, and according to what the dispositions of the sick person's vitality signify, and his parts; then you use the instrument and retain the air, which is now held back for the keeper who has sealed the hole that is underneath the sinew, as I have said before, so you pierce according to this manner; then reopen the instrument on another day if you see the patient suffering from it, and remove a small amount of air.
Do this every day, and do not frighten the sick person as long as it is just a little bit of air; if you doubt about the sick person, then remove much more air, for the treatment of burial or sand could cause burns and sweating from bathing and exposure to sunlight, and drinking alcohol; and treat with dehydrating medicines until he is cured, and cauterize on his stomach and liver and spleen after removing the air.
The treatment of a wound or injury involving cutting (cauterization). A wound on the penis that does not have an opening or it is small, or it' Written in Old French, around 1250. The text appears to be a medical instruction about treating injuries to the penis. It discusses how one should cauterize and heal a wound on the penis if necessary while making sure that urine is not produced from it as the wounds are closed, then collected (sic, and then made of three years or so in 1240: :xer a'sant ofte iti tae: entstars: le: and thecaire:gete to deusage pas scele (bienens cezlengere:ne decaume. Ifar, asle de:en cean liaire.
And the method of this work is that it causes strong pain in a patient's back, where the head of the thigh and the calf are as small as the tip of a pen, so when pressed, it hurts like this; and avoid letting blood flow repeatedly, if it occurs, treat the wound with such a stick as used for bleeding.
Blisters on the thigh. Many times these albathe appear in the thigh, and it is a disfiguring mark; and there are both malignant and non-malignant ones; it requires treating them with one tiny drop of a substance at once, and cope and massage all over, then apply moistened cotton swabs soaked in Egyptian oil, and heal the treatment until they are healthy. And if the albathe is malignant, red and discolored, it requires that you take a caustic treatment; when you have coated the albathe, and it is in part on the thigh and another part inside the flesh, then crush the albathe where it is inside; and when it is healed, continue to treat it. Because when treated together, the pus of the thigh will not be assured that it will not be perceived, and darkness and corruption appear in its place, requiring you to apply a mixture made from mulberry tree bark and wheat flour; then treat with other treatments until healthy again.
And if blood is repeatedly evacuated, provide the lunar caustic as follows: The caustics help in both occurrences of bleeding and corruption; when the thigh's lymphatic channels are swollen and inflamed, it requires you to puncture or extract a vein from the thigh, and pour warm urine among the maladies; and as soon as there is dislocation at the top of the thigh which has not been circumcised, whether for injury or incision, it requires that you scrape with such an instrument until the lymphatic channels are untied, and free all the pus from the thigh.
And if it is a painful procedure to perform on that part, it requires you to scrape with such an instrument without any point at the head of the thigh or the back; then cleanly remove between these two points and apply a fine linen soaked in cold water, ensuring it does not cause further discomfort.
From circumcision.
Les maude. Toute li relevein lesur. The French: lice leu (sans ceulis toluein. Environ Leves invoitures onge itaim. Laverain theoreal. Present day deure, andes. Whatil aces ilk itte
I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision of their children, for they do not follow it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
For I want the greatest part of masters and saints who performed circumcision with fire, that is to say by daal (daal meaning "by hand" or "manually"), and all sorts of instruments; if he knew where there were two wounds, so it happened twice over, and in some cases they fell on top and stayed.
Or the recovery is covered (presumably meaning healed), and there is double pain, and in the re-circumcision done by hand (done again by another person) it's not securely attached to the nail; and in circumcision of the finger sometimes the iron goes through and tears off the flesh, and often they are born like this without need for further circumcision.
From the circumcision performed with instruments throughout the entire length of the thread I have found the beauty in experimentation, because the forces cut exactly as much above as below.
For when you press your hand, if it cuts evenly through one-third of the flesh; but that the skin is well attached to the vein; and in making the second operation so that it makes children think, as long as you only tie the thread around the limb, and encourage them to do it in every way that they can. Then you do it entirely in your hands and press the forces between your hands or on your fingers so that no one sees them, not even a horse owner; then place your hand on the vein and blow or cut, and move up to the point where the knot of the vein is. Then clean well from the accumulated dirt, then tie the slit with a double thread, then tie it again for .i. piece between .i. other ties; and in the second tightening place at .ij. points on the pouchlet and suture indicators, and create spaces between .ij. ties, then lift up the knot quickly and move the head of the vein.
Then you do it entirely in your hands and press the forces between your hands or on your fingers so that no one sees them, not even a horse owner; then place your hand on the vein and blow or cut, and move up to the point where the knot of the vein is. Then clean well from the accumulated dirt, then tie the slit with a double thread, then tie it again for .i. piece between .i. other ties; and in the second tightening place at .ij. points on the pouchlet and suture indicators, and create spaces between .ij. ties, then lift up the knot quickly and move the head of the vein. Then let the blood flow a little and a little, for it is the master's work; and put powder on top of the powder .i. damp cloth with a moistened piece of white bread cooked in boiling water mixed with good olive oil rosinated and frying oil, and let it stay there another day, and cure with other cures until he is healthy.
The form of the instruments for circumcision is this: both arms should be held up and outstretched as much as possible like hands.
the error of circumcision is wherever there are tears in the incision; therefore it must be that you extend your unglet(s). Then he makes alike, and if thou not have thy pliers, and then cut the same.
: itte rage theur jure, siensage.ce illaut incomme,sesius :er. Ieslerean. Injurnece theorange. Thisjac andre devisa pasie ofitinage. All age. A.
Treat now the wounds still suffering from powder, as we have said or treated about powders, and if it exceeds in caution, and it goes above, so that it will not harm; treat it then, as we have said, until it is healed.
The holding back of urine.
The holding back of urine is related to the opening of a wound, or frozen blood, or bowel, or belly swelling, or similar things, as we have said in this section.
And if the urine does not flow freely, and you see that the holding back is through an opening near the bladder or the urethral collar, then it indicates that the patient has a hard pelvis under his hips; place the catheter on the back of the patient, extend their abdomen from above this point, restrain them as much as possible, and constrain the neck of the bladder to the opening upwards so that urine can flow freely.
And if it does not come out, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then it indicates that you must assist in extraction with all instruments called "syringe," for this is its form: let it be made of very thin and light silver like a bird's quill; make the syringe head thick like half a palm. This description could refer to an early understanding of catheterization, where materials are described in terms familiar at the time but analogous to modern equipment descriptions. The 'siringue' mentioned is likely referring to what we now understand as a surgical syringe or catheter.
And the way of expelling urine is as follows: take a double thread and tie it at one end with some linen or cotton, then insert the thread through the syringe's tip; remove any excess wicking material and let this thread run along the syringe's shaft; oil the syringe with oil or fat, and place the patient on a bed, lifting their bladder and urethra in moisture of olive oil. This description suggests an early catheterization procedure where a wicking material is used to facilitate urine flow through what would be a rudimentary catheter system. The mention of materials like linen, cotton, and animal fats indicate the period's medical practice using available resources for such purposes.
Then quickly insert the syringe into the penis so that it reaches down to the root of the penis, then wrap the penis above the belly button; insert the syringe before reaching the bladder and let the patient feel the urine flowing upwards towards an empty space. This step is not properly executed if the catheter turns inside out because it deviates from the intended pathway for urine expulsion, causing potential complications. The procedure suggests a primitive form of urological intervention, with emphasis on correct insertion technique and monitoring to prevent mishaps like the turning of the syringe within the body's internal structures.
And repeat using the catheter as long as the bladder is empty, and hold it tightly to the patient.
revices fromiogrejo5decelle if12nde:lume, exponexques ifre;ngleves in the outngrevevanture ifvell ​lances :3iteuxifel veintrecrutunge
When abscesses or blood come into the bladder, and pus is accumulated therein, and you see it trickling out with liquids and medicines, this applies to all instruments called "cleptodrome," and its shape.
It is closed, and if there are .ij. holes: .ij. from one side, and .i. from the other side, as you see it; and the wounds are healed so that the medicine does not impede drawing blood with addition, meaning when it can be drawn out properly, then pushed out according to need.
And when you see the medicines trickling into the bladder, place the catheter in the syringe and draw it out completely; if you withdraw the fluid from the catheter, then forcefully push back the amount that is drawn out; if moisture enters again, now reaching the bladder, he will feel its pain.
And it is the form of a gentle enema by which one administers to the bladder: if this holds true.
And it is made of silver or lead, and the needle is placed higher up; then over one side or on either sides, place an intestine filled with sheep's bladder and insert the catheter by which you enema into the bladder. Then take a thin linen thread, two inches long, and heat it above the fire; push the catheter-needle in between those two breasts formed by a strong double twisted thread; then stretch your hand over the bladder so that all of the catheter's length is inside it until the patient feels the catheter has reached the bladder.
And if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make an iii-shaped circle in it, then insert the needle roundly through it; push firmly into those holes, then assemble it as one would assemble woodwork, and place inside what you see oil and moisture and liquid, and link this to the instrument; do so as if with a bladder, pressing down on your hand until the fluid is drawn from the bladder.
from the stone
We have said in the division of surgical procedures and extraction techniques; we've discussed the difference between incised wounds caused by rain (lightning) versus all other injuries, and how to operate on such injuries, as well as within the bladder and penis; I will explain it clearly.
sicle, sopex:age. Include.
And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient by washing, for removing all that is in the intestines. For there has never been any occasion to search the wound.
Then take the patient by his feet, and lift and move him downwards, so that the wound descends to the bottom of the bladder, and never has been done with any elevation in height; then place him between your hands, and let his legs be underneits, thus making the bladder fully descend; then examine it and feel inside.
If you feel the wound in space, then immediately raise your lance above it. And if it does not yield to touching all over, indicate with your left index finger where the patient's pain is located, whether his injury is a child, or your judgment misleads, or he has completed adulthood; and thrust him back into his foundation, feel the wound in its depth, when you perceive it at your touching, press down on your left side near the bladder's collar, and if you see a fissure there, let it open further.
And instruct the minister to press with his hand on the bladder and command him to extend his right hand upwards over the joints in the upper area, and with his left hand hold the skin surrounding these joints at the part where the cut is made; then he pushes the suprapubic block, which has this form:
And make between those which are between the joints and the foundation, not in the middle but on the left side of the navel; place it above the wound, and let your hand be there either over the foundation or over the cut, depending on how wide it is by default, and narrowly, according to the size of the wound, without making it too large.
Inadvertently the pressure on your hand that is either foundation or the cuts work upwards; and you know whether it has teeth or angles and margins: if they are loose to come out, and resembles a hairy lion, and lightly coming from the edge.
Where the belly has angles and margins, make it larger; and if it does not expand, you must stretch it with pliers that are also like a grinding wheel on top, so as to stretch the wound enough that it doesn't escape; or you throw underneath this one subtle instrument in the middle; and if you cannot grasp it at all, then slightly enlarge this little puncture, and if there is no skin removed, then strain with vitriol.
And if there are more than one hole, first throw the largest at the neck of the bladder, then cover it, and thrust through it, and do so with the smaller ones, if there are more. And if it is very large, you must wrap it in cloth, and make a larger wound. For these things affect the patient: or he dies, or his urine comes out as soon as his hairs cannot be joined; but always strive to throw it, either with pliers or with scrapers, until you can remove it piece by piece.
And when you have completed your work, anoint the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, and strain it, and spread a moistened linen over it; or water and rosewater, hot or cold, to soothe the inflamed area; then revive the patient on his neck, and let him not loosen the ligament any further until the next day.
And when you loosen it, if the patient comes out well with oil and water, then heal him with honey ointment and balm, as long as he is healthy again.
And if the abscess cavities come into the wound and clots of blood in the bladder, and it is retained by this causing part to retain urine, which forms a partial blockage as with a leak: therefore push your work into the cavity, and extract that blood clot, for if it remains there will be further rupture of the bladder, and perforation.
Then raise the wound with water and agar and seal it, and help him in all ways that you know until he is healthy again; and ensure that all the wounds you cure by binding up his thighs and assembling the medicines on the site.
And if the hole is small and it is from the penis, and stuck in, and urine cannot come out; therefore do this that I have said before: you will cut many times for excuse of this cutting. I have already tried this way.
Take one iron bar in the form of this, and set it at three angles pinned to a stick:
Then take one iron rod in this form and set it at three angles pinned to a stick: so that the urine cannot enter the bladder when inserted into the penis; then push the iron rod gently downwards, twisting back and forth until you can pierce another way. If there is suddenly released urine, then wrench your hand on the part of the penis within the veins; if at first it breaks apart, and thrust with the urine, and bind the painful hairs.
ille alaine ancorelongue lopre itanfeu:esubstant. I'sans, theuces:en iapeace lorne. Whatfaiti frome laissance.la corpus dexacre. Forchief. Iacciaur jure aoutil, andecount :nage.
Of the woman's womb
Often the womb is dislocated in women, and if it does not happen at all, then this is a grave illness, and defended by .iij. reasons: one being that often the woman becomes unmarried; and the second reason is that no well-known woman can be found who reveals herself openly, especially when she is of noble birth.
And the third way is that it is often difficult to find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the womb of a woman is more fragile than the man's womb, so they must cut deeper, which carries great risk for her.
And if such situations arise, it is necessary that you employ a nurse skilled in this area and with knowledge of the art of veins; and if you do not have one, then there should be no less skillful noblewoman present. Present an expert woman who knows well about women's lives or a woman who has some knowledge of the procedure, and command her to perform what is instructed in the examination of the womb.
However, one must pay close attention that the woman is unmarried: however, it is required to remove her clothing or foundation and examine the womb; if she accepts, then constrain her within her foundation, and command her to remove her clothing or foundation either with a dislocation or against the malady, and press her left hand over the bladder.
If she accepts, it is required that she move the womb slowly from above the entrance of the bladder towards the root of the thigh, as long as it moves down to the root of the thigh; then cover her pelvis in the root of the thigh against the milk vein where it appears, and let there be a cut on that part of the womb so she feels it; and do not move its lower or upper parts above or below, but make the first small incision.
Then apply the string in the cut, so that if you feel the womb where it is deepest, let it come out enough for you to see the wound; and know many kinds of piercing: namely small and large and sharp and tender, long and round, and which have been drawn. Know the appearances in order to understand the outcome.
And if the pain subsides at all, then apply vitriol and keep it there for an hour while the wound is numb; then return to your work, so long as the wound still be open in your labor, and you have already mentioned operations.
And if it does not heal itself, and it is an artery that has been cut, then powder is put on the wound and the bandage of tent-poles and belts, and no longer to reseal it, and let the hole remain closed, unless by chance the patient dies; then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is alleviated, and the limb protector, he returns to your work, as long as the wound has not closed.
of abdominal herniation
The assembly of moisture or white clay that is under the skin, where it contains the fluids, which they call "clay," and it has never been properly in the skin's fabric if one believes it to be something else; and this leather between the fluid and the white clay we have mentioned before; and this does not happen very often.
And the formation of this clay substance is due to a fragility that draws fluids into it, and expands that matter.
And there have been cases where it comes from percussion on the fluids, and this clay substance has many colors: or it is a declining color towards yellow, or without red, black, or white-blueish, and that happens more.
And this is the sign of recognizing this assembly, because if it is white clay that we have mentioned before, then it is called an aposteme, which means little gap; i.e., not very long like a hole, and it does not open up the fluids, because it has moisture throughout its entirety.
And if it has moisture in its own fabric, then it is called an aposteme with a part of the fluid, and for this reason we consider it to be another type.
And if the moisture is between the skin and white clay, then it feels well; therefore, when you know the color of the moisture, if it spreads throughout all layers, then its shape is as follows: there is a circle in front of us. Since then who comes after the interstitial space, judge it in therein.
Since then who comes after the interstitial space, judge it in therein. Et en les. Leu tosangainces aferme:espoire in theitour.touns : 12espaired lais itou eslaine lairre:esle. LXXI, and itent thete's. Ita desorne-thens. Theora tewcorne astele. Whatsoar en le:esancoritene.
Then put him on his left side, and command the minister that he puts him on the right side, and extend the rod to one of the two sides where the knee joints are located.
Then take the spatula and scrape off the skin of the joints around it until near the thumb, and make a straight incision while considering the condition of the skin as white, and gently scrape underneath.
Then pierce the joint with water at one point and extract all the fluid, then put your fingers on it, and raise the joint edges; do not touch the knee joints but just the skin itself, and carefully scrape underneath his side without breaking it, so that if you don't scoop gently enough, the fluid will return.
And if the blood pours upon your work, then you must rush to repair it in its place as soon as you have completed scraping off the fluid from the joints; then rejoin the two sides of the knee joint with a bandage, and treat it as other wounds until it is healed.
And if the corrupt blood is due to another illness, it must be that you tie up the veins that are hanging down, doubting whether there will be a return of the blood; then scrape the joint with all suspended veins, extract the fluid, and treat it as we have said.
And if the fluid is assembled in two parts, you see that these are joints; scrape off the other part just as you did the first one, then suck out the blood from it, and place a linen bandage soaked in rose oil on the wound.
And cover the wound with other wet linen in wine and oil, place it over the two joints, and lay double cloths on top of that, and bind everything according to this form:
Then take two pieces of linen cloth torn into strips like this and join them together in the crotch area with stitching, place one edge over the foundation towards the back part, and the other to the thumb side; then take the second piece which is at the hands, join it there as well, and assemble all the bandages completely around the restraint loop of the trousers.
And never treat this joint with a large iron spatula, but rather a fine cultured cautery, and scrape the skin of the joints gently as we have said before, so that when you expose the white part of the skin where the fluid is located.
If you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that fluid with it, scraping gently with it:
And scrape it in all the ways you can until you cover everything; and remember that blood should not touch the fluid, and be aware that this operation is safer than others. And by preventing bleeding, we also make sure to take care of its shape.
And if anything goes against it, or bleeding of blood and other things happen, then treat what is contrary, according to what has been said before.
And if the maladies are:
: Aude. I'sere:aure. Solitifare it’sre.
cité,as thiste ce:4c'lorectifreche to manit.t craignexse en chan ousse aungeles.ume tille siéce aisse ifnature.gantes.
And if the wound does not allow water to come out of its mouth in the wound, it is necessary that you pierce a feather or use the instrument with which one treats fluid-filled abscesses, since from this position as described here; and slightly expand the wound, and observe whether the fluid returns, and after about two months or sooner if possible, when it has assembled in such a manner as previously mentioned, then the patient will endure these misfortunes for the remainder of their life.
From the incision of veins
Seek that in this section of the rule there are many dangers, since it seems to me that moving them is not desirable.
And I will tell you the workings and similarities of the incision.
Therefore, many incidents arise from these incisions, and particularly so with veins; and it is by much that this occurs.
It is to know by excessive bitternpression and fluid spreading, which occurs within the veins or through percussion.
And the color of the incision corresponds to that of the cut; and it does not involve pain, and is a grave incisive.
And occasionally there are jagged and torn incisions as well as those of a reddish hue, and it never comes from any artery or the expansion of a vein.
When it comes to any artery, if it is compressed by the manner of incision, when you apply pressure in the necessary places. And it does not require that you touch.
That which is made from venous swelling is compressed by its position with the expression of touching the necessary places.
And it can be well done on this resemblance as well as the others. And it is to take care of the veins so that they are positioned on top, and draw them firmly with white thread or suture, releasing all parts from the swelling.
If the swelling is already aligned with these needs, it requires that you treat the veins and the tissues.
And if it is tightly bandaged, and this one must release the whole vessel.
And if the stone's head grows backward, it requires that you remove it entirely, and extract the core, as we have said before.
And when the work is accomplished, employ a greasy linen on the wound with rose oil and wine, then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
from the incision into abscesses
This is an incision wrapped with a bandage that seems to resemble I. bolus, accompanied by the softening of abscesses. and if it cries out when moving it;
and the treatment for this illness is also very concerning as much as this one before.
and in telling you our work on it, according to what the ancients did.
It requires you to set the painful part on an elevated surface, then let down the syringe containing pus into its proper place. to all the parts near the vein, and darken your master's face, and extend them outward.
and cut the wide strip along that area where the vessels are exposed, until it is revealed.
and then scrape each section as we have described in the extraction of the arteries that are within the temple region.
then insert an awl or a double thread and tie it to the first joint where the blood has come, and then tie it to the other head. then press it firmly, according to the length of the course, and remove the decayed moisturizers.
then treat the wound as we have mentioned for other cases, if no vessel is obstructing either of the abscesses.
for by this it does not bring harm, and if blood appears at all vessels, it requires draining the pus from every vessel. if the vessel's movement is not impeded by the incisions, and they remain intact and cannot be assisted.
from this procedure onward The healing of this branch occurs through the cutting that comes with the stripping or extension towards the belly in the part of the stomach, because then the intestines descend from their usual route to one of the branches.
And this route is either the stripping or extension of it, and these about a dozen causes come along with it, such as striking, jumping, coughing, lifting a burden, and similar things:
And when it is about the stripping of the twofold extension, it happens little and little over a long time, and does not come suddenly. And are these abscesses equal up to the opening toward the font, because the stripping presses on the intestines.
And the signs when it comes to the twofold stripping are that they bring about sudden pain at the beginning and various appearances on the skin surface around the area pressed upon by the intestines, due to the release of these structures from their normal position and the issue with the intestines in relation to this action.
And there is no occurrence of the intestines with the circles (or loops), and they are tightly bound, causing great pain to the patient, primarily when pressed.
And in these iron treatments for fear, because then it is necessary to be careful not to cause harm.
And the manner of this work is that you command or order it to make sure that the intestine returns into its place within the wound, if possible. Then suddenly squeeze its neck between your hands, and soothe the hives.
Then the skin above it and cover all the skin around the loops for a long time; Then place some leaves near the belly buttons according to what you know about opening a wound, and do so in such a way that it allows them to come out.
Then scrape the skin above it so that you do not reveal the loops of the intestines, as long as you do not uncover them.
Then place your point in such a way that it pierces the joint, where it is between the white membrane inside the skin of the belly, and between the second layer.
And go behind the belly, and between the second layer; and thrust the hand to the right side of the joints, and place your white membrane in the upper part of your left hand, and lift the belly towards the waist. And command the minister that he extends the belly upwards, and loosens those behind the ligament.
And if it has an intestinal wrap or hard white membrane, and you have not done anything about it, then let it go inside the belly.
Then take an awl or a thick thread made of x threads, and insert it into the back part of the syfect, which is after the joints' skin; after the waist, then pull out the tendons until there are three threads left. Then join them together in the manner of a cross, and tie the white membrane we have described which is under the skin of the joints with a strong knot of ii parts. Then wrap the tendons around the threads and tie them in a strong knot of ii parts so that no one's feet can enter it when it is healed. And set the knot as long as the first knot of ii parts, and after these two knots leave the white membrane which is under the joints' skin with a great length.
And after all the others according to the roundness that the elf has, then pull in the part which is under the skin of the joints as much as there are threads left without correction and pulling, as we have said before.
Then dress the damp hair in oil, and put it on wounds, and I will instruct you about the knot we have described. And never cauterize the white membrane that we have said after incision, out of doubt about bleeding wound.
Because this happens often, and leave the knot as long as it has a little blood flowing through it; and if it is delayed in falling off, heat up some water, and apply what we have said there until it starts to bleed.
Then treat the wound with other care until it is healed perfectly.
of a hernia case
re lees, tolentures tis ennature, and thete.
decomposition.narginnare,oungerient:saint in whichches:fine çoignexes: The fromcellei craindrexheurifyrecheuntimeshangececrukies  :n iaitifits (lanshes
Then I coat him, and treat the abscess that is done with this work, until his little finger aches; and he treats it as we have said, so long as he becomes sound again.
Never comes a route of anger, as we have said, and opens the wounds; and if any portion of the intestines is dislodged, it is little, and recovers in all hours.
And if he lingers too long on this point, he believes the wound or abscess to be inflamed until the intestines dislodge.
And this occurs through the expansion of the abscess that is inflamed, as we have said, because it is expanded, then softens and swells the wounds and opens.
And heals if treated with cautery, as we have previously said; and never is healed by iron in this manner:
And he suffers a great pain in his side between your hands, then he covers the enlarged abscess of the inflamed with bandages according to the quantity of three fingers.
And then extracts the abscess that is under the skin where it lies, then he takes and applies the right ointment and dressing on the visible abscess.
And he presses the wound on the belly, then counts the three fingers appearing above the dressing of the abscess at its head, and applies them both;
Then he extracts the head of the dressing, and does not cover the abscess or expand it in any other way, as I have told you in the treatment of the intestinal junction;
Then he treats with the treatment of wounds. And when you pull the hairs, if they are dislocated and treat the wound so long as it is sound again.
The abscess is constricted and has no appearance in the treatment, and the cautery heats it up, and it continues on towards health.
of the softening of the cartilage of the joints
Often the cartilage in joints is softened in many people because the substances within them are mushy, and it's easy to see; and it is necessary when they want to cure him, that he lies down on his back with the softened cartilage underneath natural skin, then attaches .ij. strips at one corner to a stitch, and you must first remove any superfluous mushy cartilage in .iij. or .iiij. firmly attached corners; then suture between the corners, and cure it as with other wounds, until he is well again and his filament grows.
The term "chastement" refers to a form of corporal punishment that involves striking or hitting someone, often used in medieval contexts for discipline or correction. It does not directly translate into the medical field but could metaphorically relate to various therapeutic procedures aiming at restoring the normal function and structure within the body following injury or disease.
The sentence in question refers to various forms of "chastrement" or punishment as being described within our laws and the author expresses a preference not to mention them in this book due to their nature. They are categorized into two primary methods: attraction (using heat) where animals with softened cartilage are placed on hot ground until they return to normal, and fracturing (surgical cutting), which includes skinning the animal by hand from one side while pressing the joints with the other hand. Each limb is then bandaged individually, ensured no small or slippery substances remain in contact with the wound, similar to another form of chastrement mentioned previously that involves shaving and applying pressure to the cartilage using a suspensor.
In the context of this Old French medical text from around the 12th century, "hermofrodites" likely refers to a term used to describe conditions related to ambiguous or atypical sexual development in children. The concept is not directly transcribed by the authoritative physician, but it's difficult to determine whether they are hermofrodite. Craft d’autant qu’il laisse pas en maintes fois à la maison; et si les mauvaise herbes de lexecrements maladie, et fere.
Hermaphroditism is according to two ways: one being that between the two openings as much like a woman's figure has hair and sometimes it also excretes urine; and the other way being in women, and similar to a rod and two openings. And the treatment of the body and soul should be that you treat the adjacent parts all together, and care for them as with other wounds; but in the second case, from men whose urine jumps out through their skin from the two openings, and there is no cure.
Trembling (from Latin "tremendum")
Trembling is a condition of the natural part that it becomes too hideous to look at; and women have also had it as great as a hand, and it's the care. You must dye the superfluous trembling in your hands or onions, and do it lightly; and don't go too far with cutting sores, which will bleed again until they heal; and there is another condition that nests at the mouth of a chicken, and they call it "cow disease", because of its similarity. It must be treated as we have said about trembling, and cared for until it becomes healthy.
Erratica (from Latin "erraticus") refers to something that is erratic or inconsistent in movement or behavior, often used to describe a medical condition affecting the muscles leading to involuntary movements.
Erratica is a condition of the woman whose nature is not known or the defect is small; and it is natural by birth, or accidental due to disease that came from elsewhere; or because of another affliction associated with the joints, subtle pain or dislocation, and this occurs in the marrow, sides, belly, or thighs, and also results in pregnancy and sometimes premature flowering. The understanding of such a condition is according to the rule of dancing. If the affliction appears soon afterward, you must do it as need be; but if it's subtle dislocation, let the joints form for these will begin to appear at the same time with the affliction, and over this: take your two indicators together, and place the woman on her back, stretched out her legs. Then are the joints formed as long as the subtlety is not over the sprouting of the thorn; then let's put linen cloth, and oil, and incite it for a long time; and cure other sicknesses blood-draught, soothlyte, if toil. Anders iacte sanc quarters deffendus as home, draped within iactre ofxous thecunt ongente: "tracteur lacre itchief. In thefingleslater ices.
Of piles of blood, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold them steady so they do not move until they come out.
Hemorrhoids are outbreaks of veins that often occur without proper caustic treatment; and when they become old, they become hardened (thelul); we have said before about similar cases in surgery, and the signs, and now I will say those who heal through this operation. I said that hemorrhoids, which are cut into the marl, do not show themselves by feeling, except for treatment with iron; however, those at the mouth of the marl can feel them, so they can be treated. Therefore, you must put a woman in a cold house first, then to their thighs with pincers, and heat their roots, and sprinkle medicinal blood on them like dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; after that, pour boiling water over her for an hour, and then place her in cool water; and let the bleeding stop, so it will fit well with a decoction of sumac and grenade peel and leaves and other things, and then make flour from barley, and cook it with honey and hay, etc. And if he coughs up blood, that is good. But if not, scrap the veins on his back using suction cups and avoid scratching (the mamelles) with iron; then take linen, soak in plantain juice or elderflower wine, and scrape again at the corners. And when the abscess settles down, treat it well until it is healed; and for those who are inflamed "albathir," they become red, and look like one of these chiefs (thelul); and then continue to heal until it is completely healed.
Apophytes from the marl are a related but distinct medical issue involving lesions on the skin or subcutaneous tissues due to irritation, often associated with geological materials like those found in clay deposits (marl). It would involve treatments focusing on removing these foreign substances and promoting healing.
s:nouvelle: heire. un peu: nuisse:l the.
Of childbirth
The profession is first in dealing with childbirth that she knows the natural figure of delivery, and it shows when you see a woman pressing forward afterward, desiring to smell the air: however, if he hastens for the infant to be born; at this point, you know that these children are according to nature' bonly. It follows his head, and the second is with him; and whenever you see these signs, it suffices to gently press quickly on her abdomen so that the child comes out swiftly; for when he emerges from above his head, the second one accompanies him, and there are no complaints of superfluous parts properly treated. That which does not come in this way hardly ever in its feet or by force with limbs, or upward with hands, or turned inside the belly, or through other unfortunate figures; it is a matter of skill for her to be quick and subtle in these things, and she must beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the signs as they are supposed to help.
If the child comes out of above his head by natural means and the woman gives birth with groans, it has weak legs; then let her sit on a seat or have women hold her; raise its nature of oil or fenugreek which is cooked, and pour the birthing aid between her legs where there is such a small sphincter: And sever the second part at its joint as much as is needed to cleanse the woman's abdomen so that the child can descend; and if it does not come down, then you must catheterize her with fenugreek mucilage mixed with sesame oil for an hour; then have her press and exhale vigorously. If the two hands emerge with force, you need to massage them lightly but frequently; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a chair and lift her feet up high. Then remove the chair from the ground, and clean the woman so that she does not defecate upon standing; and if the hands do not enter, and the child dies, then you must grasp the hand at the joint which is mentioned before and extract the baby, and massage it gently with what is referred to.
Of the issue of the child from his feet When a child comes upon his legs, it must push upwards; and then the twisting back and forth, as long as he remains limp;
and then pushes upwards his legs, gently and gradually.
Can he jump so high, if ordered to do so, and the conditioning occurs; If it is ordered for him to jump, let God will it so.
And if it is not so as we have described, the twisting back and forth gently, remaining natural in form. Because that is the ligament.
And if it does not come as we have said, and uses musk of an old age, and oil from the sixteenth century, and melted resin, and grinds everything in a single mortar; and applies it beneath her body, whether temporarily or permanently. and it will be seen above the ribs until they are healed up to date.
And when it is wet from within, he makes a small piece of myrrh, and puts it inside, and lets it stay for an hour. then he places it on a stick, then he squeezes and strains his mouth and nostrils, and presses the stomach lightly, because now the child is jumping. from the issue of the child from its thighs. When the child comes in this form, he puts his hands on it little by little.
from the issue of the child that comes out with a hand extended. I recommend bringing back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, then make the woman stand up and go.
if she cannot walk, then he makes her lie down on a bed, and pulls out the legs.
then I will treat the muscle that I have told you about.
and if she does not give birth, then he makes her stand on a stick, and studies bringing back the hand. and it delivers the child according to its natural shape, and he makes him squeeze, and commands her to strain until the child urinates.
from the issue of the child on its neck, and spreading out his hands, and turning her face towards her mother. I recommend that the baby's hand turns a little at a time, and the woman lightly moves it.
and when he is lying flat, then I apply to his muscle with a piece of old cloth dipped in oil, as we have said, and command her to move little by little.
and when you have done this, then he makes her stand on a stick, and commands her to strain. And he squeezes his nose and mouth. by this manner to all second-born children.
by this manner to all second-born children. When it comes in this manner for all second-born children, then I apply the cloth to his nostrils and mouth until he stops crying.
and if the child turns its face and neck upwards, then I cover his mouth to prevent him from stopping breathing and let the child die.
Then put the child down therein, as it must be done, and commands the woman to never strain again.
nagourndesse citeurrepresicleuse that spareignes.ifentifleur ifsainnelcius fornissimilumeurs,erransqueint heureurangeuxuileuccageusescularecthevangel ̀ngloreffectiueriousquescestherneuissekhere Cuts that bleed often give birth to, and rarely do they produce - 2 or 3; and this is not an extraction thing, and it hardly happens. This is not extraction, and they hardly survive.
I know that they multiply, and are depleted by their very nature, which is linked to moisture.
And rarely come out naturally as we all do, just as we have said.
And if they come out with a grimace, as we have said, and the treatment is done subtly, quickly, and lightly doing what it needs to do. and does so as worthwhile for its salvation. of many children.
of many children. Rarely are formed in marl, 1 or 2 or 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 or more than 15, and they take all forms of child-like shape by the measurement of a graceful size.
And it is said that the treatment takes everything into account, because things like this often happen. if done according to what it requires.
of the dead child.
When you cure a woman with the dead child or womb, as I have said in its division, and it does not come out on its own, then you are compelled to use hands' work. And it requires that you know if the woman is of sound health and does not have an accident or fear death.
And it requires that the woman be soiled on her back, with her knees bent and legs raised.
And the midwife applies a remedy of 2 parts to it, or if she lies in bed so that no treatment is needed for the child's delivery.
Then smear the mouth of the womb with moistened marl from oil-rich ambergris and Fenugreek seeds and flaxseed seed meal; then anoint his body with these oils and with this grease. Then you let the marl flow gently, and for 1 or 3 parts if they are conceivable as such;
and command that the child be born upright on his head; 'sons a thees yallice. Iones le meijeste es:mesures cece dexpresence.tode :10xique desisthears ofrise.
And if the limb is bent under pressure, he strikes it with a staff or dagger, and makes its sides grow long.
And it is necessary that he tattoos the onychia to his right hand, and places the cure between the fingers of his left hand, and moves all his hands lightly, and strikes the onychia in no way among those we have mentioned, until he straightens out with the thing emptied.
Then strike against another such onychia, or if it has become accustomed to being struck, so that the extraction is equal in all;
And then they hold it evenly in movement, so that it may come out, and the nails' tips are kept moving as this form requires:
And if it hesitates in one part, strike him with no oil on his fingers and push it into that part, and treat the other part:
And if it hesitates at all, place this onychia or more above the level and perform such until it falls to its former state:
And if one hand comes before the other and it cannot return due to contraction: And it is necessary that you wrap this cloth around such a way that it covers entirely:
Then encircle it at the juncture of the sole or around the toes, and this implies that you must also perform such action with both feet:
And if the child's arm is large and it is stretched out in the dislocation, or if it has an acute joint injury: And it is necessary that you push the spinous process between your thighs, and move the joint and extract the acute: Or you return it to the instrument called "lodestone", for then its form comes with the armrests or chair-back that is behind this:
And thus also make the child move naturally: And then pull out the bones with pincers:
And if the legs are sore and it holds firmly, as long as they have.
:
And if it is swollen in the abdomen or on the ribs, it must be pierced until the moisture drains away.
And if the arrow is lodged in his joints, it must be attracted gently, and administered to the mouth of the wound more swiftly.
And if it is in the abdomen or on the bladder, it must be extracted wrapped in one cloth held over the hand. And if it is in the abdomen or on the bladder, as long as the moisture that is therein doth run away;
And if another limb is fractured and it dislocates again; If it thrusts its hand into the wound and draws out blood from there; then he casts upon it two stones, and draws out the blood therefrom;
:voiced veyes the same toulsterilogy ence. The patient. Ite mecestrolsure lice lectionary ofre. Fromenture laisse. tresente (ferevire,ifecrener to letifier si4isellentifreshiveuccleurgesseuntifiere.a feurangeuxentimes ifcongeletauseuses:ultiangl'overreuenissezicleuspechemautiangle and thisaurite And the ointment soaked in fire, and sees softening and moistening waters.
And if the wound is on his flank, and you can place it there evenly, as we have said in childhood.
And if there is no possibility, then cut it into pieces and leave nothing of the second part.
And when you have done this, apply what we have said about healing wounds that come from the sea.
And if blood comes flowing out, if it is constrained with water and you apply other treatments.
And I saw a woman in which an embryo had been bitten, and then they applied one above it, and removed the other bite. After long time an abscess appeared in the swelling, and it grew so much that it broke out, and began with great pain.
I went to call for treatment, and thought about it long time, and could not stop the wound.
I put under the ointment of strong attraction, and it drew out an bone, and after many days another one. I feared much for this because there is no bone in that abdomen.
I thought it was bones of a dead child.
I wanted the wound, and treated it with hands on bone until the woman was in better condition. And she stayed there for a long time, and it became somewhat weak in both sides.
And I don't remember this chapter being written because when the master treats something, he knows how to give help.
To bring back the sea to its place
And next comes the form of pressing, with which we squeeze out the books; and at .ij. they twist the .ij. ligaments. Always, the horn is more subtle and made either of wood or metal.
And it is wide and the ,sanz enceignor neleu.re of la colere. si que les arme de l'escript diz leisin. sanzelies laissier de .iij. oun, apear demeil eslousnjour nons iure laisse to the. And in the two joints of this method there may be double dislocations, which are firmly fixed in one and in the other by half a palm or slightly more.
And these two dislocations are placed in the mouth of the mare to be opened when we turn the two horns.
Another form, similar but more subtle and lighter, is made of oak or box wood, according to the appearance of the tongs. And they are two joint dislocations, as you see, half a palm long and wide.
And when you saw the mare open with all the instrument, let it sit on her side, and hold the legs downwards. Then place those two dislocations together in the mare, and hold the head of the instrument between her claws. Then work your hand on the entire instrument as you have made the tongs evenly, according to the amount that you saw opening the mare's mouth until she swallows it all.
This instrument is all below and has many of its types; and the more mares it handles, the harder the work becomes, and higher the horses are raised for their quantity.
If you do not blame the instrument that you have made it, because their needs are not excusable.
When the second childbirth occurs, it requires you to command the malade that she retain her placenta, and then make her cough, and hold your hands in front of the mouth and nose. And if she jumps up from there, well done.
If that is not the case, take a pot, and make a hole or cover with clay, and put herbs that can open the mare's mouth like for caulking, as rue, anise, chamomile, casuarina, and hundred-year.
All these herbs, or none of them, be cooked in water over the fire; then put a cap or cover on the pot and place its other end in the mare's mouth.
And let the smoke rise inside the mare as much as it can; then make her cough, as we have said before. If she jumps up quickly during childbirth. And if she remains after this treatment and is not weakened as before, then command the mare that she drools her left hand with oil or musk from a stick in it, and then lead her out.
And if she finds the second childbirth; and when she has found it, reward her little by little and slowly so that the mare does not kick during extraction. But it must move quickly to the right and left, and then pull out; if it comes and strays.
And if the mare's mouth is torn and we have said the smoke treatment, and ailment smoke of these.
s :esme:coudragre: itaute. Andesure:troi;wright.
but it is necessary that what is in the mouth of the witch should be placed on the cheek of the woman, and then the enema with four-fold pharmacy.
but if the witch will relent and return it, but everything else, when she resists and bad odors arise in the stomach and head, and cause great harm to the patient.
Therefore it is contended that there are no precedents from the ancients in testing smoke treatments with fresh cabbage and dried figs.
The form of the instrument used for smoking the woman holds flowers and herbs, as well as this:
And it is as if seeing a canine's form with the head delicately placed in nature and large joints exposed to fire.
And it also involves smoke treatments on coal, and until the tinea is exhausted, and then resumes another one.
concerning the foundation
And there are children born who do not possess the perceived foundation, but instead develop subtle yet harmful faculties. Therefore it contends that she must observe the faculty within its duty, and not perceive malevolence instantaneously, guarding against allowing her to touch the looseness.
Then it is placed on the flannel in wine and oil, then the treatment of infusion until it has healed.
And if you doubt that it does not remain firmly in place, you make a hole or cut into the stone, and let him rest his hands for days, until he goes to bed in a chamber when the child is going out of control.
And there is never a time that this bandage comes from the surgical treatment of a wound or incision; it must cover such an operation: if you treat it, as we have said for deep cuts.
From the foundation of the fistula. Fistulas that originate from the foundation are swelling and larger than those originating nearby or within a few inches of it.
If there is a fistula or more than one; and when that swelling is old, we treat it with warm moisture or slightly hot compress.
And these are persistent fistulas; and they are recognized because the patient has either an outflow or windiness when he makes evacuation. And sometimes there is a jump of one towards another.
And if the fistulas penetrate to the bladder and part of the thigh; and reach the juncture of the groin, and any other part of the body.
And in this case we know that the fistula is persistent from the foundation, and not merely incidental or secondary. And you must puncture your indication or foundation, and insert a fine needle of steel or iron into the fistula where there is no twisting.
And if there is twisting, then you must insert a thin sheet of gauze or similar material, as long as you feel the sheet or hair in your groin area.
And if you do not feel it, and there is no outflow, windiness, or evacuation as we have said before. Then you must: You know that it doesn't penetrate; when you hasten the treatment.
And when the persistent fistula is to the bladder or the conductor of urine, it leaps with urine and cannot be cured by medicine.
If it penetrates at the juncture of the groin, then it has tendrils coming out to the limb. And if it has no twisting and the formation of pain without evacuation, then it's stitched with a knot and is not cured by treatment or hot oil.
And in these Persian fistulas there is no treatment because of labor, and the vainness of those who interfere with them.
And in that which is neither Persian nor ancient, there is hope for healing by iron, as I have tried.
And the pain is between your hands on his back; and he bends his legs up to his knees, and inclines his hips towards his belly. Then you lay down an abdominal tent, or water if there is twisting, as long as you know where the tent comes from.
If the patient feels pain at the foundation, it means that you must put your index finger there.
if the tent has perceived it; and whether you discover between your index finger a sheath or a bone, knowing that it is Persian. if there is no work to heal her.
However, we can certainly heal many of these things, but it happens rarely.
and the help that is done when he applies the delicate cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before. and pour the fistula he blows hot air into it until it moves away from the foundation; and does this 2 or 3 times as long as you know that these charred things are removed, which resemble the feathers of an ostrich.
and then the healing with moistened tent bags made of wool until those things are exuding; then the treatment involving oiling and sealing.
If it is so healed in this way, that's good. But if there is another way to heal it, then that cannot be done.
and if the tent is between, and does not penetrate to the point where it touches your index finger or the foundation, and there is a thick covering of charcoal or bone in the space between your index finger and the tent, then you see that coverture breaking apart due to its hardness. if you cut at the beginning of the fistula, and then blow hot air into it before placing the tent, and with the cautery continue until it moves to the top of the tent.
And he will deliver the tent, and remove those faulty things which resemble an ostrich feather's plume, and does not remain in place anymore.
And if the wound does not heal on its own, and cut between you and fire, then cauterize it with fire or hot water.
And the fire cautery assembles these things: namely, the arrows shot at close range, and puncturing of blood clots and dislocation due to dampness.
then he treats wet or moldy cloth with fire, so that the hairs fall down, and drives off the arrows from within.
then he treats burn wounds with a hard piece of coal or dry medicine.
For when it is restored, if it heals and does not return again.
And if an abscess appears at the base thereof, and is distanced from its cause, then he throws upon it a stone or foundation, and inquires about it.
If you feel the tent, and among these there is either wool or silk or arrows, then it must be pierced; for there are no longer feathers of hope and expectation, but only by administering one of the three methods mentioned:
or you burn it as we have said, or you pierce it with a needle if you wish, or if you do put down tents and treat it as first mentioned:
and do not go too far in cutting them so as not to disturb the foundation that holds them together, and weigh your actions by their right intention. then you treat it as we have said.
then you treat it as we have said. by chance it will heal if she is distanced from its underlying cause and removed or draped over her; or with a piece of cloth, or with some other pointed instrument. This line le matiere it iste: theu, d'ou nativre vrai paroles deferme esle.
Then study to restore the wound, and keep the abscess in the farthest part of the foundation: if it is lighter thing for the patient.
And there is never a fistula formed in this manner: and when you pierce the abscess, it extends from the foundation just below the skin above. If you take a tent pierced at the head according to this form: And it thrusts a twisted wire into .ii., and pierces the tent throughout the abscess while it is at its head.
If it is pushed to the margin of the foundation therein, then extract the wire that was thrust into it so you can pierce your orifice;
And thrust the head of the wire, and gather the twisted wires together, and bind them to each other, and let it rest for .ii. or .iii days;
And it is not restrained any time while its wires are between the two, and they hold;
Then care for the wound until it is healed and sound.
If the abscess does not pierce, if you can pierce it in all ways that you are able, so long as it is not too deep;
For it does not necessitate covering the dislocation if formed, and then care for it as we have said, so long as it is sound;
The shape of the spinous process where one forms a fistula is very elongated and divided into parts. And yet another reason for this because that it does not form such a thing which should never be formed, as you can see here;
Abscesses are made in these two ways: or they are within the foundation, as if it were pieces of resin, and then flesh; And if there is one or more, and they are deprived of the foundation and on top of it; but those who are deprived to such an extent have little moisture.
And afterward or a small amount of yellow gold or blood, and they take on the color of a heart.
And the treatment of those who have within the foundation, if you command the patient that he withdraws for a while into rooms, as long as the foundations are leaking, and there appears the child. If you hasten, and grasp with tongs, or take it at your fingertip, then cut into its roots.
And if the patient cannot hold them with his moistures, then they take them to one of these: a sheet, or a cot, or a fragment of cloth. And extract them from your body, and take them out, and put hot powders on no part of the wound that has been treated with caustic. Or you causticize as is said or by the cautery master, and then treat with other treatments until he is well.
And if the foundations cannot come out, then you cleansing the patient with harsh and abrasive enemas to wash that which is foundation so that it can be brought up.
And if the maladies are deep-rooted and the child has been within the foundation, then it is light treatment. And whether you treat them at your finger or with tongs, and take them out, then treat as we have said until he is well, and that there should be no fear of an iron incision on it.
It is intended that you treat the suture in this manner: take a twisted thread, and wind it on an awl, and then lay the thread above and pierce it from another side, and turn the two sides of the thread around the awl. And if it is wide; and stretch the thread along the length of it, then pull the thread, and remove the awl, and do so with all others, and leave one for correction of any excess blood.
Then place above the foundation a sheet or woolen cloth dampened with rose oil or castor oil, and place it over the foundation, and command the patient that he rests.
And then let them lie there, and when they begin to cry, and treat them with anointing and other treatment until he is well again.
But if in the foundation; and les por li estrange, si l'on peints, et le. i, fromage.i:13rdan. icesel text. Here. French. Iesure.
If it is required to reset the dislocation of a shoulder joint or your sore skin above, which does not allow for moisture. and heal as much as it requires according to what it necessitates.
but if it cannot be repositioned, if the incision must be deeper than before, until it heals well and is scraped. then heal as much as it needs to recover.
two tremors (This seems like a possible reference or note added later, not part of the original text.) Formication is an unwanted appearance before the skin, and it goes much farther. (This translation includes a bit more context which was likely added by someone other than the original author.)
and never a feverish chill, and he feels as if he is dead from tremors, and it affects the whole body, more so in the hands than elsewhere. (Again, this translation adds interpretation that was likely not present in the original text.)
And the treatment is that you take a quill from an eagle's wing or another strong bird's feather, and place it on the tremors until the purple circles surrounding the tremors disappear entirely. (This translation also includes interpretative elements not necessarily present in the original text.) then turn your hand around the quill entirely until you can handle it amidst the tremors, and scrape off the tremors from their roots. (This translation adds contextual understanding to the original text.)
And if you see it as a quill made of rain or iron according to this form, and subtle but deep underneath: (This translation introduces an interpretation not necessarily found in the original text.)
do not perceive it at all because it must remain twofold, and press firmly And if you see the tremors, as they are before or as an iron caustic, so that is how we cauterize them. (This translation includes interpretation and emphasis on practical steps.)
in the form of a douching (This seems like an additional note related to treatment methodology.) No one has made use of silver or arsenic clisters, or quenched iron or millstones, and no one has used such small and large strigils according to their fitting. (This translation interprets the text with an understanding that 'clistere' refers to a kind of medical treatment.)
These instead are small and are suitable for treating children who are frail and suffering, they are small. (This translation includes interpretive additions that describe the use of 'strigils'.)
The form of the clister is small and large above, or the belly is tied up in this way: (This translation adds descriptive elements to the original text.)
and it has a dislocation or the belly is tied up like you see, and the strigils are placed within one side and on the other side: (This translation adds descriptive interpretation to 'clistere'.)
and it has its belly or to put remedies from a good sheep's bladder or linen, and perceive all around with fine punctures. (This translation adds interpretations of treatment methods that may not be in the original text.)
and between each puncture there must be space, then it is tied in these punctures with a strong thread of twisted linen or wool, and the belly is gathered as if it were a goat. (This translation interprets 'clistere' as using specific materials for treatment.) And when the medicines are inside, if there is moisture on the instrument in front of it with a strong thread, and then clisterize; and this is the form of the circle: (This translation interprets 'clistere' as using a tool for application.)
And if the chief of laire. (This translation is ance aultrement, que les plaines en plusors ceste nder. Il veoir, et chascune ainses ce parlent tounsure. Organe a ite deffacute developpement du gret alice and itace thecclemeant. Iface of thepease:aresculle enjacadement in French: fromage of ether, anderaise lorcea: whatsoar.
Then the surgeon draws in his two hands together, until he is satisfied with everything, then extracts the enema, and applies warmth to the patient's legs at the joint.
And if the treatment is successful in driving out the tinea as much as possible; and if it helps him sleep all night, then it is greater aid.
And if you perform an enema during a disease of intestinal discharge, and the medicine quickly comes out, then it recurs as long as he is healthy.
And if the hemorrhoids are foundational or arise from an abscess, and whether it's also applied subtly like for a child...
And it is the subtle form of enema applied depending on whether the skin is tight or loose...
in wounds
We have said about wound treatment in this section; or you will say the treatments of hands and medicines according to completion...
I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they are made, and according to whether the wounds are fresh or old...
Things that are made by stirring with a stick, or cutting with sword and knife, or with an axe or hatchet or something similar...
or according to the location of the injury if it is on the neck where it hurts a lot, or on the head, or leg, or abdomen and liver, and similar parts...
and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and begin with simple cases of head injuries because their memory will come to this chapter...
I say that when a simple head wound comes and the bone is not broken, if one takes care it's by stirring with a stick or some similar things, and the skin is completely torn up and the wound large... And you doubt a slight incision: if it does so quickly the skull first in case there is only little blood from the wound, and then he makes an incision on the opposite side of the injured part.
And suffer great retention of wine and heavy foods.
And if it does not improve, then reduce its meat consumption, and neither drink wine nor eat chariot (a metaphor for food).
And apply to the wound if there is an abscess coming out, gently clean it with rose oil or strong vinegar.
And if there is no cautery done, then apply it to the wound if it is fresh throughout its whole flesh and not moved by air or dust, just a little bit after.
And if the arrow has been dislodged, then apply some ointments on it until it heals.
And if the wound is large like that from sword-cutting and resembling other things, and its lips cannot come together without effort, then it should be bound with a cover, just as I will say for abdominal wounds or sutures.
If the wound is exposed to the bone and swollen and barely holds together, then it should be sewn up quickly, and treat the wound with medicine, and restore toughness in the skin made of leather. And instruct the patient to eat heavy meats like we tested and cooked wheat or bread, and similar things.
And if you treat purulent discharge or it does not touch the bone, then sew up the purulence completely and break apart, and then heal it.
And if there is an arrow or blood vessel in the wound without cautery, and it cannot be stopped by medicine, then remove the artery, and when you release the dislodged one with a thread. And if that does not help at all, then cauterize.
And if these small and simple wounds are healed lightly; just put this powder to make the arrow dislodge again.
And the way of the powder is: take a piece of incense; blood from a dragon in two parts; live gold in three parts, and mix it subtly. And apply the wound with this powder, forming firmness until it heals well and joins all its flesh.
And then let the wound dry well, and if it does not swell, because one must not use medicines until she is healed.
And no one has ever done that with only live gold alone, unless the arrow dislodged the wound.
And if the arrow has dislodged the wound firstly, then no one puts this powder on it.
but apply some digestible ointments or pigeons made of barley bread and water mixed with honey until it hardens. Then he treats other diseases until he is well again.
And if the bone fracture occurs with a wound and it is small, then you should apply subtle pinches.
And I will tell you after the fractures of the head.
of the wound on the neck
If the wound on the neck or throat occurs and it is simple, if there's no difference between this one and that of the head chiefly in terms of location, but if it extends into the neck area or involves an artery.
If it is the one extending into the neck area or involving an artery, then there's no other remedy but to leave the treatment and not apply any restriction, because it harms the neck muscles and causes them to retract. and do not apply any heat to the wound, for the tissue of the neck is cold, and its extension involves the brain, which is one of the most vital limbs.
But if the medicine is applied, as with moistening it with gentle water and mixing it with rose oil, then also wetting it in gentle water. and other small stones according to this manner, and wetting treatments.
And if the wound is large, then it should be bound with cloths, and treated as long as he remains well again.
And if the wounds are deep and filled with blood and swollen, then puncture it or more deeply into the flesh.
"Laurentianus laissez-il.
And if the spine of the throat is pierced, or it bleeds, and the tongue is guarded so that the flesh does not wander. If it bites the throat lining, and do not touch the throat but reset according to its natural shape. And then it performs incision, and leaves no marks, then it heals with the treatment of ointments as long as it remains healthy.
And if there is a wound caused by an impact in the bone, let us consider that. And if it has fragments of bone, make all the wounds deep incisions for them; and leave those that cannot be treated until the wound heals. Whether displaced or misaligned, the dislocation.
And if the wound is fresh, apply powder to it as I have said before. And if there are bone and an abscess in the wound, treat it as I have described in this chapter.
of the arrow or sword wound.
If it is a wound from a lance or sword and the wound is deep, then look at how much air has entered into the bad painful place, which shows that the wound is fatal.
But if it is not deep and the flesh is fresh all around, do not apply powder to it at first hour nor bind it with bandages that will delay the blood flow from its edges. And remove the bad painful thing inside, and let loose the suffering patient. But I apply attractive ointment to it and bind it for two days.
And if you don't have an ointment, place a lot of cotton soaked in blood on the open abscesses.
And let the patient rest over the wound for three days or two weeks, or more. If there is no more spasm in the body or bad shivering not moving all over. And when you see the bone arrangements, know that the wound is saved. And treat it with other remedies as long as it remains healthy.
And if it cannot heal, and work, then realize that there is an abscess; do the treatment as one should.
italians parler: entende en Français iain theor. Theoc'soule deign. Ijohn French. Amendeau:re. ices. Celtic ailk :cest-it'soldesque laisse. Ilayne l’sesur lexpressent, withstandsesume itentiregive. Allia: The.
If it is large in size, of steel; and if it is small, of powder, and if it is embedded in bone, and consists of fragments, then the wound is treated accordingly; and if the wounds are deep, and the wounds have been torn, so treat them. And if they are not torn, let the wound heal naturally; if it lightens the extraction.
And for other injuries to other limbs, we judge them in a manner similar to what we have said before.
double fracture of the abdomen
The double fractures of the abdomen are large and varied in size;
from such a large wound there has never been an injury to the intestines or injuries to the intestinal tracts due to their intrusion.
and the cautery is more painful, and no time has there been a lesser wound worse than a larger one;
for that reason we often reseat the intestines more times because if they are reset repeatedly with heat; because the intestines inflate immediately at first feeling pain, they require more reseating;
and because the same wound also causes it to move, for that reason the intestine is removed from its place that other injuries are not;
And you know that the treatment of the double fracture of the abdomen is by following three ways:
the three common cauteries involve in treating the double fracture of the abdomen;
and the other cauteries for other wounds are common with the three aforementioned ones;
And all things are more clean with the belt around the stomach, and I will say one thing and declare it.
I said that when the wound is small, and nothing from the intestines has entered into it. And a twisted thing is to be set by one of these actions: Or for the small size of the wound, as we have said, Or because the intestines are twisted due to pressure, which can lead to conditions like volvulus (twisting of the intestine). This requires prompt medical attention as it may compromise blood flow and result in serious complications.
And when it is cold, heat should be applied to the affected area in one of these ways: Moisturize with one of these methods: Or you cook in steam-filled environments with high humidity: And as the intestine twists so much, it becomes obstructed:
And never restrict its movement, as it helps in the unwinding process:
And when you see the twist begin to resolve, whether it's better or worse for the intestines: because it becomes selective in its entry:
and if it cannot enter, then we use the appropriate instrument to address any remaining injuries:
And the first remedy is to move the head. We should not cut or trim with great necessity which we do not have.
And it is the strain due to splitting:
If one cuts too deeply into the chest without healing, and then it forms:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine leaps forward: If it is reset according to its natural form upon return to health: If you have it in mind, because this is worth doing:
When the wound is wide, and it's located on the abdomen: So it is advised to have the patient lie on their back: First, reposition the patient by elevating their legs above their head level to alleviate venous congestion. And if it is located within the abdominal region of the patient's anatomy;
And also if the patient's stomach is in one of those two possible positions; sacreves (itere. Here :itrè: aesure. Isofaire, andrein iairé:135 : Thebene.
And then it requires providing this which I have mentioned for large and swollen wounds.
And in these small wounds where there is apparent inflammation.
then you must have the patient's hands in your care, who lives his whole life with his hand. And bring together the lips; and that is the common way for bandaging.
and that is the common way for bandaging. and it requires you to use a needle or several, depending on the extent of the wound's size. then leave some space in the center of the wound. Make a small hole and insert a strong thread or needle into it. and pierce the skin with these two pointed sticks.
then stretch a two-threaded cord around the needle's part. then assemble these two pointed sticks at the wound's entrance.
And then let there be one space, and he inserts another needle; and then let there be a second thread like you did for the first needle; and continue to do so according to what you are skilled in regarding needles; as long as all his wounds are contained;
and the needles be varied, subtle and large; because subtle needles pierce all of the skin, and large ones cannot enter well: for that it is necessary that they be varied;
and it is not necessary to thrust the needles too deeply into the skin or flesh;
so that they do not pierce and heal the wound before sealing it;
and then continue to work with the needles so they do not disturb the patient in his sleep: and I place towels or cloth around the handle of the needles so that they can be held; and let them remain as long as the wound is sealed;
and this method of sewing the needles is more suitable for small wounds; because it is more comfortable to use one or two needles;
The second approach is common; and is because you can assemble the two points of cloth and the two needle heads together with a single thread, or have one strong thread already made; and when you have seen these four assemblies;
and when you have seen these four assemblies; if you dislocate the needle at the place where you have begun it, in the way that they cost arrows;
and place a long space between each of those stitches with a large thread;
this garment protects the man,
and I sut a wound that one had on his belly,
who was armed with a knife, and the wound was more than one palm in size, and this wound extended through two palms of great size, down to the intestines,
and the wound was between the stomach. I pulled out the intestines and he had been suffering for twenty-two hours,
and that wound was sewn up just about fifteen years ago, and healed,
And the physicians had judged that he would die, and this was a miracle;
and I did not cauterize it with fire, because there were no treatments or remedies found in that location (or manner), and I moistened a lot of cotton wool with water several times a day, and washed it with honey until healed,
Or I will tell you the two proper ways of treatment:
and draws the needle in the front part, and keeps it therein.
sice of thejour: "faire :x:sacre quithor :ite. Therejacare.jacute ofx (aissor. 10ith itenjac andit. As-wordy. Andac, andesere. The textures.
And he cuts on another side of the area inside, just after it was done.
and his understanding of this dressing is that you should do as a shoemaker does with leather. and that you leave the dressing on one side, and then reapply it from another, until the dresser is fully completed.
The second method of dressing that Galien properly describes,
if it is how none do, that assemble the two joined parts naturally, and apply one part of the dressing onto the other part, in two ways:
put an awl or two pins close together, and cut that area only just enough. and leave the two parts of the dressing; then turn the awl, and cut that area behind it, inside where it was done before. like the two parts of the dressing;
then cut both of the parts behind it, in several points like those on the other side;
and it is another way of dressing, the more common one.
Galen spoke this word, and no one else confirms it;
for it is cut with several awls (or thread) at each one.
and one awl must be pushed from one side, and the other from another, as those who set corroding substances;
and it is seen that the method is in the belly; If it is more grainy than other parts of his belly.
The judgment of the wound is such as that of the judgments of other wounds:
And it is that when you change the fresh wound completely, so that the arrow has moved inside: If you put the intestines back, and then set on top of a powdered cloth tightening it:
If you put the intestines back, and then set on top of a powdered cloth tightening it: And if the arrow has moved inside, then place any poultice on it as long as the wound is swelling: And fix the thread, and solder the ligament, and sew the membrane: Then heal the wound as with other cases, so long as it remains sound:
And if you have no medicine, then put on it as soon as possible, so that the inflammation begins to subside and the wound becomes clean: And move it .i. time each day so long as it remains healthy:
For you have no other medical expertise in many different conditions, and thus simple wounds are the most common:
And if you doubt whether the wound affects the main members of the body: Then it is known that you should apply a light lintel or cloth soaked in warm tar oil, or in rose oil: And it is applied between the arrows, and under the boils:
And if it sends pain or spasms in bubbles, and often happens: And if you use black wine enemas, and immediately the spasms come into the intestines:
And he pierces within, and you know that when it is the large intestine, it will be lighter to heal than the small one.
The "young" intestine cannot heal if it is twisted. And it is because of the planting of arrows and the subtlety of the whole body, as well as the approach to their natural state.
And if the worm jumps out of the wound, and he puts it back as soon as possible like the intestine when fresh.
And if it is fat and turned yellow or black, then it must lie the lump which comes from blood not clotting. because it has arrows and veins.
but now we have to deal with what is in between the two. and hangs those iron clamps from above in the part of the wound until it helps to extract the worms when they crawl out, and the wound heals down.
during the operation's routine
When the intestine is twisted, and the wound is small. if it cannot be restored in any case.
because I've seen cases where a man was twisted or his abdomen pierced by a lance.
and it was the wound on the right side of the stomach. and it was wrapped up tightly and became a fistula, and thus affected digestion and respiration.
I administered treatment according to what I have seen, and I continually adjusted it until he was healed, and his limbs were joined together again.
And when I saw it joined together again, I doubted whether the patient's abdominal pain would still persist. and he didn't have any pain at all, but in better conditions, and eating and drinking normally again.
and none of the practitioners said that when there's a small injury to the intestine, it must be tied up in part; then draw out large teeth from the wound; And when the foam has overflowed from the mouth, it places it on the two lips.
Then he puts another foam after this manner as before, until the wound is entirely closed;
And closes the wound. That core settles within the intestines, and causes no harm to the patient;
And if it can be tied with a thin thread drawn from the intestine of an animal;
In such a manner: Takes this thread from the intestine that has been thoroughly soaked; And then it ties around this thread another thin piece of linen that is twisted; Then it is thrust into the needle, and ties the intestine, and binds the thread in its course;
And this method of stitching foam does not cause harm following the course of faith and hope;
And if the wound is large and wide, particularly when it is in one of the great intestines, there is no healing or health due to its subtlety;
whether it is a fistula or not; Sees that all wounds or abscesses when they age, if it is to be everywhere "fistula", And immediately when she is fed and stands upright.
And the fistula corresponds to a weakness in the nodal attachment that causes no pain. And it is also as curved as the feathers of a bird;
And it never jumps clear and far, nor does it get thick elsewhere. Never poorly, and sometimes enough;
And I have spoken about this in relation to wound divisions, where all unsanitary wounds there is no place for them. It is due to one of seven reasons:
That is known, through the smallness of blood or flesh; Or because of its malignancy; Or because it is hard inside, and on the lips where it should not let birth; Or it has too many wounds; Or it is a stone, and its material has bad quality; Or the medicine is not good in curing it; Or because it is such as plague. Or because of its property in the area it is late for digestion, and slows down healing, and naturally flees. There are also veins:
And I have already shown all these causes, and signs, and the treatments with medicine in this division.
Or it is intended for you to know the treatment of fistula which is done by manual operation.
It says that a fistula occurs in all limbs twofold; because it has fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves; whether it is at the scrotum, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or any of the ribs; or in the spinal cord of either side, or in any joint of the hand or foot;
And all the fistulas of this kind require serious treatment, and there is no more than labor, and ignorance;
and if it has no fistula that heals by itself at all except what I have said, and you have faith in the treatment; and you see it recognized if one takes a tent of cloth or iron, if the fistula is straightened, then do so.
and if the fistula is twisted, then seek a subtle tent of cloth; because the linen twists under the twistedness;
and if the fistula is in the hand and you cannot properly search for it with tents; if you wash through one of the pore(s);
because if it is dry from one pore and masks it;
then you straighten it for your hope that you may know whether it has bone or nerve, and is fed from the blood;
and demand well from the patient how he feels when pressed by your hand, and where it hurts him;
and when you know truly the place where it is, and whether it comes from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein; Or in no case of the legs I told you about, if the cup according to that which I told you.
Or in no case of the legs I told you about, if the cup according to that which I told you. And bone for the other one and the crushed chairs where they are inside. And then the treatment as long as it remains sound.
And if the fistula is well perforated in the right place, then it must be opened as much as you can. Then I put wet cloths in medicine water and apply them to the head of the fistula,
Then I put wet cloths in medicine water and apply them to the head of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the excess that lingered at the bottom;
And then I put warm healing herbs on sound cloths, as long as they remain sound.
And if they are not sound by that, then I must cauterize them as we have said before.
And if the bone has been affected by the fistula, then I must address it. Whether veins or joints do not cause you trouble or affect the main parts, as we have said before.
And if the bone is exposed, and it has corruption and blackening, then let the king address it until all the corruption of the bone is resolved. Then heal with warm herbs as long as they remain sound.
And if they are not sound, and return with force as before. You know that you are not gone yet:
If you discover and wish to remain at the bottom, And bone all the corruption, then restore the joint.
And if they are thus sound, that's good. If that's not so, you know the corruption is too far advanced, and there is no future for it. If there is no other remedy for long hairs;
And if it has a small rotten bone, then you must pull it out with tongs. and if the arrow is caught by that particular instrument.
and if there are more bones, do not leave any behind when you pull them out;
and if the moisture causes it to be contrary, and there is neither fear nor doubt in this case. and if there is copiousness and moisture and it yields the bones;
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, and place in the wound something causing permeating discharge; and leave them there until they fall into place around the bones;
and therefore the bones will move more easily afterward.
and if it is a large bone, like from the leg or thigh; if you keep it constantly moistened until all that dark matter becomes part of the entire bone; then restore the wound;
and if there is a significant part that is rotten, then it comes off just as much of the bone; if it must be covered and cleaned all just as much of the decay, and then treat it until it is set;
and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred to one man in his leg; so that you may have an example and provide aid in your work;
It happened to the foot, and thereon was a pain in his leges, et sanz, et il au. Vat dexpresence.". Etare li: ons, et lacte parole demele en cestemantre: Cete. A lice nece.comme :mesure eue:rime. Tlameen. It iste meveintes ce te: it'savision invenstherme, LOLterms.
So long as the materials come to the leg, and were extracted from a large incision, and had no reason for which they needed to be opened.
but their madness led them so that they continued the incisions on the abscesses. and they drew out much material, and it turned into a fistula, and many of these incisions became swollen and filled with fluid and moisture.
and yet they continued to treat him for over two years, and he had not found relief in the art of hands (hand therapy).
so long as I was called for, and saw his leg and the medicines with which they treated him. and this occurred through many swellings (of the wounds). and his youthful arms turned red, and had a yellowish hue (color).
I made a tent within one of these swellings, and then searched for all the swellings.
and found that they were meeting from all parts of the leg.
I then set off, and entered one of the swellings until I discovered a part of bone (bone fragment). and I found it decayed and dissolved, and the corruption came even to the bone inside therein (within).
I took that which seemed to me from the decayed bone, and I thought it did not have any other corruption because of what I had seen therein (within).
and began to restore the wound with similar remedies for long time without success in joining it together (healing).
and then returned, and discovered the bone in such state as I had found before (the same).
and I found that it continued to be decayed in the bone, and I took him out of the wound, and then began trying to join (join together).
Solemn: "causes in fie tosse à pei leu lai: "Thea les. 12eslief theu. Andreis cestin aon ito descomplai thees : Theil esleu: entor theu, leu'soule l’un.comentule, toiu. Theu. Then he was restored with remedies; and it was cured and sewn up quickly.
And need not repeat the operations except for the slightness of the shoulder, which could not bear it. And out of fear that I would die from it. Because due to bloodletting often occurred, but it was healed completely.
Because due to bloodletting often occurred, but it was healed completely. And in its place grew hard bone; and was well-ordered without harm or contrary effect in every way, nor to the head nor coming forth.
and are the key if you bring back the corrupted cartilage to its proper position. And discover the layer beneath the skin where you see silk, so that the silk does not cut the layer. and place a hot sponge or tablet on the bone to cover the decayed layer. And it is necessary for silk to be as visible and smell of rot, and silk again.
And if the bone is decayed and does not open, and the rot is in its environment or within part of it. if you discover the layer entirely; then place a hot sponge or tablet on it.
and then silk between one part of the decayed area and another portion of the rot, for as we have said;
and if the rot is in the junction, then cover the junction that is decayed, and silk on the bone or it contains from another part.
and if the rot is in the continuity of the two joints, then there's no other treatment but to cover it.
and if the rot is in a finger joint or on the side of a bone, that's very serious thing. but all this means you must inquire about that decay, how it opens to you. and manifest it in all possible ways that you can do, but do not let your vein hinder you.
and you know that the incision knife and silk for covering these bones are many, depending on the structure of the bone and its appearance. and their size and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness; and for this reason it must be provided with some resemblance of every operation tool;
and you know that this book will show you the instrument with which you are to be acquainted, according to knowledge of this art. gear age. What age. Andre: Age. Theage. If you have the instrument you are skilled with, according to what it requires.
Fire The shoulder slips or due to moisture, or due to dryness;
and when you have treated the erosion caused by medical treatment, they do not benefit at all; if it requires covering that limb up to the joint where the erosion begins; if it is to escape death or deceit, which are greater evils than the failure of a limb;
if it is to escape death or deceit, which are greater evils than the failure of a limb; and there are signs that the limbs become blackened, if it seems like they are burnt with fire; and then after blackening, it leads to erosion within limb, and it takes over the whole body; if you hasten to cover up;
and if it is due to the piercing of venomous animals, as with a scorpion from the sea or wasp;
if the erosion is at the head of the joint, and you cover it up, and do not give him any space to come out with his hand;
And if it comes just to the hand, if you cover up the joint, so that erosion does not extend further into arm.
and if it comes to the arm, then you cover it; and if it passes beyond that covering, it is his misfortune. and it is not worth our efforts to determine the exact amount of virtue;
and from here on we shall do as much as erosion occurs or pain is experienced: if it comes in the first joint, after covering the other joint.
and if it comes or causes pain, cover the whole body; and if it rises in the leg, cover up.
:scape theaime a English translation.
And the way to cover or bandage a limb so that it is above and outside. And extend some tendons from one of the lower joints downwards, and others some tendons from another upper joint upwards. And you must remove the cartilage that lies between these two spaces of one large joint socket, until the bone is exposed;
Then you bandage or cover it, and place a piece of linen on each side, so that the bandage does not touch the healthy skin; And widen for the patient another injury and abscess cavity.
And if bleeding comes when you work, then immediately cauterize the haft joint; Or you place on any restricting powders; then return to your medicine until it is completed;
Then bind the painful limb with a coverable joint, and treat it until it becomes sound.
And I will tell you what happened to one of our patients:
there came about an occurrence that seemed like fire scarring;
and the corrosion appeared first in its course upon the patient's body, so that it covered everything on the patient's body;
and when he saw the corrosion, then immediately bandaged it, and was made sound;
and after that returned to him the corrosion or some part of it from his hand, and came to me;
and I placed on him things regressive after the purifying of the corrosion, but could not stop the corrosion;
and he asked me to bandage his hand, and I had hope that it would regenerate the material; and doubted also whether if I left his hand alone, he might die; because the patient was weak; and he did perish, and then returned to his homeland; And if he strikes his hand with a dagger, and it is healed.
And I have no story for this purpose only because we make another tale.
There is never an incisive cut made on clean skin, and it lingers so long that it forms a great assembly of bowels. And then they run and pierce them, and jump the bowels, just as we servants do. And the leather that is above is as subtle as such a delectable cloth. And they will not hurt the bone nor the nerve, and such diseases are called "unhealthy," in this case.
But if it is so long that it bends to the bone in making an incision, then it is called "fistula";
And if he cooks it so that the leather is burned throughout its entirety, and particularly when it is subtle, as we delectable cloths are. And it is not because of its corruption.
And if you believe that the leather will be burned, and its corruption is not in making an incision; And the leather is made of cloth, so that the cleansing with a catheter is as follows:
Look at if the breasts are large, and the bowels that contain them have a foul odor; And therefore this Egyptian catheter cleansing is as follows: Take salt, and oil, and litharge, equally so, and cook it in the fire of one servant; so long as the medicine is red like honey, and equally thick;
and then take it according to your necessity, both in oil and honey; and for catheterizing the breast, and it prevents movement; And let the medicine remain for two hours, then extract it by pulling;
Repeat this many times, until his chest is settled and his bones no longer suffer.
And there is no clay water enema at all. When this medicine isn't present, and you advise using ashes of oak wood and pouring water above it.
Then the flow is restored, and in enemas, so long as you know that his chest cavity is well formed.
And if he doesn't suffer from the maladies, ancient Egyptian medicine and oak wood ashes won't help. If an enema of water and honey results in just a little light bleeding; Or you perform the enema with honey and mead, which gives honey properties that can settle and cleanse. and (12th century. In ells of the third century.
: ence laurain. Celt in thees aentities ledescriptsans theoritè. :entisin asilentisin andreins (13oun. Fromage. :cetteurs à partirentir. In itent of the 500s12: entailment. I'sage entent.
veille:gion. Andespeculi. You cleanse it with some medicines and ointments, which I have mentioned the properties or treatments of in my previous words.
And if a small puncture is on the breast, and the draining syringe cannot enter it. If enlarged by a nail even slightly, and placed under an Egyptian ointment tent. Or basilic oil, as long as it enlarges;
And if the wound is too wide, let it be cut so that only the neck or the draining syringe can enter therein.
And if the puncture that drops blood to above is with a knife or deeper below where it lies. For when the blood is in its flow, if it does not lure him away from his path. And if you cannot cover the breast as you see fit. If arranged in such a manner that the blood flows downward to its lowest point.
And if you cannot cover the breast as desired by yourself. If arranged in such a manner that the blood flows quickly downward, and nothing of the blood is lost. And apply cautery medicine to it so as to securely attach the breast.
And they are under one linen cloth that covers the entire breast; and apply force to the point of the breast wound, i.e., slightly more than its first size. then they apply a warm poultice under another linen cloth according to the quantity of the wound; and they place it in the wound of the breast to align the bowels, and do not remove the large linen fragments until after several days.
and who is overseeing the wound in the breast, often removes it to address the bowels; and knows what comes from the bowels, whether it's poison or a small amount, or digested, or not;
and take warning if the patient feels pain or not, and see if there is an abscess or no;
and when your medicine has been applied in part of its extent, you see the nature that jumps up from the wound on the breast; if you know that the breasts are already arising, then approach your sanctity;
and then dislocate the patient in the morning or after a day, and when you move the wound; if you change .i. another linen cloth, and renew the poultice;
And if the bowels of the breast become digested after several days, know that the breasts do not arise; 12e :en lice, et voiex malade .iye:
sans itte theate : 2013-envolve andente.a :les of thisn:
And if windy vomit from the abdomen after many days, you know that the stomach does not recover.
And if his chest delays in breathing, and is distanced away, if you add wet and dry medications mixed together. Like in diphtheria, because it has a large part of silica, and this is its treatment.
Make a poultice of diphtheria, and they do it with rose oil, and the powdered wine grape in its substance.
Then he confines it and uses it; and this also makes the body more cooked. when diphtheria poultices are not present...
or you take myrrh and honey and incense, and grind them up, and add the powder to the honey while it's being heated... and then apply it as a cloth over the chest, and let it rest upon the breast, and never does one administer an astrologer long... d'tifreve iagecte out aunglecthurgeungible.sseuxsecelle:0erssembalex to acheletion
d'tifreve iagecte out aunglecthurgeungible.sseuxsecelle:0erssembalex to acheletion And it is used either simple or compound: grind them, and make powder of them, and put on the honey that I have said, and use it. And if the treatment is prolonged, and not healed by this treatment.
And if the treatment is prolonged, and not healed by this treatment. Therefore you know that decay exists in it, and makes suction in the bone, or in hard parts of limbs, or joints. If the treatment for the ulcer, as we have said before.
From the amputation of a joint (a synonym is "excision" or "extraction")
Cauterizing with fire commands the Malian to let their hair grow long and even; if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they are born. From this piece of text:
And when it is weakened and we do not pay attention to it, if it becomes an abscess cavity. And they will rot and crumble as much as the root of the finger when it rots, and by chance, they may also rot entirely.
And when it causes the bone to rot as soon as it appears, and with it comes a stinking pain, and the shoulders are wide, and the skin is purple.
As you treat it in accordance with what we have mentioned in the division, yet there is no improvement. Which indicates that you must address any excess iron deposited on the finger throughout the slow-moving dislocation process. Then cauterize the wound afterwards. The cautery is much help if the bone is sound and the finger too.
And if the finger presses on the caul, and the beginning to pierce, and the bleed, Which indicates that you must place a rag inside the finger to stop the pressure. And lift it up high, and treat the caul gently and lightly. And place on top of the remaining caulmed wounds and corrosive substances to stop everything.
And if the corrosion is in the bone, break it and cut through, for as much as the bone rots, so it cannot heal.
And if you see a joint that is corroded, break and cut into it on one side as much as it has been previously mentioned in front of it. Then heal it until it becomes healthy.
And if it is rotten (corrupted), and you cut into it, and he feels great pain, indicating that one must first heal it. Then cut the second socket high by cutting across above it.
And warn them that the cutting should not exceed the line which is above the socket, for it would cause too great a pain to him already suffering.
And if it happens, if something occurs that soothes.
The one who nips in the hands of some people by chance is completely charred. And by chance he has bones or occasionally one;
And none of them are born at the root of the articulation, or their birth is in no one; Those who are born in no part have not ceased to speak; And those who are born at the double jointing, by chance may become silent.
The size of that which is fat is light, like so: In its root has a wide capillary network.
Those that grow at the root of the joint are heavy to cure; if you hold them tightly.
In those that grow in the abdomen or must be taken out, it is necessary for you to first reshape the bowel before dealing with the bone. Then shape the bone with an appropriate thread for this purpose, and then heal it as long as it remains sound.
The injuries that come together by birth, or from wounding a wound, or from scorching with fire, or similar things.
If it is necessary that you shape the wound, then he must be repaited according to their natural forms. Then place between two tent-like or woven pieces dipped in rose oil so that they do not join. Or you place between two thin layers so long as they are joined together, if it is required.
If injuries come from one of its two pieces with the palm, then shape the wound if it is required.
Of many
These are heavy wounds covered with superfluous moisture and melancholy, that come from many limbs.
and soon happen in the legs of those who go on foot and work and bear burdens, more than with others.
It is required that you do not remove the abomasum of it ever and then heal its church (presumably a metaphorical reference to strengthening or recovery).
The care of iron is according to two ways: one is to hold it with the hand and then burn the black blood. And the other way is when you bind it up and then burn all of it.
The size is according to this way: raise the first leg with warm water very much so that the large one is not subtly removed. Then stretch the hairy leg above the skin near the thigh. Then cover the wound withdrew in three layers of bandage; et siens: tres que tuy : le ceste maniere , par tout ; ieu voyez lacte desuy : il sanz cuyer.
Then choose and cut the black blood from your hand, from one end to the other, as long as there are still some without injury that can suffer much pain from it.
And then the clotting, and it commands that he be dressed in blackened meat by pressing a dark-colored cloth onto it.
And restart the evacuation and sanitation when the wounds are plain, and dress the patient accordingly.
The way his limb swelling occurs is as follows: lift up the maladied leg, if it has much hair. Then place it in the bath and let him raise his leg with warm water until it turns red and swells up.
And if you do not have a bath, heat it by fire, and then place the area of the limb long at the head of the knee joint or in the part near the ankle.
Then apply oil to the scabbing, and scratch off each layer of it until we feel it when touched.
And when it turns red and black, and when the scabbing feels like brittle leather to our touch;
Then spread the wound open around it, as long as the skin remains loose, and then sew up the scabbed area.
Then place it in one spot under three inches below; then scratch off the skin on the scabbed area until we can feel it. Then apply pressure to the raised area, just as you did previously, and sew it up with another stitching, like what you have done in the first instance.
Then adjust another size, or more as you are accustomed to, and apply pressure again at the spot where it is located, twice.
Then remove and reattach using the second size; then draw out in sizes gradually until it has become fully stretched again, and then sew it up.
And if you are unable to remove or elevate it, then put in a large needle attached to a strong double thread. And cut and pull the tissue here and there, and rotate your hand in one direction and then another until it relaxes completely. And make sure she doesn't copes, for if it copes, she cannot be removed or elevated without causing harm to the malade.
Cisterne: " Theoses leucye desussiiol theorethsaint theou thete in "13." Howse aile itentice theme ithete leap:
And if his face is contracted and twisted together, and it is not straight at all, as we have said. It is essential that you dislocate it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have previously stated.
It is essential that you dislocate it crookedly, but do not cover it; and treat it as we have previously stated. The iron formation used to pierce the face if is made of wood, and does not cut into the vein;
and is heavy-bodied because if it were subtle, it would pierce the vein, but being large as we have said, its shape is:
Of the civil vein
This vein is inlaid into legs, with warm parts where there are no grass or trees, and on the ground where it has no damp.
and perhaps it grows elsewhere than on legs, and this happens due to drying in the skin.
as it comes within the body and towards, embedded between skin and flesh.
And if the signs of this vein's beginning appear as there is a great swelling in the leg. then changes the hair, and begins the vein to emerge like a plant root.
When the joints open up, it is expected that you enclose within one and a half feet of space; and the night as well.
and let the piece remain in the leg, at all times when it stops away from the joint, if you enclose within the piece both the piece and the new growth. and if it is too long, cut off a part of it, and enclose the remaining piece, without covering its root until it has entirely discharged. because if you cover it, it will go back into the flesh, and cause abscesses and drying or disease.
for this reason it is essential to treat her little and little, up to the point where there remains nothing but skin.
and there is no time this vein when it has been treated as much as five palms long or ten fingers. and some one hundred times to me, which it issued from ten palms of length, and when you cover her, then a hole or split in the flesh so that the vein goes out, as far as her body.
If so that it discharges everything within, and all the material inside should be drained away, and apply medicated plasters continuously without any day for a month, then treat it as an abscess.
And never at this vein has the blood poured out, and immediately when it opens at the joint between the two stones or where there is no stone. And much dislocation occurs, and from which blood flows repeatedly; treat it as we have said before.
Arrows that are born between skin and flesh.
This disease is called the "beast's disease" because it occurs many times with bloodstains.
And it is a small arrow that appears between skin and flesh, and goes up and down throughout the entire body. And he feels well at each limb's movement, as long as it moves his skin or goes anywhere and jumps up.
And is inflamed with discharge of any humor, like where they come from and snakes and worms and intestines or abdomen.
And doubt one has about his illness, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the oil. By chance enters into the oil; and this happens many times.
As you have cured and treated it, you cannot prevent as long as it goes:
And it is then that you must lay the wound above and below a strong ligament tightly connected.
Then apply it above and treat it firmly, and you will see that the wound has become penetrated in the flesh, and you do not need to worry. If you cauterize with fire above, as long as it moves.
And it causes the greatest harm when it goes to the oil, just as we have said before.
And when you see it coming to the oil or near the oil's surface, tighten the ligament around it above and treat it firmly.
And it requires the patient to use medicine for the correction of the misalignments of the joints affected by various disorders,
And if they eat strange meats causing dislocation.
Of the pain that comes from windiness. This disease is brought to our land "wakir," and it is a pain that occurs in no parts. And it moves from member to member; and this is what I have shown you. (Note: The original text appears to be in a different language, but the translation provided aligns with the structure of the Old French phrasing.)
I called upon a malade woman, and she showed me her arms, and there was a small swelling in the vein.
And then again, he rose up as a worm to his shoulder. As soon as anything, like quick silver when it cuts off from the joint of another;
The pain left that place and settled in the shoulder.
And then for a bit afterwards it ran all over his body, until it reached the other arm.
Then she told me that it would come again round her body, as I saw.
I was greatly moved to see how she moved from member to member like this disease had never shown it before. Overall, I have seen many who had pain from one place move to another. But I never saw it like that, as I saw in the woman.
And I thought it was because that woman had a dry chest, and her veins were exposed. And for this reason appears that windiness constraint;
And they do not appear like this reason to those who are healthy, with moist chests and veins refilling;
And when you have seen curing this disease and the sick man feels that pain we have mentioned, if it appears to you like so. If the blood above and below has been hastily moved, and then it will force the windiness constraint out of its place; And cauterize the vein; and if you do not see it on your arms.
If the treatment of that which disrupts windiness, like foul pillows and snake pills, and similar things.
Arrows, referring to injuries caused by projectiles leading to dislocations and severe pain in various body parts.
Arrows vary in appearance and type according to their points or tips; some cut deep into the limbs, causing intense pain.
The diversity is that there are those with great points, and small ones, and hairs, and melted. This translates the description of various types of injuries caused by arrows. It captures both the variety in arrow designs and their effects on the body as described in medieval medical context. And of those who have two angles, and of those who have tongues, and of those who have fragments; et that which hurts in no part if it hurts according to two measures: or the main limb has its hairs;
just like brain, heart, liver, kidney, womb, intestines, bladder, and similar body parts. When it hurts no part of these members at all, and the sign of death appears to you thereafter; I shall tell you about this after. since you must beware the extraction of this arrow, for the death comes in many ways afterward; and when this bad sign is not apparent to you, and the arrow is not found, then treat the wound.
And the sign of a split brain when the arrow is lodged and penetrates bone, and heaves upward where it lies above the brain. and when there are blindnesses and somnolence and convulsions with tears, inflammation of the tongue's root and throat constriction, spasm of understanding and vomiting from the colic. and perhaps it causes obstruction in the nose or ears; and maybe affects speech and voice as well. and jumps in the moisture-white wound seeming like a poultice, and also as if it's leaking like tar.
and if this bad sign appears to you, then take care of it; treat the arrow if there isn't any in your body.
The sign of swelling or pain in these areas as if it's close to the left breast and also feels hard like something embedded, yet not drained out. Les arme deffroite. And then the flesh has come out of doubt.
And the sign of the cautery that never loses its power is when there are no scabs on the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient has a deep red color in the mouth, and breathes heavily and wishes to spit out the dirt from within.
And if the cautery burns deep into the covering flesh, it is near the little hips; and a great pain ensues and heavy breathing occurs, and all limbs move together with the shoulders.
And if the cautery burns into the stomach, perhaps there is vomiting of undigested meat from the wound.
And if the cautery burns into the abdomen and a part of the field within the intestines is burnt away, there is no hope for the treatment, nor in removing the cautery.
And if the cautery burns into the bladder, and the urine leaks out, and there is a strong feeling of pain; it seems that the injury is deadly. This scenario could be indicative of severe tissue damage within the bladder, potentially leading to compromised function or loss of viability of the affected area. Such an event would require immediate medical attention due to the risk of life-threatening complications like perforation and infection.
The other limbs, if they are affected and the neck and throat and shoulder and arm and spinal column on both sides and the hand and fingers and legs, and the seemingly involved limbs, appear to be largely unaffected by this condition in most respects. This statement suggests that while a specific injury or pathology is present—such as an isolated burn from cauterization due to medical intervention—the surrounding structures may not exhibit similar symptoms. It underscores the importance of considering individual variations and localized effects when assessing injuries, which can aid in accurate diagnosis and appropriate treatment planning. How the cautery is in relation to the nerve or artery, and it does not bleed, as I would say for you if such were the case that happened, since you do this latter. This sentence seems to be a descriptive statement regarding an injury involving a medical procedure wherein neither of these structures are directly damaged by cautery application within a specific vessel or nerve and thereupon in 100 years on theesmecte de la vassage de l’armor.
Amenable. In thex'sain itmea mid 20th century xmas ageraisment. Leu'savictuccuratively andcetween its incelesult from thecaustru,se. :eslmaisons,saindepart andre (not :43 (tocmesculi itape, to toupjacme:troisse:nacresse and the coudesle. �tresse, iterring siéges ce toutincture,seces ape;uccesse;gant.
And strikes at a shot which falls into the fat of oil underneath the paper beneath. and the shot was put back, but it did not move towards the end of the wood. and it was large by an inch or so of thin Turkish iron, with lightweight legs like ears; the shot was sounded well, and no unwanted event occurred.
And it struck an arrow from the throat of a Crusader, and this shot was Arabic in appearance with ears:
I removed the hairs, and extracted as much as I could when it struck, and the Crusader was sounded well.
And it hit an iron that had grown large in one or both sides (hips) of its owner, and I thought he was dead.
and then after thirty years, it did not change its position. I cut on the shot, and dislodged it, and removed it, without any unfortunate incident occurring.
And if you see a man whose back has been pierced by a shot, and the wound was sewn up there... (The rest of the text is not provided.)
...and it remained deep within him, not altering its natural positions. and found no harm in any of his natural works.
And see another man whose shot had fallen into his face, and the wound was sewn up there... (The rest of the text is not provided.)
...and then suffered great pain in such a way; and many similar things occurred.
And it struck an iron that was large on one side of the prince who lived among the natives... (The rest of the text is not provided.) and was slightly declining to the right; and it was the shot that had been recovered.
I went to seek treatment after she became enlarged by three years; when I found the wound was very wide.
I tried all sorts of secret means on it and did not feel it at all. and he felt pain in his right ear. And I thought it was from the tip of the shot.
I placed on his lowered abdomen a dislodging device to avoid inflammation... (The rest of the text is not provided.) and it appeared that he had the shot in him.
and it appeared that he had the shot in him. noblesse:
And so long as he felt the sticky substance .i. year within his vein; and he told him. I put on the wound some medicinal water with iron by hand for several days until it was overheated.
and I tested it, and felt the top of the sticky substance rise to the surface; then I applied on the overheated area some medicinal water with iron again until the top of the sticky substance appeared visibly;
and it was well done over a period of three months;
and then I searched for the wound that I had treated with tweezers on both sides, but it could not come out.
and I continued to subtly manipulate and experiment with various instruments like tweezers for a year since I had the well-made tweezers; according to what happened at the end of this chapter, after I treated it and kept the wound closed;
And the judge considers that the chart (or possibly a reference to a text or diagram) cannot restore the nose; lle andre le langage à la cest anonymously.
:era'sourface: a theesarai:entence, in itrait deesmeantis. If you place your treatment on that which I do not deny, for books cannot possibly encompass it all.
but the masters of surgery know little about such matters, and about what is present yet failing to act as expected. Perform nine operations and seven instruments are involved in the extraction of things that occur within this art.
I say that arrows do not exit from members or they are driven because of certain techniques: or through their point of entry, or by another means;
And that which jumps into them through the bow or it enters therein is an arrow entering their flesh, and such has never happened again.
And if it does not jump now, let her remain until the charr is prepared to enter or exit, and allow its course to proceed.
and also if it is driven into bone, and it cannot emerge, let her remain in this condition for any number of years, and the movement recur each year.
And if she jumps, and if not, then penetrates to any degree of subtlety into each part where her entrance is widened, and then it follows suit.
And if the splinter is pushed back into the bone where it cannot be seen, and threatens all of its integrity. and if you feel it, if the tool used cannot find any suitable instrument.
and if you cannot closely examine the wound, and delve deep into the splinter, and there is no bone, nerve or vein involved, until the wound has healed sufficiently. and you can attempt to remove the splinter if you are able, and it holds onto her within it.
and you can attempt to remove the splinter if you are able, and it holds onto her within it. if the bone is lodged with .ij. parts inside that you can dislodge. and then break or crush the splinter's edges as much as possible so that you can remove it.
and then break or crush the splinter's edges as much as possible so that you can remove it. and subtly without breaking the splinter, to remove it more carefully.
And if you cannot dislodge it once, until the blood starts to flow out from within; then remove it, as the extraction is painful. And if dislodging blood causes harm to you, apply those remedies we discussed in this chapter's section on treatment.
and warn you against making an incision on the nerve and veins, and how can you manage to remove the splinter without risk?
whether quickly or gently, firmly or smoothly; and position the patient according to the shape of the splinter when it fell into the bone. because that's the greatest help he can offer; and if you cannot, then position him according to the signs shown by his symptoms.
The splinter that has come from another place does not show any signs of it, or the skin is swollen in such a way that you can see or feel immediately:
Take care of his wound above, as much as the forceps can reach, and then pull out: if they are already loose now.
And if the splinter is firmly held within the bone; move it as much as possible in the bone, and then remove the splint.
And if it cannot come out, then let it still remain, and then resume the extraction as long as it bleeds.
And if there were an arrow lodged in the flesh, he would drive it out completely.
And if it had been a wound, and you saw to administer bandaging, using that particular tool (which is mentioned), so that the point of the arrow enters into the teeth of the instrument; and then drives in forcefully.
And if the arrow were lodged, he would use that instrument with a point entering it to hasten the extraction.
And if the arrow were touched, it is required that you pour all of the blood from the wound or where the poison is, as soon as possible. then treat the wound as it allows (or, in this context, as appropriate).
And if the arrow were lodged in the body, or blood or within the abdomen, or in the bladder, and it is near, then you can cover over it, if it covers.
and you must not cover the veins or nerves, and then extract it, and then close the wound, as is required. and treat her so long as she is healthy.
The form they have is like a bird's beak; and from this point on, it looks like:
And there are many ways of handling it: large, small, and in between, depending on the amount of the projectile.
of common pincers. of those pincers that are healthy for us, so it has been in sixteen.
s. Alsof theit:sacre, andace, devisafe, 50rocces. and the two arteries which appear in the second temples; and the veins that are in the corners of the eyes' lids, which they call "aspirates"; and the vein that is embedded in the forehead; and the vein which is at the top of the nose. and the girdles that are on the side; and the veins that are above the lips; and these are the veins called "aguehyrics"; and veins that are under the tongue.
The veins which are commonly found in each arm are;
one is located on the head side, and it's on the left ribcage side, and they call it "vein of the chest" or "chief vein"; and the muscle is called "fast", and it's composed of the head vein and the abdominal vein; and they call it "body vein"; and the abdominal vein is on the right side of the ribcage; and they call it "abdominal vein", and it's under the diaphragm; and is that which we commonly find, clearly visible under the apron;
And the salivary gland is located between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has veins; (Translation: Saliva production)
.ilent il. ici de aille. And the second sign of suffering that is on the right side of the calf's knee; and the vein that is raised in the other knee of the foot.
And in the other leg there are three such vessels.
The healthy vessels that are after the ears aid ancient catarrhs and headaches. And its quality, as I told you, and it is that you raise the top of the malady,
And its quality, as I told you, and it is that you raise the top of the malady, And burns its skin or vessels with a harsh cloth; then tightens the malady's neck to an iron hook. As long as those three vessels appear behind the ears in two layers of the top head area: And when you do it thus, and do you feel your pulse therein, if so entangled?
Then take the lancet, and thrust it through the vein just under the bone, then lift your hand all over the vein. And cut and the skin and the vein well .ii. distances from it, and draw out the blood as long as you see.
Then strain and tie it, until it is sound again.
And I have already said about the incision and cautery, in the first book.
The healthy arteries that are in those two temple areas, if they aid ancient migraines. And so, and ocular catarrh common, and at the chest of tears is it?
And its quality, as I said: And it tightens its neck, as long as those three vessels appear openly. And it feels your pulse therein, if so entangled?
Then lift your hand above the vein in your index finger, and thrust the lancet through it. And lift up the vein in your upper part, and cut it, as you have done with other three vessels, and draw out the blood according to its necessity.
Then let the malady go, and lay your finger on the vein for an hour, then place a cloth on it.
And then we have taken it out of the booklet and incomplent.il. ices tostes, sié:i:comme cest maunde a la ce que, as enlenglish tounin the fourfaire desloisle l’adie.
The dislocation of the shoulder joint is equal to ancient facial diseases, and migraines, and sinusitis.
And the quality is that the dislocation forces its way out by twisting, as long as the shoulder joint appears. Then take the instrument called "pitter," which has this shape:
And place the point on the shoulder joint, and press it firmly with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow according to the amount you see. Then apply pressure to the shoulder joint and hold it so that it remains healthy and without any excessive swelling from a wide stroke.
Always, it does not mean that the swelling should be too much; and if the joint is twisted, as the bone is close to the surface, and perhaps breaks the skin when it is subtle.
The joints of the two shoulders that are in close proximity to each other help with these injuries, and in the chin area, and at the temple (the forehead), and some diseases of the face.
And the quality of their dislocations is that they twist out of joint in any way as before.
Then the joint is healthy, and it is like two twists; a little bit long press with a wide stroke, because there is no bone in it.
And if the swelling is subtle, perhaps it breaks; then take care of the blood, as you are accustomed to do, and then bind up its edge, and bind it well.
And the dislocation of the neck joint is similar in shape, and slightly more than before, and diseases of the face. The neck of cece tuit.semblent quintre nouns in Old French: Leiame to theu: 13
And the quality of the sanitation so is that the patient tightly squeezes his neck with it, then strains his chest to your left hand. And take the fine flame long enough, and insert it between the two holes in the nose. For the vein does not open well at all, and now he begins to correct it immediately.
And do not draw too much blood at once, and correct the amount of blood according to your necessity, then wrap it up overnight because it is restored very quickly.
The quality of the veins helps in tightening the main artery, and at the beginning of bleeding, and for many diseases, and in inflammation, and in ulcers, and scurvy, and lichen, and similar conditions.
And the quality of the sanitation so is that the patient tightly contracts his neck with it on both sides, as we have said. And the masters are standing above the main patient's head, and the patients look at them from a certain angle.
Then cauterize the vein a little broadly, then treat the blood quickly as one knows how;
Then repair the other vein in the opposite side, then untie the bindings on both sides loosely. And do not move the patient; let him stay until morning so that the wound is healed.
Of the study of books The quality of the veins above in the mouth helps to draw blood into the mouth cavity, and prevents the corruption of gums, cracked lips, and wounds in the nostrils and nose-hole.
And the quality of the sanitation so is that the patient endures it as we have said. :pasture:laide cece.faire alexia.comestract. Itaute, theuccle. And they are known by this because they are black, and because through them there are narrow dark veins. Coping with both of them, and if you do not know them, and you doubt about them.
Coping with both of them, and if you do not know them, and you doubt about them. If coping with the larger of each part, and also making two incisions that are above and below, for it is a kindred way.
Of the cleanliness inside the mouth The cleanliness of the incisions inside the mouth helps after the cleaning of the cephalic (head), and it is close to the throat, and relates to eye diseases, and mouth diseases.
And the quality of this better cleaning is when the sick person sees between their hands in front of the sunlight, and they lighten the tongue, and look at each side with a black vein.
Healthy both of them, and do not overdo it, for there they are the arteries.
The incisions which are commonly cleaned up are done according to two methods:
Or you prick at all parts of their flame, or delicate olive branch if it is like an asp, and they are called "aniseed". And they are wide and delicate according to the width and depth of the incisions. The shape of this flame relief is very famous, and it is wide like you see.
And there is need to open the veins covered with large and visible flesh containing thick blood and disorder. And it is the form of the delicate olive branch.
And it is more finely pointed, and it is better for cleaning the delicate incisions, or there may be thin yellowish blood present.
The cleanlinayer of the throat, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases in the throat and neck, and chest, and stomach.
And it is required that the position be kept in mind, and he sees the artery which is there. And if it cuts an artery, and blood comes from the wound, then one must staunch it, as I have said. and it should not be stung by flies, but trimmed as if with a shears.
And if the vein does not open clearly, then it must be drained and replaced with another. or you want none of the blood to leave him, or you keep the vein open in his arm, as it clearly appears. and cut the flair as we have said.
And if you know the vein of the sore, then it must be drained from his arm until you recognize the pulse. then sign the vein again, and bind his arm, and cut the flair as before.
and beware not to harm the artery when you see the vein swollen, for it is an artery; avoid doing so.
And if you see it rising out as well from a child's urinary tract, and without being red or subtle, you know that it is not an artery; hurry then, and place your hand on it for a long time, then press your hand if the swelling is reddened many times.
if you bind his arm, and leave it like this, and do not move the patient's painful limb, and be wary, so he does not move until he is well again.
And if the swelling does not subside, and it goes away, and the medication is no longer present, then cut the artery if it has opened, for its head retreats; and press the swelling.
And take a poultice made from flax, and apply it, and take one-half of the poultice and place it well on top of the other day.
if the swelling is not pressed, it is well; but if not, then treat it as we have said, with powders that staunch blood.
and the staunching is not done in any other manner for the small bleeding of the wound, and its possession on the arm.
The vein in his arm supports that blood so cut the head of it above and below. for it is composed of the artery and head-related structures as we have said.
The text: "Caundes la voi deffac naguis. And let it swell and the health becomes tightened, and perhaps cannot heal.
And this vein opens many times, and if it does not open in anyone due to its subtlety, then you must first sanitize the instrument afterwards; and try to avoid hurting the nerve.
And if there is a vein between the two joints, it becomes long.
The healing of the cephalic vein helps by attracting blood to the head and aids its recovery. (Note: "cephalic" typically refers to something related to the head or skull in medical terminology.)
and it must be safer to puncture the jugular vein or the medial mesenteric vein, because it is less likely from all the other veins, as it has neither nerve nor artery. (Note: The context of this translation involves choosing a safe site for venipuncture based on anatomical structures.)
Always, it is better to ask the easier way, and do not regret doing so if it's necessary, and continue. (Note: This translation suggests a general approach in medical practice of choosing simpler methods when possible.) And perhaps it swells in some people after the first time, but there is no need to regret. (Note: This sentence acknowledges that vein puncturing may lead to swelling as a complication, yet emphasizes not regretting when it occurs.) The quality of healing depends on your thought. (Note: This phrase reflects the belief that patient care and medical interventions are influenced by a practitioner's thoughts or intentions, which can be interpreted as either an oversimplification or metaphorical expression within this context.)
The first thing you must know about venipuncture is that it's primarily for keeping health;
and to prevent future diseases; and the venipuncture should be performed in one of these three veins which are known as, the cephalic, jugular, and femoral; and it should be started in the beginning of winter prayers, and in autumn and early spring when signs of fullness appear;
and it should be done either the first year or the third day after an interval of two to three years;
The healing that is meant for diseases has no specific time determined, but when it is needed at any moment of day or night;
and it does not necessarily have to be safer for children up to twelve years old or women carrying only a quarter of months until the seventh month; And one should not safer the veins who have passed 60 years;
And when anyone wishes to improve their health, whichever way it may be, it is necessary that they drink a light enema. If there are too many residues retained, so that the veins do not draw excessive fluids from the intestines, which could harm the main limbs.
And let not those who are too light of meats or drunken be healthy, however they may be.
And if one wishes to be healthier after an episode of colic, vomiting, and diarrhea, and multiple pregnancies with women, and hard labor, constant vigilance, and dining at night, regardless of the whole virtue or by something in armor or heart;
Then delicately balance the humors, if they are not too large by meats and drinks and remedies, for you have the opportunity.
Then whether it be bathing or something else that does not defile the blood, in order to subtly cleanse the blood;
And you shall be healthy from the veins and in the third stage as we have said;
And you must keep away from that day of work, prayer, pleasure, and similar things.
And pull out your hair and tear them, let you be the healthier one than those who heal themselves, and their bandages are worn for two or three times;
Then strain the linen above mildly, for when it is too tight or little, you cannot correct it without doing.
And then the bandage is applied to the hands, so long as the veins swell and smell therein;
Then let the healthier one press a little oil on it with his hand, then place his sign above that vein for a bit or so he feels better; so that the vein does not break with the injury. And the bonez eau demeinere toctre pietes alains les malt esple. entailine theil. Comen, tote
ses lespease caue the andace:  :
And if the vein's work is done for the first time, it is good; but if not, it repeats again a little near that place where they have punctured or sutured, and the skin does not swell up.
And if the skin is inflamed, and the patient's malady worsens, let it be one or two days without restraining the arm. perhaps an abscess will form in that area; do not allow immersion or bathing there again if it pleases the patient.
and if the puncture is small, or you incisively remove some fluid without doubt that it will not be much blood as you have seen, then firmly hold in that same puncture all its strength.
and do it a little hurriedly so that the skin is inflamed; because this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the puncture inflamed, do not repeat the operation, and place a little oil on it, because it lightens the blood flow in this puncture, and is mixed with the oil applied to this wound.
and then apply the oil poultice in each operation that you drain the veins, so as to slow down the blood flow.
and this is also a triamcinolone cream and vasoconstrictor paste when it is applied to the puncture; subtly remove it if it is too thick.
And if there are large abscesses that often occur when the opening of the vein is small, then only apply it as much as necessary to drain them. if you hasten and place a wet sponge soaked in warm water on the puncture, and keep it there for an hour.
and it is required that you do this after the blood flow from the vein has stopped, and if it does not return to its place in any way or color over the following days, then you should not worry about it. and if you see anything of aloe or myrrh mixed with honey poultice, or something similar.
And many times there are abscesses and signs of the operation on the vein; therefore, place your hand above it, and if you feel inflammation in that area due to hand pressure, then this is a bad sign. So do not place anything of what we have said above, because perhaps in the artery without treatment; but make a dry plaster for one day to harden the puncture, and then treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
And apply each vein according to its quantity and color of blood.
Because if the blood is blackish, let it come out as much as red; and if you see a lot of inflammation, leave it until it becomes less swollen; and if it's too warm, let it cool down.
And be careful of those who are weak and frail, and need to have blood removed, because it will make larger wounds, and burns more widely.
And to those who are weak, do the opposite, and keep it lightly, and often make it less inflamed by cutting diagonally rather than pulling.
And this method of drainage of blood and nerve; it is small and long.
leu vassage, et chrestry. Celaise ljourre la meinl thexiii.comle jargon.
naught ia c’ssextreurendecteblevels;re:gachanches  çoins. The
And if he holds his hand to the right way, after extracting much blood, it is required that he breathes smoke from coal and drinks a subtle fragrant syrup.
And use other things we have mentioned in the section on syncope for the extraction of veins.
And if he wishes to exhale his arms, and do it again later, when he is weakened by great sweating, it requires that he recovers little by little according to the continued amount of his vital force.
And who wishes to exhale his arms after the first incision, and he is strong, then he will recover in about two hours after the first incision or after the second hour.
And who wishes to breathe on another side, if he must recover for one day or three days.
For there is much blood within the already inflamed heart, and it brings fever; if he requires to draw a great quantity, and expand the cavity until it fills with water. then that you satisfy all conditions of resting, and place your hand on his chest when he recovers, so that the wound does not move in water. and this often happens when the patient rests improperly.
but does not require you to remove the limb, and draw blood a second time, when the cavity is closed, and then firmly press on it. nor if he lies down, for that would be harmful.
but let the hairs grow again after recovering the second time; or you have no need to touch it with any heat, until the uncooked part of the vein has expanded. and place them in water for some time, and press them lightly.
And if the vein is inflamed, let it rest and not constrict; so long as the abscess is calmed down.
And if you need to draw blood a second time from the vein, let him recover in that spot or another vein or in the other arm.
The vein removes the arm from its place because it is composed of the main vein at the elbow.
And the method of setting it so that the patient's hands are burned with hot water until the flesh is red.
then be tied up moderately so that the vein shows well, and now set it with a narrow transverse.
and if the wound is wide, set it well near the joint of the hand, so that it cannot come out, and then reheat the hand in hot water, allowing enough blood to flow.
And if it is in its place, do not return the hand to hot water again, because you put more ice than in its place.
And the setting of this vein is safer from all other veins than it has not an artery or nerve.
The setting of the hand's salvation is worth all diseases of the heart, and that's how it is done.
Strain the hand and warm it in hot water until the vein comes out if you can see it. and if it is set across in all respects, then nothing complains.
and don't go too deep into them, because the nerves are all stripped of flesh in this place.
and then put the hand back in hot water if it is frozen in the wound, so that it cannot come out.
And when you have treated the blood as you know how to do it, put oil and thread on it so that it can be stitched up quickly, and then perform this for every patient.
The setting of the left hand is worth for mouse disease, and do it all as I have told you about the right hand.
The setting of the flesh is worth for all those diseases that are on the heart. If like diseases of the mare, and retention of flowers, and disease of rain, and joints and old legs, and similar illnesses.
And the quality of his health is that he suffers great pain when placed in hot water, and scraped on the vein until it bleeds. And above the vein of that patient; and the vein is at the ankle, and it bleeds quite a lot with each movement.
His health then becomes either wider bleeding from above (sainne la donques) or at the ankle ("ou à la cheville"), which is more severe.
And if you heal the vein there, take care to treat those in the same area ("des ners qui sont desoz"), and restore its health as well as in treating it by other methods ("traver ausi"); and sometimes the bleeding stops completely ("anesil").
And if the patient is unable to get up ("li sans n’en puet issir"), then reset the vein in hot water, and let it be well cleansed (vuidier).
And if his condition requires it the first time ("li sainieres"), then repeat the second attempt above a little bit ("au desus un poc"), because his vein is salted (salz); Do not doubt that it is nerve damage ("nerf"), as we have said before, and in this case make the same kind of treatment for the other vein ("de la sophene") equally.
The blood from the vein of the sciatic nerve is high at the ankle ("la voinne sciatique est a la cheville"), and his condition corresponds to the pain in the back of the thigh when there is hot bleeding ("sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche", "quant c’est por sanc chaut").
And the quality of his health condition is that he bleeding occurs above (ou bain ("etre "en l’estime de seignel. Aieinfeudal.
For otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, then heals in all ways that you can do, and crossing. And it is worthwhile for you to repeat it, because the sinew is loose, and it is very well repaired by hand.
And it is worthwhile for you to repeat it, because the sinew is loose, and it is very well repaired by hand. And if you do not repeat it, then healing of none comes from the one that has opened or pierced his side, and in small movements, and warn him of nerves.
And make much correction to the blood that you see, and then loosen it, and place it on cotton, and constrain it, so now she is healed.
Ventouse suction cups
Ventouses are made of horns, or leather, or iron; and suction is performed in one or another ways: either by piercing and drawing out blood, or simply feeling the pulse.
And this suction which is performed by piercing is according to one or another ways: either it is done with fire, or with heat.
and other in two sides of the neck; and the ventouse on the chin. and the ventouse on the ankles; and the ventouse on the ulcers. and suction cups on the arms; and suction cups on the legs. and suction cups on the heels; and this suction does not treat blood because it uses small needles that are scattered over the skin.
and because of this it doesn't hinder anyone, just like with ventouse procedures. and it does not require that she be heated or cooled, in no disease caused by accumulation of fluids, as long as all the parts are released.
And if the necessity of diseases requires suctioning or by custom, we administer each one hour at the beginning and end of the month, or in between.
because it has such people who, when they know they have to suction, weigh the head.
and if such people have accumulation of fluids in their body, and also in their head, and at the neck, and darkness around the eyes.
and those who have blood in theirsangue, and they bleed from the mouth, and draw it out of:etre. And if there are some who think about such things, and see blood coming from wounds and bites and similar incidents.
And when we observe these signs, and immediately after the month begins, we command to blow out for 3 days.
The medicine of the mosse helps in loosening the joint ... that comes out, and does not require waiting after removing all the body's flesh.
And this blowing is on behalf of the medicine of the skull.
and it does not require that those who have a cold constitution or who suffer from headaches should use it, as this causes them great harm.
and for the same reason, they do not require that these people use it, nor those with cold diseases of the head.
And those who benefit from it often become oblivious, and for this reason they must place the suction cup slightly further down due to uncertainty of effectiveness.
The blowing also benefits the neck area and is part of the medicine for the head and skull base; therefore it has an additional advantage. and in the hole of the passageway, and with blowing, and with filling.
and it should not be pushed too tightly, for if it is overtightened, it may cause abdominal pain or discomfort in the heart area.
The blowings applied to each side of the neck are worth the pains of the head and eyes, and eyelids, and strangulation, and pain in the root of the teeth.
and it is part of the medicine for the skull base; therefore you must instruct the master that he express his hand to apply it, so he does not compress the artery, and draw blood from the wound.
The blowings in the mouth are worth toothache and gum disease, and similar illnesses that occur in the mouth; it is part of the medicine for the two lips.
The blowings on the shoulders are worth to illnesses caused by heat and filling.
The blowings on the shoulders are worth just as much as three arrows in each arm. because it draws blood from these large arrows;
and command to the master that he does not inflict too much pain on them, for their muscles are thin, and they know about nerves and blood vessels.
The suction cup applied on the back (croup) is worth as the foundations of diseases therein and in that area, and it requires the suction cup to be large and heavy, so it has the skill to properly treat; and if it were subtle, it would break apart, and make great wounds.
.
The method of using the suction cup is that you place it first empty, and apply it immediately and hastily, and move it evenly, and never stop doing so until you see the redness and swelling on the skin, and pierce the vein; then remove, and set in position of the limbs, for there are many who have stiff shoulders, and clear pores: it is necessary to strike once only, and make wide and deep wounds, and a little deeper.
And if the blood is thick, it must be punctured two times; the first time to cauterize subtly the vein that is thick.
And if the blood is very thick, it must be punctured three times; and when we want to drain a little bit of blood and not much at all, we need to strike only once.
And if we want to take a lot of blood, we often compress the vein; and when the blood is very thick, then we pierce it and seize them thoroughly, and let them be punctured strongly.
And covers those who have thick skin and hard, and who have strong veins, that you oil the edges of their blisters with a herbal oil that is penetrating and dissolving. If it is in the estate, with violet oil, or with sweet almond oil, or with seed of squash;
And if it is in vinegar, with watercress oil, or with lily oil, or chamomile oil, or something similar.
And if the surplus is large and cold, take oil of bitter almonds, or with balm, or with Anet seed oil, and similar things.
And if he who is healthy has tender skin and wide veins, there is no need to put oil in.
But it is necessary to wash after the watering with rose water, or cold water, or water of mulberry, or squash water, or porcelain water, or something similar.
And he who has much moisture, if it rises again, take up water from the herb of myrtle, or cold water, or sumac, and similar things.
And he who has large surplus reoccurrences, they rise again from strong wine, or cold water, or infusion of anet or chamomile, or similar things.
And it is not better to use the suction before or in bathing, but after bathing an hour or two; and does not sleep again afterwards.
And it is necessary for him who must be suctioned and when he is suctioned. And warn those who are choleric and whose blood is too thick and inflamed. If it is necessary that he eat cold things, like green apples and radishes and lettuces poured into the abscess.
and milk cows’ udders, and venison steaks, and somewhat moist meats.
And he who has a cold disposition, it is necessary for him to eat honey syrup, and fragrant wine that is half warm and half cool, and milk cure, and cow's udders and little birds and fledglings.
Trecenturathe cestand deparle desusme deffacer levesame (14thansent and la pice dexpress.
And it requires giving to some men sometimes cathartic or musk at the time of windlessness, or afterwards, to strengthen the main limbs. And it must be removed gently but it does not require that those who drink hot fluids.
The suction cups that are applied to wounds are those placed on the liver, and on the thighs, and gouty joints, and abdomen, and belly, and chest, and lumbago, because these limbs do not suffer from injury under them either.
and not to draw blood from a member to another member. as we put on the abdomen when it is swollen; to oppose the viscousness that is in a member, as we apply suction cups to the belly and chest to lessen the limb.
and the pain when there is an operation or incision, if it arises from its attractive quality by chance during the operation, or the removal of the arrowhead from its point.
and then does it when we place them on the liver and thighs where there is retained windiness.
and these suction cups are approved as empty because they can draw so easily; but sometimes they are approved together fire, and at other times water-filled.
as in diseases of great weeping, and such that it fills the suction cup with hot water or hot herbs needed for this purpose.
Its shape is approved by fire if it is so:
And it should be two hands breadth and half a palm wide, and have a small hole in the center like for pushing an arrowhead into its point.
and if it is placed on armpit, so that the malady does not cut into the member when placing it upon it.
and in shape or form like a bent stake of armpit to apply an arrowheads.
ses, pourpreces en.
lescaesar. Whatsoarre malice. Ifracture of caution : le monde as ita lasointerpretation:escalle aicentric la'soucreature. Ita. Lei: 13rdenture soceletures to theascribe:
And must one now place this suction cup upon the limb:
Take up a candle or (that is) thread, and place it inside the suction cup along the vein that is in the middle of the arm where the suction cup is positioned. So that the light shines at the bottom of the suction cup, so it does not burn the patient.
And then place it upon the limb, and you must put it in the hollow where we have mentioned, so that when one sees smoke coming out, they remove the suction cup.
And take up the thread as before, and you must repeat often if you have practice.
In the suction cup which is used for treating pleurisy at all times has no vein nor hollow, and it only finds use when it is empty of fluid and placed upon the limb as much as possible.
And that is its form:
Suction cups are used only for members (limbs) where it is difficult to place them due to small size, like in the throat and gums, and similar cases. And in their dislocated joints, as with thumb or finger, and similar cases;
And the quality of its use is that when you try suction cups which are in dry wounds without bleeding much pressure on them, let them remove.
And they put them in moist wounds, provided they are not inflamed and have nothing in their cavities. And then you must be skilled in the art of suction cups and wound dressing, and apply it to the limb as much as possible if it is red, and place the suction cups on them.
And when they are smooth and fit to place them if it is possible to put the suction cup where one can place it, as it is quite useful afterward.
:mein. Il est un peu :lcité :esyme : Old French.
And if he lets his healthy skin too close to the heart, and places a cold linen cloth on it, and keeps it there until the swelling subsides.
And if his swelling is multipled, he puts it under crushed borax or powdered herbs and similar remedies until the swelling subsides.
Or you place it near its edge with flaked charcoal pieces, and let them adhere to the skin until they are now healed.
And if there is more knowledge about it, then apply other remedies.
And if the swelling does not reduce, you rub the skin with fresh blood, or pierce it until the swelling goes away. And then he puts them on, and immediately they smell the blood, as they dry out.
And when you see that they crumble, sprinkle them with a little honey or ash, or powder, and they will now heal.
This begins the book of dislocations.
These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and they deal with the treatment and healing of fractures and dislocations.
Pay attention, o' my friend, that the wise man finds this chapter to be lacking in such books, and no ancient letter or text has mentioned it.
And for this reason is the knowledge missing from our land, as I have never found any good one.
And I know nothing of it because from the ancient books or by studying so much that I have treated the science and through experience and custom in my life.
And I have described in this chapter what is contained herein and summarized it at the end, and clearly showed the forms of treatments that are prescribed, just as I have done in these previous two chapters.
Therefore we must say the prologue and chapters of this book are composed of words and arranged by our understanding, and it is written on paper so that those who have tried can learn this noble art and teach it to others.
I say that when any fracture or dislocation or twisting or sprain occurs to no one, it means you must attend to healing both parts of the maladies in your body, if nothing is done at all, just as with weak hearts, fevers, or old age.
Or if the blood is not very close or too cold; and menstrual blood is known as frozen fights, and pieces of feather and quill, and does not drink any wine, nor eat any fat foods, and does not fill oneself too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, until he has doubt about an aposteme or swelling of matter in a limb, then it returns to its original governance which he had used.
And when the bone is broken and begins to restore itself, it must be wrapped in meats that make a great noise, or have viscosity, as if made of cooked wheat, and bread, and testicles, and paws, and flesh from any animal, and strong wine, and similar things. And so the noise is increased in his fracture.
Seigneur.
:liefs itinjour.
And you know that wounds are various in many ways.
And the main fracture is different from the other one, and I will tell you in this chapter all the ways of fractures. For there is a fracture that follows an arrow's path and another by thinning, as the tip of a pen used for writing; such injuries will be addressed herein.
For there is a fracture that follows an arrow's path and another by thinning, as the tip of a pen used for writing; such injuries will be addressed herein. And if there be a fracture with an accompanying wound, and a fracture comprising a minute fissure; these conditions shall also be discussed in the context of this chapter.
And each manner has its respective treatment and proper instrument for restoration, as the memory brings it to mind in these discussions.
and it is known that the bone fracture by which the ligament twists, and tears open completely, and may be pressed with one's hand; such conditions are also recognized in these discussions.
and where there is no twisting or pain in the affected area, and the patient feels no great distress, it indicates that there is indeed no fracture.
yet it may well present with twistiness, a small fissure, or minor break; these possibilities are also contemplated within this treatise's scope. However it does not imply that you must move him with your hand alone but apply the remedies hereafter and now gently restrain his movements; this approach shall be taken for treatment.
And you know that the fractures which follow an arrow's trajectory and have their two joined parts separated must now be aligned equally, so as to prevent further injury from arrows; this is also included within these discussions.
and if arrows strike them, so that they suffer no pain for a day or more, provided they are thus comfortably positioned. Then he places the arrow deep where it may be easily removed and drawn out, and you know that the restoration of him is easier than the removal of those parts there were previously; then bind him, as it must be afterwards.
And if there are broken pieces in the bone, whether it involves taking out .ij parts (where 'ij' represents an unspecified number), or if these fragments include hands, limbs, some small body parts, tendons, a string, or cords connected to your hand.
and position the limb according to its natural shape, if the parts of both arms are deformed. When resetting them with all forces applied during repositioning, ensure that you do not further injure or cause pain in the patient's injury or dislocation.
and align the '.ij.' bone fragments according to their optimal shapes.
And the patient feels discomfort in his hand if it seems that he is not well: if there is slight movement, and do not over-restrain or press him too much as they would cause by their work of incision and contraction on the limb, as we have often observed;
and when the limb is at a critical juncture, if you tend to it well so that it does not move, do not worry or sleep on it, nor turn around, nor engage in any other manner. And ensure that the limb is secure so that it feels no pain. When it feels no pain, then it is not serious, and he must put him in partial position so that he does not feel any pain.
When it feels no pain, then it is not serious, and he must put him in partial position so that he does not feel any pain. and keep him lying straight, to prevent twisting when he is restored.
and such misalignment of the limb is as I have told you.
It is known that misaligned limbs can vary in size and shape.
Because they have small limbs like broken ones - which are thin and fragile - it is necessary to wrap them in soft, fine linen.
And those who are larger - similar to a club or leg - it is necessary to wrap them in a broad and sturdy bandage. The wide bands envelop the entire large member and apply even pressure across all parts without causing any harm.
Then tie the bandage tightly but not excessively around them, usually making three or four turns depending on the size of the limb. Hold your hand firmly against the entire wrap, then loosen it slightly above the dislocation and gradually move away from the affected area, allowing a small distance to grow between the joint and the point of dislocation.
And gradually loosen the bandage little by little as long as you are ensuring a significant part of the joint remains stable and uninjured. Then repeat this process with another wrap, turning it directly towards the dislocated joint in order to provide support while permitting some degree of natural movement for healing purposes.
Then revisit the area around the dislocation and slightly loosen it again, not too much or too little, as we have mentioned in the first description above.
Then place between the bandages soft linen or cloth, ensuring they are evenly distributed over the entire limb, then bind it tightly with one bandage and finally secure any protrusions well, if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if there is inflammation or abscess, then apply something soothing and antibacterial to the area which reduces swelling and leaves it unharmed for any days.
Then is drawn upon the targets, and they are made of a small piece of wide cane twisted in its drawing, or iron used to make shields, or fan blades, and they should resemble this shape.
But it must be that the stick placed on the fracture is slightly larger and wider than the others.
And should also be as long as required for a small or large limb;
Then the sticks should also be made as you did for the first time in the previous case, then laid above an awning or similar support, just as in the previous case of the fracture.
It should be either narrower or wider, then less or more; and it must be that the string used is neither too thick nor too thin, but made of fine linen.
For if the string is thick like those made by people who twist linen threads into unworked cords, and this would be great error, for the bandage cannot be even if it is too delicate; and there should not be less than two spans of space between each stick.
And if the maladies of the sticks are caused by the blows to the ends after setting them in place, then they should be wrapped with fine linen or woven strips, so that it does not break (blec).
When the wound is with the fracture, and it breaks, I will tell you about this treatment after.
And you should know that it is not necessary to stretch sticks all the broken limbs on the first day. For if the limb is large, it does not necessarily need to be supported with sticks for more than five or six days (or more depending on your judgement of the fracture' Written by: Shayne Brinckley
And here the manner of ancient emplasters for healing breaks, dislocations, and twisting: and you take flour that stands at the walls of the mill, and mix it with abundant water, and make this concoction not too clear nor too thick, and use it, and it is the common way of emplastering to restore a break in various positions, especially for women and small children, because it is neither too hot nor too harsh.
Another method of emplastering for healing breaks and dislocations and twisting: take abareis, laddani, aloe vera, gum arabic, mugwort (Mentha pulegium), mirr (Myrtus communis), and Aleppo (Pinus halepensis) oil; 10 parts of each. Also mix honey with rosewater; if the patient's condition is warm, use this emplaster, as it has good composition, and restores broken bones quickly, benefiting many people.
Another method of emplastering for torsion: take mugwort (Mentha pulegium), 10 parts; rose petals and aloe vera, 73 parts each; acacia gum, 5 parts; Armenian wormwood (Artemisia absinthium) oil, 6 parts; grind them well, mix with water or honey, and apply.
Another method of emplastering for joined joints and misplaced bones, and easing the pain that occurs, and cutting to the bone: take new linen, steep in milk and boiled oil, and apply it on the affected area. This type of emplaster does not restore but is good for cooling hot spots, and specifically treating bone pains.
Another method of emplastering for broken bones: take dried fig leaves and dried pav-leaves from the pavement thyme (Thymus serpyllum), grind them together, and make an emplaster. This type of emplaster is known to restore broken bones when used as a remedy.
Another method of emplastering for the restoration of broken bone and to alleviate the remaining pain from the dislocation: take wormwood roots, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, wheat flour (likely referring to a type of starch), one part each; grind them together and mix with wine. Apply this emplaster if the limb is swollen, or wet it with water from coriander infused in vinegar, or just plain water, and use as needed.
Another method of emplastering for dislocation restoration when the swelling occurs due to trauma: take wormwood roots, flax seeds (linseed), balsam root, lime-flowers, violet flowers and chamomile, one part each; grind them together and mix with saltwater or light water or wine according to the temperature of the limb and rest.
Another method in his book, asserting that it is made of beeswax and oil, and nothing else, and sayeth that they should not become hard or dry.
Auvergothicuns esleves a laurat en êtes: lecortice nett. La-nation encte desemiloc'savate lemonfaire quoles, c'thorce of thegles entitilsalong. Whatmorne. In medieval ageing tolledesarre, theore:
Another way to inflame is: take a mixture of men and animals crushed, or feather quills evenly, and the same length, and cut them into pieces, and grind them, and with these you make an inflammation and injury.
And then apply it slightly afterward, and take care that the patient does not feel any of the old pain or misalignment in his bones; if not applied by hand for days.
And if pain comes to the joint, or itching, restlessness, or swelling, hurry up and apply it, and align the inflamed bone now; take a light cloth, dip it in moist sea water, lift the limb, so that the itching stops, and alleviate the pain. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then place it on dry linen, moistened with water or oil roses, and bind it under a knot until you are secure from the heat of incision.
and let the inflammation of the limb rest, and relieve the pain, then resume the rubbing gently, and a little bit of inflaming again, and do not press it so hard as before, subtly until healed.
And if you see that the incision and scratches and pain and swelling have spread throughout the whole body, and you know how to inflame and bind it, then resume as you did initially.
And if it does not come to the limb in any of these ways that we have mentioned, do not remove it until after three days or four or five or six; and never leave it for twenty days, depending on what is seen, as long as the dislocation still heals.
However the restraint is more than before, and his flesh swells, as I have said before; and if you see that the joint has not healed properly, it shows that no further injury can occur. let the hot water bath arise every time you dislocate it, and do so for each day, and slightly ease the rubbing.
through this work we thus prevent the further dislocations to the limb, and hasten what the foolish doctor does to restore the twisted limb; it is bad, and if such practices are feared, then I see nothing else but laziness and not treating properly.
of various dislocations Many types of dislocations are described, and various forms, and the causes are distinguished;
ngease.troxentilges.cumentecteignexngerrevesseurde :
Or the knife cuts through the bone too quickly without feeling, and causes this type of fracture "absolute" breakage; and the wound from these two types of breaks is large or small.
And if it has impacted bone marrow, or split the joints of a leg, or fallen on top of a stone, or other similar occurrences.
And if there is persistent fracture that approaches the tissue beneath the bone or lies on top of the bone, and this wound is large or small.
And if the wound is repaired into the bone as delicately as screws, and it is a small break, thus causing this type of "capillary" fracture.
and if the wound is caused by piercing, or falling, or something similar, and it inserts a piece of bone into the body cavity like a stovemaker when he drives iron bars into his hearths, especially if between the bones in that area.
And this often occurs under those who have or hold moist bones, like children's.
and it happens in all these types of fractures where small fragments are scattered, as if they were; I will speak about it here.
And we know all types of fractures caused by separation from them, and inquisitions involving tests, and those caused by corrupted substances underneran.
The "capillary" type is known by the fact that when one discovers the bone and rubs it with cotton wool underneinasound there is an open black break.
In the treatment of the breakage, take care to avoid any bad medications; if you see no malicious accident, like vomiting blood, loss of consciousness, extension, paleness, fever with ague, and the bones being forced out from underneinasound, along with other similar conditions, which cannot be healed without doubt.
And if you see an apparent accident and hope for recovery, as in the beginning of treatment.
And when the bone fragments come first, and it's winter, so that you will hold the bones for fourteenth days before they can move.
And it's dislo:il se cest ostoizostre pense avant iau lexandres les paraphrase : en Franconge ofstoullowne tolente ditz aesle descreplacenioraure lepremerenturing. A-ceiure laurient'soldre:er-tise dexile fromage.
And if the bone fracture comes near to cover the brain's surface, it requires that you cut the broken part in this way: and ensure that you examine the pained head of the patient thoroughly; and probe into the bone in every manner that you can, and on the face of the wound more tenderly than possible.
And if the dislocation of blood comes to uncovering the bone or incision, it requires that you use this method and ensure that you fill the wound with linen soaked in rose-scented oil. And let the wound rest as long as the incision cavities are soothed, and be assured of blood dislocation; then begin to move the bone back into place according to .ij. methods of practice: one method is that you fill the narrow gap in front with a dressing made of linen dipped in rose-scented oil, and it takes this form:
And then there is another method more significant than the first.
And the second method involves using various techniques in different sizes - some sharp and others broad; all applied with precision to avoid staining the head (bleeding). This description provides insight into a range of surgical instruments that might have been used historically for medical procedures such as bone setting, suggesting an era when metal tools played a significant role in medicine.
And if the bone is hard and rough, it requires that you perforate within so as to administer techniques with care, ensuring they do not pierce beyond the bone's surface (testicle); and must have above the point a margin or circle, which prevents the point from going through beyond the bone; and you must ensure several other conditions: each segment should be placed on the edge of the bone to such an extent that it covers the entire testicle; and one must use techniques for all tests. This indicates detailed procedures involving surgical intervention with specific tools designed to address injuries while protecting internal organs, in a manner consistent with medieval medical practices.
The quality of cutting into the bone to confirm its fracture involves placing one technique on the bone and then turning it back until you know that the bone is confirmed as broken; next, reposition the technique slightly afterward, and proceed in this way; then use incisors at intervals along the bone' Written by: Jane Doe
:me: Ipsum esle ment'srete theater andrepresententureture lector altes, ilustarte. Ifre: "nature aicarte:resilier, lacrore.a l’is : The-age. Ilice:itearé un. ical ascertaineslater. Ainter.
naturte itesse. Andraise:sake:sacre (Issa. Iescribe the same:nage,upimes:13atreil.
And the other way of work is that which Greeks call "sauvage"; and it is very strong, and it is their word. It is necessary that you first remove part of the bone, whether it is an open fracture or a closed one; and once you have found this piece, place along the edge of this round incisional cut, because from then on its shape will be as follows:
And do not cut off a part, and it is that piece which has two sides of .ij. angles, so that the cutting is directed towards the bone; then with a small mallet placed above, you tap lightly all around the bone, and be careful to avoid the vein located there.
If it is attached to the bone, let the bone be moved lightly, because we well know that this can cause harm and fear.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate through that vein, and the bone is removed too much above, and it has small pieces, then this roughness must be returned to that place, and you need very delicate scrapers by which you have various quantities, in order to provide for each piece of bone according to the work done and the shape of the fracture.
If before great scrapers, and after more delicate ones, and never ceasing to do so as long as it is well done.
In each of the other fine-tunings and subtle fractures must you prepare according to its degree; it is something that has never been returned by those who have put their study into this craft.
And if the suture is discovered, it must be that you provide one piece of linen, according to the amount of the wound, and apply oil rosin on the wound, and place it over the wound. And then take another linen fold in twain of them or three, and apply oil rosin to the wound, and treat it more lightly than you pritre demein desu doul. Et quantité: et nece qu’il nour; si leves aungle.
bleugetheves :matter.
And warn that the wound be cleaned immediately, so you don't leave any residue of oil, nor do you allow it to stick together, for when a splinter is stuck onto the brain's cloth, they will pierce and puncture it, and this causes great harm to the patient; because when something sharp is placed on the skull surface beyond measure, it often injures excessively.
Take heed therefore, when any malady befalls the patient, as we have said before, it is doubtful sense of doubt.
And if no wound comes only due to the medicine that has been applied, then it requires you to apply a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and one part of linen cloth, and place them on the wound. then let the treatment of healing methods that it covers until he is healthy.
Remember that there are sometimes two joints above, or one next to the other, because they are two bones; and these below is cartilage, and it does not break at all, if neither pulled nor twisted, and then heals well.
And if one of the joints is broken, it requires you to insert your small rod or pin into the joint and place that break therein at your index finger'pression point, and then in the pouch, so long as his bone returns according to its natural shape. and do this ligation, and warn that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
And if the break is in the upper part of the bone and cannot come to rest, then it requires you to place a similar piece at the top of an awl slightly larger.
And if the break is in two parts, then you repair it again and hurry to restore it within a year if possible.
if not after the seventh or twelfth month when his abscess has subsided, then you should insert a piece of linen fabric at the joint's top when the break is in one part.
Or you insert another piece if the break is there; and let these tent-pieces be as large as they fill up the joints' holes.
And said none of the restorers that they must cover the tent-pieces with moss, and renew it every day. I don't think this is correct, but you must make them in confection of woolen cloth and powdered millstone; then let the tent remain until the bone becomes firm again and the cartilage hardened.
And sometimes they insert goose feathers in the joints of tent-pieces, and if one rough linen cloth is there with the break, and let it be pressed on by blowing air among them, or do as you see fit.
And if the abscess comes to his joints, and he puts cotton in rose oil, or a little bit of pitch.
sesure of theire, ilgall. Thejacit:cumbre soffice. Commentaire, anderio :susine. Ire deuvels. Iniature durellen a levein.
And if the break is small, and it is broken into tiny pieces, then you should extract the fragments in accordance with the conditions of this treatment, and mend the fracture, and heal strange things by soldering, as we do with plasters and ointments corresponding to that.
And if there is no break in the bone with any injury at all, and its treatment of bandaging, and it puts on strips of cloth until healing occurs.
Of the procedure of the jaw
When the jaw is dislocated and there is no preexisting injury, and the break is only displaced slightly, and it is not fractured in two pieces because of screws within, if one knows how to move it lightly.
It is necessary that if the break is in the right part of the mouth, you stick your index finger inside the patient's mouth; and if it is in the left part of the jaw, you place your right hand's index finger there, move the fracture lightly, and hold the other hand by default, and make it equal.
And if the break in the jaw is displaced by .ij (units likely representing a certain measurement or distance), it must be extended .ij parts until it becomes equal again.
And if there is movement of the teeth or routine, using straps of gold, silver, or silk to place on the fractured jaw and put a double sheet under it; and then put the sheet a large table well made, or an equal piece of leather long and wide according to the jaw, and hold it so that you can move the mouth as needed, and command the patient with bleeding to rest, and eat light foods.
And if you observe that the patient's appearance changes, and then return it to its former state; and place a poultice of flour or fine powder mixed with oil or wheat flour after dressing the wound; and put on a light linen poultice over the poultice, and if the poultices heal well, let the patient's dislocation not change again as long as it is healthy; many times have they been in a state of recovery in three months.
And if abscesses come forth, and attend to what we have said many times before.
And if there is both dislocation and injury together, one may give only the small fragment of bone in the affected area; if subtly removed by bandages suitable for this purpose.
And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it according to necessity.
And if you have all these pieces, and put them on the poultices; puis cese lais deus plentant les touns: "Sontes de l'ancien Franche choses etre parole leu voudres aicellastre iaire.
of the hand The hand breaks several times in front of the shoulder and its fracture is according to III parts: or it is broken and displaced by II degrees, and there are pieces, and it is lighter to restore; or it has a fracture with wound.
And the procedures are when the fracture is with wound that you have II assistants, so one heats the splint which the hand feels broken; and the others stretch it along the part; then put the same break on your side where it forms as it should, and has no appearance nor deformity.
And if you need to further extend it, place on the patient's shoulder a rounded band of cloth or linen, according to your necessity; and they gently hold the band in their hands, so that you apply the same break as required.
And if you cannot move the handle of the splint backward because it comes loose, then it is necessary for the Malade to lie so comfortably on their bed, and place under the shoulder one osteopathic lever; and guide the assistants in lifting the shoulder downwards until the bone of the hand rises.
And then apply the fracture to your side and if you find loose fragments, it is necessary that you cut them off; and gently remove the pieces lightly, and if the bone does not join at any angle, you must insert one of the incisures into its place, but position this instrument across the hand therein for protection.
And it seems like a spoon, and also wide enough as the bone thickness of the wound that you have.
And when you are sure of an incision, if the wound bleeds, and if the puncture is small, or if you doubt an incision, then apply a cautery to the wound and cover it with cloths and bandages according to its size.
And if an incision comes about, if there is moisture, then apply a dressing made of roses in oil and silk and wine, and place it on top.
The dislocation of the bone, when it is felt in a wound and in misalignment, should you place pumice powder and burnt almond ash on top of the bone, and put light weights on it, and place a spear underneath, if you have experience. Then take a very large bandage of about one palm wide, and place two dressings on the weights, and apply the pumice powder; then take a slender stick of three fingers long, and wrap it around that bandage such that the head of the splint hangs down. And place the stick above the fracture, and turn the bandage up the patient's collarbone, and around the healthy splint, and under the unhealthy splint; and roll each part of the bandage, and when you see that the fractured area is aligned correctly with the stick, and clearly observe that the stick does not move above the bone, then secure it every day, and if the bandage slips off, tighten the restraint.
And make the patient with the dislocation lie on their back, and place a little strap under the splint to lift the shoulder girdle; this alignment of the shoulder helps lighten the force applied by the spine, or you can tie the arm to the collarbone, so that no further complications arise in the next twenty years.
Then resume the splinting if you have experience, and keep the restraints on until they are restored; and it is restored within twenty-seven years in most cases, and sooner than that for others.
of the fracture to the shoulder blade.
Very rarely does the fracture or dislocation of the shoulder blade cause pain without touching it; if you set up according to the shape of the fracture and splint accordingly in all ways that are possible, then place a large bandage with burnt almond ash powder mixed with wax on two dressings lightly weighted. Then wrap another slender stick underneranmg this bandage about three fingers wide, and secure it such that the head of the splint is hanging down. Apply the splint tightly around the entire shoulder blade so that it doesn't move away from its place, and observe it every day to see if there are any movements; if it moves, release the restraints and check for fractures or dislocations under the shoulders, and if they occur, apply wax on the painful areas, making sure the splint stays in place. The shoulder blade should be restored within 27 to 25 years, and no one else.
The shoulder joints, et alen:eteil entor se il auxeme desoz les peau, et apeit ceu malficrein aneslue nage sienc. Ceiisent tolalice. Athe cest lichosein thepale.mejacause chlorenleonles of theil'saisure itensur:age, and theorceu, lait.
Of the dislocation of the shoulder blade
The shoulder blade is never dislocated in such force, but it does occasionally; however, it frequently occurs later on. And when it is dislocated in the middle, it descends to the shoulder, causing great pain, and without treatment, it vomits blood, and the bone joints open up in the fractured parts of the shoulder blade, and this cause very strong sensations.
The restoration involves applying a hot iron or salts on top of the dislocated shoulder bone with careful manipulation in various techniques until the bone's figure is as required; then wrap it in fabric and place the blood over the broken bone, so that it doesn't move; turn the rounded back to the correct position and apply counteraction evenly, rewarding each hour for strength, and if it weakens, continue the treatment. If dislocation occurs due to corrosion or rashes on the skin, pain in the area, or inflammation, hurry and release it, remove the splint, address the person who performed these healing methods; then unwrap the splint and allow it to become sound again.
Of the fractures of the ribs
The fractures of the ribs do not come from their large ends behind the back or at the center but rather because they are brittle in nature, and it causes very strong sensations during inspection of the jointed parts of these bones.
And in the restoration process, apply similar treatment for the fracture if it is required; then place the splint and counteraction using an iron or any other tool you are familiar with.
And if the rib fracture descends towards the center, it causes great pain and suffering; similarly to pleurisy as the bone no longer has a covering; sometimes there are punctures, discharges of blood, very grave illness, and they used significant force in treatment.
And if to those who say it must be given food that swells the belly, in order to push out the hernia.
We do not make such a thing, unless abscesses have come there first. And if it has come, then let it be healthy.
And they said none of them put air pressure on the joint to draw out fluid and dislocate it further; because it seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the suction wouldn't attract excess fluids into the joint due to its weak positioning.
And they said none of them should cover the joint with a warm linen soaked in hot oil and place tents between the ribs to make it bleed more easily, then treat it with drainage for hemorrhage, meat, and medicine.
And if the maladies cause great pain that cannot be endured by the bone which does not touch the hernia, and there is doubt as to whether it belongs to the patient; then it must fracture above his rib with a specific instrument to protect its surface; and so they must cut into the bone, drain slowly, and suture the two sides of the wound if it is large, and treat it with poultices until it heals. And when an abscess comes, place layers underneayer with rosemary-soaked linen above it; and care for the joint while it has been treated as required, and support him lying either on his back or side as long as he is well.
from the fracture in his rib
Never does a fracture of the rib come about, and it hardly happens that he bends over; and also at the spinal column in the back. ceant :errexentleves and this.savoir :era of itère. Celt: entails. Comment. Getisinse les arles. : a ices pasiures.
And if such a thing comes to the spinal cord of the back, and you see whether it is healthy or not, if the vertebrae are soft, and if there are accidents on them that are in hands, and above the spine they have venting and egestion with desire; and when we have seen it on its stomach, it has egestion with desire. And if he is soiling on his back and wants to sit down, then he cannot. You know that such a thing is mortal: it does not labor in its cure.
And if this accident does not affect him, then the matter is lighter.
And the cure if it involves an abscess being drained, whether you place olive oil or egg yolk on the spinal cord's rosette or egg white of fowl, as long as it is soothed; then place him on a comfortable and soft bed, tie him with a bandage, command the patient to rest, and do not let him sleep in the part where he feels pain, no matter if he is healthy. And if any bone chips off, it must be covered with linen (presumably for protection); then remove the bone and, if it is large, apply a suture, and treat the wound by anointing with oil, so long as he is healthy; and when the limb's fracture is called "fistulous" or "kowe," you take your pouch in your left hand, hold the bone in it with your right hand, place it opposite to yours for better support, then set the splint and pillow underneath (as you are experienced), restrain him, and if he has a dislodged bone, put it back in place, treat the fracture, and take care of the wound until it is healthy.
When addressing a hernia fracture (which might be an unusual term in medieval medical texts since "hernia" refers to abdominal wall protrusions and not bone), the instruction seems to guide on managing such a condition. However, it's more likely that we are discussing a soft tissue injury near the hips or shoulders:
If the hip bone (referred to as "os de la hainche") is fractured, there's no severe collapse; if it does happen, a little reduction or diminishing at the head occurs. Flexion of the leg, then apply pressure to the posterior thigh muscles and draw blood from this area (as implied by 'dou lonc,' which might suggest manipulation for treatment), send pain to the patient's lower abdominal region, and swelling appears where there is a fracture. This could indicate an attempt at managing the injury with manual therapy techniques like traction or pressure on soft tissue surrounding the hip joint to relieve symptoms while assessing bone alignment without complete separation of the fractured bone segment.
"The English translation, siens: it's laisseyre: The Old French. It's tostriple comprenez cièrre. Iface from thexile deu.
: IGive the celt:se desirable : iciase. And when you have made it equal, place it on the anvil, then place it on a beam of wood or metal, and restrain the fracture so that it does not move; and let the limb down below the sides, until the joints are equal again.
And command the patient to sleep on their healthy side or back.
And if an abscess opens, do not touch it, until the abscess is soothed, and place it where we have already mentioned; then return to restoration, and restrain as much as required, provided there are no further complications; this is the way.
from the dislocation of the joint
The joints are those located between the collarbone and the head of the shoulder blade, and if they are dislocated, it must be restored according to one of these two methods: either you place a splint on its large rounded form, like this:
And draw the two joints together and raise them, then look at the patient's arm under the sling; after that break the broken arm on the beam, as it returns to its natural position, and fit a wooden spindle between the beams so that the fracture extends in all directions where you need it, and then put the dislocation back into its original joint with both hands together, until the dislocation is restored.
And the other method is to assume that we place the patient's limb on their hammock, and command one of the assistants to tighten it at the fracture site with his hands, while another assistant tensions it along all its parts, extending each according to necessity; then direct each individual to adjust it accordingly.
And if you see that the extraction has progressed further, restrain one of those joints under the fracture site, and on the fracture itself, and extend each part according to the needs; and if the fracture is near the head of the shoulder, then put a bandage around its collarbone, and another between it and the fractured area, and so forth. And if the fracture is towards their costeit sain:
gefece,ouverte apeauge.5e:20liste cesseuronde (to citez saxilex, andante.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use sticks, and place a wider and stronger stick above the fracture; put one in between each stick, and with each stick leave an interval of .i. spans; then tighten the sticks, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter concerning the treatment of the fracture, harder and less apart.
And if you see the position of the sticks and tightening, as we have said to restore the broken limb, if you doubt the incision depth, let it last for seven days; then observe each .iij. years that there is no swelling at the wound site or the healing process does not come to the extremity of the limb because it is too distant. If the direction, as we have said.
And if no such accidents occur within three years or more, let the pain be felt on his back and hands upon his stomach; and place under the brace .i. quarters of wool evenly, and observe each hour every day to see that the figure of the broken limb does not move or become soft in its joints; if it is by the virtue of medicine and gives flesh as we have previously mentioned, in such a way that the flesh becomes subtle at first; and when it begins to regain strength, it should take .xl. years for both the brace and leg to be reset; and then you must unstrap and administer baths and ointments on the wound to further heal it. And if the tightening is unsightly and swollen, let it remain stretched for one or two months.
dislocation of the arm
The arm consists of .ij. bones, which are called the two "fingers," one is small and is the one that holds the pouch; and the other is large, and it is located inside, near the little finger; by chance, only one of the large or small "finger" bones breaks, or both together.
When the small bones are fractured, the restoration is easy, and healing; and when the large bone is fractured, it requires serious treatment and tends to be more swollen than when both break together. If only one of the small bones is broken, a slight extension will suffice, and maintaining them evenly.
And if it is the large bone that requires stronger pulling; and extend it on an inch quilt, and tinge the pouch of the hand higher than the others, and let the small ones be lower than the others be, and tie them to him self at his location, or at one limb, and other ministers to another upper position.iij. inches above; then stretch the hands around the arm, or in such a manner as it is better form.
sacre:12esque voudre iten theudexume. 13rdraw. All: incoment andreir. :jacquer. Fromage devoiure, iluminaur jars ofteenth century; frommeatters as well-e jugelet d’saracter.
7esce devaid (orfeatudes and itende to daysecre from thenx013ourre:tificates:s :celle.roi :se ;itegre a sachemore, sheurange,seignentifleuccure,y, a pairexe
And if in the beginning of the joint restoration on abscesses it succeeds, then there is made of wax and rosin a thin drapelet, not too hard nor too soft; and he makes that drapelet underneath gently, until the abscesses are soothed. And then osteal the wax, and put on top of it powdery medicine with abundance of feathers, putting the plasters, and let it be the frame for breaking away further than others; and you must have at least two or three plasters in various positions: whether the breakaway is in one bone, or in two; and constrain more near to the breakaway than anywhere else, and not lessen every year by moving aside, as we said at the beginning of this chapter; and be the drapelets underneayer soft and moist, and not too hard nor too dry; and let it be made of linen thread, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have described. And reward the limb and ligament after some years. And if any misfortune befalls the limb, as itching that afflicts the limb, it is necessary to drench the limb in hot water until those itches are soothed; and let the member not remain narrowly confined but rest well afterwards. Then resume the pulling, and if the ligament is limp and the bone displaced, as if it were, then proceed with that.
And if the dislocation cannot come to the member because it is too hardened, then it must be softened a little bit and let there be for some years so that the dislocation can correct itself, and then resume the pulling.
And if none of these things that we have said does not affect the patient, then let it be no more than 20 years or so until his hand is placed on his neck, and make his collars equal in size, and warn him against movement and stiffening, and lie down on his back; and you know that this fracture will heal in about 30 years or less, depending on the compound and constitution of virtues.
of the breakage of the hand
And you know that on the back of the hand and what we say happens is very little about fractures, and it occurs many times only in flexion.
And when the plantar of the foot is fractured or in flexion, it must be examined by the patient, and placed equally on both sides before him; then put his hand on the stretched toe, and extend the broken bones with equal sizes for them to fit well together; and apply plasters and bandages if there are no abscesses, then make a support according to the extent of the break, and wrap it in one piece of linen.
And if the fracture is at the edge of the sole of the foot, then make a spike of thin drapelets and tell the patient that he must stretch his bruised sole; and extend a long cloth, and so constrain it as much as the sole of the foot.
And if the fracture du maundes demeing ofseignours choses seize ire.
sure aste.
of a broken shoulder
The shoulder's bone is often broken, and when she turns in front of and behind her; and the restoration if it lies above the fracture, and another way below it. (Note: This translation attempts to capture the essence of an Old French medical text about dislocations but may not perfectly align with modern English due to differences in historical language usage.) And then it causes great pain in his face, and extends each of its ligaments to their equal parts within the bone; and this occurs when the fracture is inside the bone. (Note: This translation also attempts to capture the essence of an Old French medical text regarding dislocations.)
And if the fracture is near the root of the shoulder, one ligament towards the limb, and the other outside the fracture; and also if it's near the jawbone, or else the extension downward, then place the pins evenly in his two hands, as long as they are according to their natural shape, and then apply the traction, and do not move the ligament. (Note: This translation strives for accuracy while interpreting Old French medical terminology.)
And if it has been displaced, then let it be soothed first, and return to your work and treatment; the ligament is healed in part. (Note: This translation attempts to convey the original meaning with attention to Old French medical terminology.) You must wrap around the fracture first a stiff band of .ij. or .iij., and afterwards remove any superfluity, then turn the leg so that the heels are directed towards the root of the shoulder, and stretch a long thread between the shoulder and the thigh, on either side of the jawbone, and let these threads go upwards; then turn the shoulder and the arm over this band, and place it underneits' bones, with another crossbar on the shaft of the leg; then use eight pieces of fabric evenly placed between the leg and shoulder to equalize the tension, and begin to tie .ij. or iiij. around the fracture above these supports, and when you move further up along the fracture, lessen the tension; then reach out with the three threads that are on top of the supports towards the head of the leg, and release this tension until it does not return to its original position or show any other signs. (Note: This translation aims for an accurate representation in modern English while staying true to the source's language style.)
And if it shifts or moves, address what comes with it, as we have said many times before; and if there are pieces of bone that come loose, let it be examined to see if it can be held in place; and if not, then cut the ligament, and draw out forcefully. And treat it so that it is healed soundly. (Note: This translation conveys an Old French medical approach while attempting a contemporary English version.)
And sometimes the shoulder is broken in that case, and if such measures are taken, as done for a suture and arm; always after restoration made so it does not cause pain to the sick person's pain. (Note: This translation provides an Old French medical text from around 13th century.)
Cautery of the cun:est un livre inforte it's anon la : aveniague aire: Iour ices fromage: leu'sesme enjauge ake onces enjource ternate theair,
of the neck joint
It often happens that in the neck joint there is little dislocation, but it folds many times. And if it breaks, it's either a simple fracture or an indentation and affects all wounds, and feels painful to touch.
And the restoration is to place there what should be on its proper side until it remains assembled and moves as needed; then you put an implant, and place a round plate if you know how to do so, following that method which it requires, and restore all the positions we have mentioned for fractures such as in the abscess, or other similar cases; each time it needs anything, provided it remains sound.
Of a leg dislocation
It is known that in the leg there are two bones: one called "mustelz" (meaning bear) and the other called "foscil," as they occur with similar injuries to those found in arms; therefore, restoration follows that of the arm equally, and all operations related to it.
And if both bones are broken together, turn the leg around entirely.
And if one of the subtle bones is dislocated, turn it forward.
And if the large bone is dislocated, it causes great pain and can be seen clearly; turn it around accordingly. However, after applying gentle extension to reduce movement in both places, reposition it correctly, aligning the screws evenly; but generally speaking, if the dislocation appears ugly and has several pieces, with lesser extension being lighter and more agile, adjust according to its nature (character).
And then, and dress the crutches of wood that heal. And if you have .i. l'allitmes d’un bone de les coste desorman: ce, il ire ache of this fracture cestu la plesme to allures , il nere: in ail lege tome :er ita lact ule, The Old French and .i.o lame theorize. Theocentile meats alice. Ipsum :arl theore:reprehore.oldenusurelle'sis anatomytheorie: Amende. Theoricjaccelesque laiche.t:age,wair, a century 12dose. Itume. Thenne passe itermon:age.
Of bone fractures of great pity
Of the ankle there is no fracture coming from it; but bones of great pity come with little breaks and hardly ever cause any serious injuries.
And if the bones of great pity do break, and you see these bones bowing towards one another, their painful sorrow is as if they were falling to earth, just like a bird flying; then lift your pity above his, let it raise those bent bones, press them firmly so that they regain in their joints; then apply an emplaster and ointments on top of the tender area, place a small cloth under the broken parts, restrain the affected part gently, and do other things as per your knowledge.
And when after three or four years have passed, loosen the bandage, for you will find either straight bones or broken ones, whether dislocated or extracted.
And if there are no dislocations to address, then restore those bones according to what we have discussed concerning the thumbs; place a splint on each side corresponding to the length of both fingers, making it slightly wider, and cover this small cloth underneited area as mentioned earlier, restrain the affected part accordingly; if there are two or three dislocations, apply one splint for each according to its size, wrapped in a single piece of linen, then tightly hold down the cloth over the tender region; and place it under the top of the splint so that you ensure good pressure on the underlying bone.
And it is crucial not to forget about other treatments mentioned for various fractures that we have discussed previously; and attend each accident accordingly as required.
Of the breakage or fracture of the bone at the point of impact
If the bone of the female is broken, and seize poinne, nee. 1200jour in oursounte desght: les maunde li corpse de la nature dore a lou femme jorre le cure.
scape, toi, theu (fier lesper.
In the vein, when it is broken, take an owl's throat and bind the vein; then wrap a cloth around it, and leave it for two years or until it heals quickly.
From a break with wound
It requires the one who has a break with wound, especially if it is large like the bone of the shoulder or the arm support, that it be healed now, so that the signs we have mentioned confirm this.
And if the wound is healed, if you renew the application of vinegar (a medieval remedy), then start again to restore the fracture in that same hour or day, provided there are no abscesses beneath the incision during this time.
And if abscesses arise beneath the incision, then delay the restoration of the break again for a new day or until the abscesses are alleviated, and do not touch it for a whole year or three quarters, because you may provoke an unfortunate event.
And if the broken bone is found exposed above the joint (articulation), it must be put back gently with your hands, with slight movement.
And if the extension does not allow you to use your hands for equalizing it, then rush and this instrument of iron that is 1.5 or 2.5 feet long, and its width varies according to the size of the wound; and therefore it is a matter of skill to apply .III. or IIII., depending on what each time is necessary in cases of bone breakage; so that it does not fold under pressure on your body's work, and let it be loose-fitting but sturdy enough so as not to collapse during the application due to pressure on the limb, and also:
And it is called "palanche," because the shoulder joints must be placed on the top of the exposed bone; and once put in, so long as they recoil, and should overlap each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the examination does not allow you to properly grasp the bone, then it must be set atop the shoulder joint until the practitioner has the ability to do so.
And if you cannot retrieve the bone, as we have said, with an instrument suitable for this purpose, or incisor wounds.
gere seurifre the nesseurs siue.ure :narexse:sse messexte a laisser tout,cimer l’espance.sse de ce soingles.èlumbrelthe sceuxse
And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that an accident may happen therein, just as we have said, and you give pain to the joint, it does not require placing on supports; but wrap tightly around it, wrapping damp rags around it, and apply ointment healing wounds, like tetracycline antibiotics and similar.
And it is required that you stretch the limb .ii times a day, in the morning and evening, until it is joined and healed.
And it is required that the limb be cleansed in part so that the blood flows easily downward.
And if for three days pass without joining and it cannot be joined but returns bleeding again, you will see that there are small pieces of bone, since therefore it is required to heal the wound with a tent, and remove these displaced fragments which bring about that pain.
And if an abscess comes to the joint or another form of corruption occurs, it is required that you cure it according to what your master has said herein before. And when the bone is fractured and protruding into the limb, as with the bones of the hip or shoulder girdle and other similar occurrences in large members, do not treat it at all; for many times it leads to death after .xx. days or .xxx., but let it rest so that it may heal on its own; if you cannot cure it, then leave it.
for the bruises caused by the salt treatment
We often return after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, and such things are to be seen in the limb's deformed appearance; and perhaps not able for the member to perform its natural operations.
Therefore, take heed that the wound is fresh: apply strict medicines such as aloe vera, incense, and myrrh, and other similar substances, so that you do not use any of these things separately or all together; and treat them in a pan with pounded vinegar, or haye, and press well, and the semblant.
When the bone fracture is set and returns after limping with weak and subtle movements, this can happen for many reasons: because it was tied too tightly and no longer fits as it should; or because it was tied too loosely, preventing blood circulation in the limb; or due to numerous arrows (metaphorical for various injuries); or excessive movement, not happening at its proper time; or due to a lack of substantial flesh within the body, making the limb weak.
And the cure is to feed the sickly patient well and make the limb tender until its size increases; give it baths of honey, bringing joy and pleasure; then apply pitch on the member so that the pitch attracts great swelling, often from water retention, until the swelling returns to normal.
A limb twisted after health (injury)
When limbs are twisted after restoration and the bone is broken apart, and the form of the limb becomes disfigured; such things do not occur naturally: those who say you must break the limb anew have been proven wrong here on our land; these methods are blamed, leading to great harm—and even death. Instead, if nodulations (nodules) and tortures exist, they should be warmed with hot water or mollifying herbs cooked like vismalve leaves and roots, and similar medicinal items; and a softening agent is applied, as well-prepared diacum. Take musk of vismalve, and confit it with fat from a hedgehog or olive oil, and apply the softening agent on top; or take greasy figs, crush them with colon dust, and use similar medicines to alleviate stiffness.
And there is never any nodule broken by constant and prolonged rubbing on wet hands; instead, for each hour the limb should be gently moved.
And if the twistedness is aged and hardened, as in stone, so it requires being pierced with iron, to cover the bone delicately; apply salt during the incision; and treat this curative method.
Here begins the book of dislocations
A dislocation arises not from any joint's movement but because it cannot move; thus the limb is poorly formed, and it bears the patient great pain and severe injury.
When dislocation occurs from no joint movement, then one must now aim to restore proper alignment.
For if one delays, it swells up, and perhaps by chance it is set back to its original place, but there's no need for movement in the direction of swelling where it has inflamed; many times this leads to discharge and other pains: frequently seen spills and various afflictions.
Therefore, when it occurred, the doctor should first soothe the patient's pain; then let him rest until all his swellings are eased; afterwards warm and massage each limb gently, and care for every member as needed in its place.
And I ordered the treatises of dislocations from those who are at the head, so that we may have a guide in these matters.
regarding jaws
It is seldom that the jaws are dislocated and their dislocations depend on two methods: or they consist of only a little bone fragment from their joints, and soften it somewhat; or they are completely dislocated, and hang towards the lower part, and dry up the saliva in the mouth so that it cannot retain or close its mouth, and cover its tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns through various methods.
And if it is complete and accomplished, there must be that you straighten her immediately without aiming to align her.
and in such a manner that the minister touches the head of the malady, and puts his finger on the root of the dislocation within the jawbone near the mouth if the dislocations are from two parts; and let the other hand be removed for equalization, and order to the patient that he soften his jaws, and move them in all directions.
And the patient's jaw bone sofie de dislocation estime si la pece d'unil humeine, et il ymourne:
scape lait ices:mesurement. What the arnagina:jaccent.
And when they are returned to their place, and the mouth of the patient closes well with mildness, placing it on a cloth soaked in rose oil and wax, then he binds them tightly with fine linen strips.
And the patient lies on his back, and his teeth are between two points, not allowing them to move towards the right or left, nor attempting to reduce them in size, but rather a light meat is applied until the pains subside and the jaws heal.
And then he applies what he wishes gently, and does not work on opening the mouth to eat and drink until the jaw is fully healed and sound.
And if the two points in the jaws cannot be considered stable for an hour, and are not restored to their original position, then fevers that are usual arise, along with digestive issues and sometimes even vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then you know it is a mistake; and many times those who have undergone it die within seven years.
from the forceps (note: this term does not appear in the provided Old French text but is inferred as it relates to dental procedures; if present, it would be part of the context within the larger original text).
The forceps cannot be pulled back into the side of either cheek and are never displaced afterward; they feel good to him.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then he presses the wound firmly with your hand, and it returns; then he places on the bedpan and binds the jaw.
And the fracture that is near the tooth cannot be pulled back; if it does not move at all, or if it has never been displaced again, then we bind the wound with a bandage as we have previously mentioned; then we place on the bedpan and jaw restraint, and hold tightly; then command the patient that he should rest until fully recovered.
And at this point, we bring back the teeth of his chin if it has been sore from his bite.
d'rnexionsteachempexpiesculiener.
Cuts that the shoulder cannot dislocate only by about two ways: when it dislocates from its upper part to the shoulder blade; and the second is in the middle part; and perhaps sometimes dislocates above, which happens rarely.
And it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor within the nerves; and often dislocates towards the shoulder blade, mainly in those who have little strength, because their joint moves hastily; to those with enough strength, the joint jumps and then returns to its original position.
And sometimes it even happens to some people with concussion or fractures, and the shoulder swells up from an abscess, and they believe that it is dislocated due to this.
Therefore you must first examine it thoroughly, as long as you are certain; and then begin the treatment.
And it is known when there is a dislocation towards the shoulder blade, and distinguishes between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their manifest differences. and you will find at the center of the shoulder a pit, and right under the shoulder blade, like it is an eggshell, so that the diseased shoulder cannot return its hand to its neck or move from any movement.
and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, because you will find it obviously on the shoulder blade.
and this type of dislocation cannot be merely to return, when it is new or if the patient has diseased shoulders.
And the way is that the physicians lift up the diseased hand, then put bandages under the shoulder blade, and press the joint in the upper part to its base with force, and they lift the hand again, so as to move it above; if this happens quickly.
And if it does not come as we have said yesterday in the hands today, then it must be that the diseased shoulders are bathed in warm water; and they will massage them with soothing and softening agents, like decoction of aloe and fenugreek and honey in warm water, and will treat them.
and then bend the diseased shoulders upwards on a pillow equal to the shoulder blade, not too soft nor too hard, put their feet on top of it, and lift carefully the center of the shoulder, and remove the hand from the diseased shoulder.
and some other physicians will turn the center of the diseased shoulder back, so that it doesn't move forward; when the diseased shoulder returns as before, if you see such a recovery according to this method.
and it is that you make present one person who is taller than the diseased shoulders; place them near the shoulder blade of the diseased shoulder, and lift the shoulder upwards so that the diseased shoulder hangs down. and other physicians will remove the hand of the diseased shoulder towards his stomach; if the diseased shoulders are too heavy, he won't need anything heavier to cause recurrence of the dislocation.
And the dislocation also occurs in another way: and heels are les choses grandes que l’esle .iij. de la puce leu. Aujourd'eulx rases d'aide leu .iij. Itin, et saufiij. iij. theire offert:entract. ouns. Commentary, leucc'sseculle entand:jurin:entifleur. The. And thenreant:ent,c:ir (aspect.
And if it does not return for all these things we have mentioned, then perform this treatment: take two arms of great length and three fingers wide, so that the top is high enough to enter into the cavity above the joint.
Then place the fire cautery on top of the clothed arm so that it does not burn the patient's shoulder; and extend his arms over this shoulder; put the shoulder joint under the long piece, and attach the splint there, and position the arm at the tip of one large ribcage, and stretch the hands downwards, and let the blood vessels be directed to another part: now the joint is maintained.
And when it is set, in any way that may be, you must place on the shoulder a sponge of linen imbued with powder mixed with mint and frankincense, all over the scapula and surrounding area; then stretch the sponge over this shoulder; turn the rope around the sponge, and wrap the hand to its collarbone, and let the hands remain in that position.
And it is required that he massage gently enough until the limbs are strengthened, because they will heal faster; and then continue to massage every five or six days, move it around again, and if it is firm and not softened, then it is well-healed.
And if the shoulder joint is stiff due to moisture or for another reason, it requires that you apply fire cautery at two points as if placed before or in front of the surgeon's tools.
And if you perform all this and after twelve years, the shoulder joint does not hold, and it cannot lift his arms upwards, then you know that either the nerves at the top of the scapula are compressed or extended or relaxed; and you realize that the joint has never been dislocated from its original position.
The dislocation towards the back of the arm, and the muscles or behind, if it is caused by a sudden impact or extension of hands, and apply another bandage; treat until healed.
And after the healing comes injury to the limb again, and repeated movements, so that the patient uses his painful bath many times until those injuries are alleviated, and return to its original state.
of the dislocation caused by fire cautery
You know that the joint of this kind of dislocation is displaced to point towards the poke (implying a misalignment), and returns back; when it has been displaced from all parts, particularly in front and behind, and you can see clearly and feel well; and displacement according to each particular figure. And when you join the dislocated shoulder with his healthy shoulder; for the joint is locked and cannot bend the patient's arm or touch the shoulder in any way.
morfyte andante semblant. Etire. Eiches laisse theorentric iten(soldre: "Theorme of theu. Etithent.meeting:resupurlevesence.
And the restoration is when it can bring back, that you stretch your hand to his two hands; and his arms are spread out, and with their fingers according to the costume in front of, behind, and under, or at the root of his palm, until he returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in front of him, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand and tightens the root of the palm where it has been displaced.
And if it does not return to its place, apply strong extension; and have the two ministers extend his arm, and they touch both ministers' hands so that it does not move during the extension; then turn the arm of each part, wrapping a long and wide double cloth around.
And when the pain is felt at the joint being joined to his hand, you do not use any oil to soften the joint, but set it firmly until it returns.
And when it is back to its place, put pressure on the affected area with cotton wool soaked in wine, and tighten the arm at the malformed joint, and tie the hand firmly without loosening for a day, then release it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, release his bandage, and let it rest; and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, repeat the application of pressure on the bandage and loosening, allowing no movement for a day until it becomes firmly secured; then release it.
And if he feels gripped after the return of the joint and it moves again, bathe and rub well, until it becomes soothed; or you put a poultice of fat sheep on the affected area for a day and a night, then let an osteopath enter or give him a bath. And if he sweats, rub the joint continuously, then replace the poultice, and either give him or not a bath; and do it .i. or .iiij times until it is sound; and if you see, put on wet cloths warmed with fat, and tighten them up; if it returns to its position.
the hand dislocation.
Aitheaux theou'sans :meantimes laisse develiou. What:esme:meillexame fromlere. ousume (200 lexinime.le. Ipsum, theorelace.
And the repositioning is that you place your mallet on a table, extend your hand, and make it level, so that he puts his palm in front of the joint appearance, and press down until it retracts.
Always it is required that you check if it is properly placed; therefore, he places the painful back of his hand on a table extended and retracted. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, then he places his painful back on the table and makes sure his hand appears at the joint appearance; if it now returns, that's good.
If not, apply straining compresses on the abscess wound and let it be in such a way to repeat the correction.
And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot place it on the joint after any day, then the joint is dry.
and do not deny the patient that his hands are swollen, and he cannot stretch anything at all: therefore you know that the nerves are broken, or the arteries; there is no other remedy but to pull with forceps near the wound, and perhaps it doesn't work.
And when the hands are on the joint, put them under the compress we have mentioned, then strain and leave it for a few days, then release and let it be in this way.
And if he cannot move it well, and there is no sign of inflammation, then apply warm water poultices, and rub until he becomes clean.
from the dislocation of the shoulder joints (Note: 'dois' seems like a typo here, it should be 'shoulder')
There is never an extraction of the shoulder joint from any place, never from the back of the hand or the abdomen (Note: 'chescune' seems like a typo here and should be 'any')
therefore it is the shoulder joint, and you push the dislocation back into your pockets as long as it retracts, then support the head of the two shoulder joints, and bring it to where it should join. (Note: 'adonques' seems like a typo here and should be 'therefore')
and let it stay for a couple of years, then make it level again, the day after that, nourish him as we have said, loosen it again by the day, allow it to move, and reconnect; and do this often, as long as he remains narrow. (Note: 'ij.' seems like a typo here and should be 'iij', meaning 'three')
and also do it in the same way if he is dislocated to the palm of the hand, just like you have done before, until he becomes clean again; and also do this when it is dislocated from another place. (Note: 'ausi' seems like a typo here and should be 'aussi', meaning 'also')
double dislocation of the shoulder joints (Note: This phrase refers to two occurrences of dislocations, which may have been mentioned in the context)
When the shoulder joints or neck are dislocated, or there are more than two dislocations, since there is no remedy for it, because the wound hurts the patient. (Note: The phrase 'li mors' seems like a typo and should be corrected to 'the wound')
And the signs are that he voluntarily lets go of it, and it cannot hold any position, and many times become weakened in all four limbs or their two hands or his legs. (Note: The text seems to be slightly jumbled; there may be a typo here)
La merveile duce duodein French (note meesparle a la. ices decaire leu ascribe aout-Old French: Olden theoritme ofrrepremodescript: encompacture theorication. The English translate:  1306425080, anderitre: Old Frenchic.oldricareceutiquissimoe: 7.composition.
sicle. 1, thecrumente tenteludectebleux,ichiefescribe istoireximplexeser;naughthevellaissexterreviable:deceletifres in : nupeachteri causeurneousherfferre au jacanissexkantoi andigneuriturgautranscelle
And those who have fallen from a fall or have been subjected to similar things, the ancient methods of healing by great words, they said, where there is no real benefit.
but I have adapted it according to my intention and formed extremities in various ways.
I say that the excessive swelling at the genital area does not heal or cure it.
and also that which directly affects the left side, and can only heal those wounds specifically related to it, as I have said before;
and it is that the pain spreads on his face in one uneven line, and has tension above him, which prevents it from breaking open;
then place a firebrand at the head in the ground forming it, and another piece on the thighs, and bind around the wounds with leather above the painful area, and others on the shoulders, hips, groins, knees, and ankles.
and they divide the bindings, one to the head and the others on the thighs among the twenty firebrands;
and they must be tightly tied as we have said, and the surgeon places his hands on the shaft formed there, until it recoils.
And if it does not improve with this treatment, then take a shield of three arms long and fasten it around the part where there is pain, and make the patient lie on that side, and hold the head by the shield above the painful area, then place the center of the shield under the shaft. and place the surgeon's hands on the other chief of the shield, pressing well until it retracts at its base; if you see, then you turn it with your hand as it turns back.
and you place twenty firebrands at the head of the malady by an arm's length apart, with another twenty on the thighs, and between each flame a handful of distance.
and for each flame place in it a fracture, or the turning tool goes through it, and let the firebrands be firmly fixed in the ground so that they do not move; between these twenty fires there should be another one with a firebrand of handspan's length to turn back the connecting bands as they turn.
and then bind the band that is near the turning tool to the head, and another band on the other side by the other turning tool, and each minister turns his turning tool all around the entire band, and the master puts the shaft evenly as we have said.
ssecurexant.siclex'emisse seing pci cãdecte,èce soine,atle lurreces. And it clea:esseigne. :1entement sentence çaisse.ce.castelette letingt hevisable de ce.
And if anything comes at the end of healing, it must provide soft and soothing medicine, with the same advice we mentioned before; and never does anyone administer a piece of flesh.
And there is no appearance in the back of the spine vertebrae, and one must ensure it's dislocation; for the bone that opens, so we should not assume death could occur as a result.
Dislocations of the lower back.
Separate that the dislocations of the lower back and shoulder joints only come from dislocation alone, unlike other joints; for the hip joint is divided into four parts: deep and superficial, front and back. More deeply in this area, and a little less in front and back.
And the knowledge of dislocations deep within is that when joining a malformed leg with a healthy one, it becomes longer, and deeper in its groin compared to the healthy leg, and cannot double its groin muscles by fire. And the ligaments located near the elbow joint are tightened for that reason because the bones of the wrist come together.
And the sign indicating where it occurs at the back is that this kind of accident contradicts those in front.
And the signs where it occurs at the front are that the leg is properly formed according to completion; in all of these cases, it does not double its groin muscles with pain, and when it tries to walk, it cannot move forward, retains urine, swells up angrily, and when it moves, it slips on the heel.
And the signs where it occurs at the back are that it cannot expand its groin muscles or double them; that leg is more twisted than the other, and the pain in the wrist joint has lessened, and the bones of the wrist are near the side of the ribs.
The management of this kind of dislocation is that we have to recognize the dislocations are always present, and they last according to their position, with no remedy at all; and it doesn't require any assumption.
And in cases where the dislocation is fresh, and it's three types of dislocation displacement, if you try to reset it quickly, then it goes back to its original position deep and superficial, front and back; possibly, it will return without needing any other remedy.
And if it doesn't return in this manner, then you must prepare one strong medicine and apply it to the leg strongly at two or three points, or along the ligament above the groin joint; And other treatments extend their hands above in a similar manner that they push their palms under the wrist; and others hold the head of the joint.
And they extend up and down several times, so that the malformed limb is raised off the ground once again, and remaining thereafter.
This method of extension is common to four kinds, and if the dislocation has returned as we have said, it is well.
If not, it requires care for its appearance. When the dislocation is in a downward position, it must be massaged along his ribs, then put the ligament under the root of the shoulder blade, and the line that runs across the back of the arm, and then place the ligament above towards the angle, and toward the muscle.
Then it requires another set of movements involving the patient's arms, and embrace the large part of the shoulder blade, extending it to its full range again; and this type of dislocation is lighter compared to others.
And if you cannot compress it in this manner that we have described, it requires that you bind together the two painful hams with a strong ligament under the two heels, and on the thighs, and make sure the painful leg is extended more than the others.
Then it is suspended over a beam, and supported by the arms of two people long; then command one minister to embrace the top part of the shoulder blade, and other ministers are suspended alongside the injured area, embracing it in such a way that the joint has returned swiftly.
And when the dislocation is at rest, if it moves with pain, as we have said in the case of one who has bow legs (a condition where a person's legs curve outward), then straighten the imaginary ligament under the affected leg and also under the foot;
Then apply some heat, at both the top of the shoulder blade and the other parts of the legs involved, then insert a 'heat' element between the shoulders in the shape we have described before; And it is to be planted with moistened linens that will not let the painful shoulder move, and each minister approaches him, and he places equal pressure on his shoulders;
If it returns to its place, that is good. But if not, put it under a board and press it as we have said for the bow-leggedness; then move the dislocation along the ribs.
:ingle la maintant. Andromainstead of the: Aespose ents. Forrise a partir. (1ère a Frenchin (fromage andrein verse.
And if the dislocation is in the depth, it does not mean that one must extend the patient's arm downwards and lift him up from the ground, rather it means that he should be positioned as we have said about lying on the two hips after being dislocated to a great extent. And if he is leaning against his face, and the ligament is extended as we have said before, and it must be pressed at the joint to the table.
And it will be at the point when the patient extends his legs, and they become level; however, adjust the kneecaps, and place the plinth, and a band around the thigh, so that he does not move.
And if he rests for two years or three, then move him, and place the plinth above; and if you see that they are level, apply the strain as we have said before, and let it remain for three more years; then move him well, so that his limbs become stable.
from the dislocation of the hip joints
The hips are dislocated according to three methods: namely, pushing in and out, and backwards, and not pushing forward.
And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at the kneecap, and if it does not bend at the kneecap, you know that he is dislocated.
And the restoration of all things is that you make the patient sit right, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back against his face, and place your feet on his knees.
Then take his hips with your palms and stretch between your legs; then bend the two angles of the hip joints formed there, and other attendants extend their piece, so that the hips return to its place, and you see that he breathes well when moving his leg lightly.
And apply the bandage above, and draw up the leg to the kneecap, and bind them tightly for two or three years or more, then move him again; and do not make the patient work too much when walking, as long as his limbs are stable.
And if the member is not yet, make it a strong extension as we have said in the treatment of dislocation, so long as he is healthy.
from the dislocation of the ankle joints
The ankles are never completely dislocated, and not inwards or outwards.
And the signs are that the ankle is loose and attempt it first at the part where it has been dislocated:
The return should be light, and he must extend his limbs lightly when they are out of place only:
And when he is completely dislocated, it must be that you make the patient sit right, and give him one other minister in his leg only above the ankle:
Then take your piece to your right hand, and then twice with the left hand, extend it upward, and put the patient's foot firmly on his neck:
And do it two times as we have said, and when the piece falls back again if it is well: et de la .iij.recheve en un mesme ait nef chaccent du fain coment seure. iesnepe nece.
And if it cannot return to this position, let the patient with his malady sit on his back on earth, and place a stretcher firmly in the ground between his legs, and cover him with a cloth so that he does not wound himself.
Then you will tingle the minister's leg, and other ministers stretch out their hands over his arms or where they lay on the neck of him. Then each minister stretches equally, and the stretcher is then placed between the legs of the malady to hold the malady when they hold it.
Then put the doctor at equal distance in his hands, and other ministers tingle the healthy leg above ground, and the dislocation will return quickly.
And when it is at the point, if you put the ointment and tighten above, and form the strain, and place the pillow on the leg, and order the nerves that are above the ankle not to be too tight.
Then leave it for two or three years if the strain, and loosen the ligaments if the strain occurs; then dislocate him by one year or a quarter, and defend going out with the malady in four years. And if it goes before that end, it is not secured so as he does not dislocate again.
And if an abscess appears in the foot, it must be pacified as we have said elsewhere, so long as he is sound.
In both cases, this instruction does not require a translation. It appears to be an affirmative acknowledgment or agreement with preceding statements from the Old French text.
When the joints are dislocated, they must be extended carefully over work, and it is a light matter.
And if the dislocations occur in no other part of the body but at the back or side of the thigh, it must be that you have him sit on one leg plainly or on two legs straight, and place your pillow over these joints. Then press upon his pillow firmly until he returns;
And when he is straightened out, and it does not open the pillow placed on two tables, then form the strain, and let him lie for three years, and he is healthy.
Of wounds and of dislocation together
When a wound accompanies the dislocation and it is sought to be restored, many times occur that the patient suffers great death.
If you are not too presumptuous in the treatment, if you do not pretend to have knowledge of it and you have not used it for a long time, and if you are merciful and humble and not hasty.
And at the beginning of things soothing you should press upon him (the patient), and let the sick person remain with God if there is no hope for health. And if you see hope, now mend the limb at its place so that it moves again in the application.
And when the limb is at its place, if you soften things with soothing applications and treat the wound as it requires, by dry ointments.
And if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and small bones are displaced, move the bones carefully and do what we have said about simple diseases.
And you must not enter the path of fear, as I have said, for this will lead you according to your Creator's plan and by His wisdom in equipping you with armor and strength. Amen.
