O you, dear son, I have completed this book which is the last of the medical science assembly, along with its explanations and through its declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I shall complete this treatise with this section, which is part of the work on hands, known as "Surgery".
And because the work on hands is practiced in our region and performed throughout everything, its knowledge is lost and scattered, leaving only minor descriptions found in books by ancient authors who have written about it. And from this arises mistakes and falsehoods, closing off understanding and dispelling knowledge.
Or it seems to me that I shall revive the essence of this treatise according to its arrangement of exposure and explanation and abbreviation; and together with the forms of the instruments of cautery, and other remedies from practice with the support of explanation and preparation as necessary.
And because no good masters in our time are found, the art of medicine has been abandoned. And it is necessary for those who undertake this matter to study the science of anatomy, as Galien says, understanding the judgment of limbs, and their forms, connections, separations, and knowing about bones, nerves, flesh, and the number of veins, along with the movement and flowing vessels and resting ones, and where they originate.
And thus Hippocrates said that without the knife there is little, and with the hand is much; especially in the art of surgery.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that those who are not acquainted with what has been said before, beware lest they fall into error and kill people; thus I have wanted to warn many times against those who undertake this science and abandon reason for experience.
In this case I saw a madman who cut an abscess of hard swellings or neck of a woman, and he severed the veins in her neck; for so much blood issued that the woman died on her hands.
And I saw another fool who treated a stone in an eye of a man, and the stone was large; he took with it a part of the bladder, and within three days, the man died inside.
And I have already been called to treat it, and saw the condition of the foolish man and the size of the stone, and indeed if he were cut by it, he would die therefrom.
This other wise woman took care of the duke from our land who had his leg broken, and with the break there was also a wound; the uninformed healer held the fracture near the wound at the extremity forcefully without letting any blood flow, leaving it like that for some time until the leg became completely healed and came to ruin.
I was called upon to come to him, and hurried to undo his leg; and when it dislocated so easily without pain.
But the contamination was already firmly established in the member and could not be healed; it did not cease to spread through the limb until the entire limb was completely lost.
And see one other mirror which caused a hardened abscess to swell up, then inflamed due to the wickedness of its lordship.
Because an ulcer, when it is free of black bile humor, should not be touched with iron unless it can be loosened from the part so that all corruption may be removed.
And therefore, dear son, you must know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: namely, where there is danger in various arrangements; and I will show in each section of this book where there is fear and risk.
Because it is necessary for you to take care, so that the wise men cannot speak ill of you.
If you take up your arms in action, and approach the sick with ease and firmness, using the best way so that by God's grace you come to health and be praised; and leave behind ill-fated diseases of grave healing; and take off your armor from which doubt arises, and have faith within yourself so that you may depart from this world to the other realm of glory.
Galien in some of his admonitions said: "Do not take lightly any ill disease, lest you be called mad by wise men."
I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire and medical caustics, and it covers treatments from the head to the feet; including types of piles, methods for applying cautery, and all necessary aspects in its practice.
The second chapter is about tailors and surgeons, plasters, wounds, arrow extraction, and similar matters; it is also ordered with instructions on piles treatments.
s
Thus as we recall our work, it is fitting that I describe the nature of assistance and harm from each composition.
I say that the quality of assistance and harm is like lengthy words and subtle science and hidden remedies; and on this subject, many wise ones have spoken and agreed with it; but their words are few, for I shall recount at great length.
I say that cauterization helps all constitutions or matters where there is material; for two types of constitutions exist: those with hot matter and those with dry matter.
In hot and dry complexion combined with matter, some believed that fire cautery is greatly helpful; while others said the opposite: that fire cautery does not benefit diseases originating from heat and dryness.
Because the nature of fire is hot and should not be treated with warm diseases from heat or dryness, as it exacerbates them; those who say otherwise claim that fire cautery greatly helps diseases caused by heat and dryness in people's bodies. Because when you consider the body of man and his humidity with respect to the hot complexion of fire, you find the body cold.
And I heed this advice. For I have found it no time by experiment.
And so, do not interfere unless you have tried it and know well the chapter on cauterization, and the diversity of human temperaments, and their conditions and causes of diseases, and occurrences and duration of time; we are not afraid for other temperaments, especially in cold and moist illnesses. And all the healers gathered and agreed on the use of cautery.
And know, my son, that the combination of fire and cautery is a secret of healing arts, and offers greater mercy than caustic medicinal cautery.
And as the membor quidemement of art cauctere de medicine. So tu fire and to let medicine de fence the arse.
Medicines with burning heat come from one limb to another in communication, and bring diseases of serious healing to the member; and sometimes they kill the patient.
The veins due to their height and the goodness of their substance do not cause this if there is no excess.
And this is what I have found through experiment and long service in the field, as well as study that I have put into the art; and therefore I excuse myself for my lengthy words, because it pleases me not to take from you the secret which is kept or given forth by fire, nor the quality of work, how it supports diseases of organs, as the philosopher says in demonstration; thus receive this in your thoughts.
And know, son, when cuts should be made with a fire brand, and the patient praying.
: laismen, the, whichnus:me: that they, and thise. And so s.
And do not think even once, dear child, as the foolish physician does; for the disease healed by cautery has no return; and it is said thus; but it is not so, as they believe, because cauteries are not medicine that changes complexion or dries humors causing pain, and it works more quickly than other medicines due to its efficacy and power.
And the things that disease comes at any time according to the patient's condition and location of the illness and its strength are gathered in him through the consumption of meats and similar things, unless cauteries are administerebt there where it has little superfluity and moisture, as with densifying cauteries for pain and other matters, but pain does not return often.
And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the last of medicine; and it is true; but they falsely believe that cauteres are worth after medicine, when in fact cauteres are the last of medicine because we administer treatment methods for any disease which may be effective, then we administer cautere, and it works. Then properly applied cautery is among the last of medicines, not according to the whims of foolish miracle-seekers.
The ancients said that a surgical instrument made of gold is more effective than one made of iron, and they claimed this was due to the quality of the gold and its high substance; and they said that the heat from cautery does not cause putrefaction but it is indeed so, as I have tested it, and found that in some men it is true. Cauteries of gold are worth more than iron ones, as they claimed.
And even when you heat an instrument made of gold, it is not because of the color of the gold that it heats up quickly and then cools off; and if it is overheated, too much so it burns; and thus there are enough obstructions.
And so we use fire cautery as we have skillfully prepared for our work.
I order this chapter from the head to the feet so that the path may be easier to find.
of the olive oil caustery
le t,
The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by solvent medicine, modifying the head three or four times, according to what the virtues and temperament and habits of the sick person can endure; then return the head of the patient.
Then make the patient sit with a cross between your hands and place his hands under their knees; after putting the base of your palm on the base of their two elbows between them; and when they come to your arms, if it bleeds there from then apply the cautery called "olivare," which is as follows:
And put the writing on the leg, and draw and strain your hand gently as you turn it slightly; then lift your hand very slowly, and return to where you see a small bone; if you do not see it, continue the cautery until you can see the bone as I have told you; after that take a little salt, and put in soft cotton inside, and put on the wound, leaving it there for three days; then place clean linen over it; leave it until the burn is healed; afterwards treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmacon," until it is healthy.
When ancient ones say that as long as an open wound persists, it cleanses more; therefore let it move.
And they say that one should not irritate the fire cautery too much if a part of the bone is burned; and then treat those areas where bone has been burnt.
And others say that one should not irritate the fire cautery too much, and if it's wide enough like the pins women put in their shoes for humors to flow out, then keep open wounds exposed for long; afterward, cleanse and bandage them properly.
And these two ways of fire cautery do not seem to me entirely good in all cases, except for some men who have cause for fear; and it seems to me that I should abandon them; because the neck is weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we testify with other limbs; likewise when the neck of the sickly is naturally weak, and the first appearance of fire cautery appears more healing and moving for me, so I work accordingly in this regard.
And the persistent pain in the head
When the head is chronic pain and lasts long, one should use years and pills called "cochie," along with the purge of the head and oils and poultices; if the fire cautery as we have previously mentioned is done, it does not help.
If the patient's head is of a strong constitution and not too cold, then you should cauterize under that fire cautery as we have mentioned above.
After performing cauterization to the edges of the head up to the bone as we have previously mentioned, and making a fire cautery called "vessels"; there are spots where one applies poultices; hold your hand so you do not see all the way to the bone: patients feel much more pain in this cauterization than others, which I will speak of elsewhere; it is necessary that the fire cauterizations at the edges be finer than those used on the middle part of the head, and here's how they should look.
of the head When sudden pain occurs in the head and the disease extends to the ear, and the shoulder is purged by cleansing medicines, along with other treatments as mentioned in the division of diseases, but none help: then you make cauteries according to two ways, that is, with cold medicine and fire.
The cautery with cold medicine involves picking a piece of hair about two inches long and removing the skin and covering it with two small slices; then place it over the temple where the pain persists, so you can replace the hair shaft from underneath the leather; when placed correctly and strapped tightly, leave it like this for twelve hours; then remove it and bandage the area again, leaving the wound as such for two or three days; then apply a cloth soaked in melted butter until no more pus is present.
After the ointment treatment until it is safe; and if you see any of the burning remedies I have written about, or as described in treating with burning remedangs.
The cautery of iron is made in this manner. Heat the cautery as follows:
And it is called "closed" because the head is made in the shape of a hole with a small protrusion and a tiny opening; place it on the painful area, hold your hand and slightly twist the iron gently until half of the point you desired has been scorched; remove your hand so that the artery does not burn further, allowing copious bleeding.
After placing cotton wool on the wound and applying it to the area for three days; then you put oily cotton in butter, and treat the wound with ointment until healed; if you wish to cauterize this migraine with a fire-cautery called 'cultelare', place it at the very tip, and be careful not to cover the artery in this migraine that is not old.
From migraines
When treating migraines as we have previously mentioned in the division of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cautery is made of medicine and iron without any effect, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellara" until it becomes white; and so place it on a tender spot for half an inch long, remove your hand once, and ensure that you do not cover the artery and let the blood flow up to the bone; and be wary of the jaw moving when bitten, and the nerves having only focus on movement without pain or spasms occurring in a bad way, and prevent any bleeding from an artery once it has been capped, or if there is great fear associated with capping or for those who are unfamiliar and untested; but I will tell you how to stop blood when the artery is capped, and I will show where this occurs in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not relieve the illness and the patient is suffering greatly, cauterize at the head as we have said before, and care for the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery which we mentioned earlier or abscess extraction with a cautery that has two blades; and this type of cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
From the pain of the ears from exposure to cold weather
When pain from the ears comes due to cold exposure, and medicinal solutions have been applied along with other treatments we have mentioned in that section of the book, and if the pains do not subside, then use this cautery called "poins," which is as follows:
After placing the cautery all around the afflicted ear, where pain resides on both sides and recedes slightly from the base of the ear after you have reached with it; then apply ten pricks (poins) between each ear. Then cleanse the area until it is healed.
t a, that estrend le pe ciel byt:
The torture that must be treated with cautery is only those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not make cautery on resemblances that come from bruises and swelling of nerves.
When you treat this resemblance of torture that moves from idles and purifications of the head and gargling, which is not effective, then it is necessary for you to cauterize the patient with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, another a little further towards the temple, and the third near the joining of the two lips; place the cautery where the part is healthy, making the first cautery on the head of the ear just below a bit from the tip of the horn, and another along the length of the temple as long as one pace; leave the cautery until half the skin has been burned away; this is the form of the cautery.
And the resemblance of the cut is as we have described before but it is slightly more subtle and requires that the knife be somewhat larger; after curing them in place as I have previously stated, until they are healthy.
When apoplexy is early and you treat it as we have said, and it does not benefit, and the patient has no fever, then make .iiij. cauteries: .ij. on the .ij. horns of the head, and one at its peak, and one where they are called "vassels," as we have previously mentioned, and the last cautery by the mouth of the stomach; apply them as we have said before.
Lethargy
This disease requires giving the patient large years and purgative pills to cleanse the brain; afterwards lift up the head of the sick person entirely, and place on their occiput the embolism of sinapisperm which is written or mentioned in the treatise about plasters; this is how you do the cautery: as I have said.
If it is thus, well done; and if not, make three cauteries in the area above the forehead down to the neck, with two inches of space between each cautery; treat as you would other wounds, and if they are close together, make another in the middle; and if necessary, place two others on either side of the horns, and treat until healed; this is known as an "olivary" cautery, as previously mentioned.
For coldness in the head It is necessary to warm the head as previously mentioned; after warming the patient'ebody, make a cauterization in the area of the forehead and on each horn, then one behind and three above the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient suffers greatly from pain, and the illness is severe, create four cauterizations along the spine of the back; leave it until the skin turns completely red, then remove your hand. Afterwards, treat until healed, this being an "olivary" cautery as previously mentioned.
Of epilepsy
Epileptics should not use iron caustic unless they are phlegmatic, and first must purify the brain with leeches and other treatments that we have described in the section when patients are large and suffer greatly from medical pain.
And if it is a child who cannot endure, he shall gargle and chew to purify the brain often with good meats; then wash his head thoroughly, and make .i. caustic as we have said before, and .i. caustics on each horn; and if the patient is very ill and suffering, then apply caustics as I have told him who has paralysis and softening of limbs, on the spine along the back and neck, and make it olive according to the manner that I have said.
If the patient is a child, make him this subtle cautery according to the following manner:
When due to melancholy there are excesses or corrupted effluents and thick phlegm, then you cauterize the body parts as we have said for those with paralysis.
And if by the cause of melancholy there are decreasing excesses to melancholy, and the patient's body is moist, then give them a drink such that the brain be cleansed, according to what it is in the division.
C's
If you see during cauterization points on all the burn, this manner of cauterization soothes the brain equally; and then place cotton wool in butter and linseed oil.
From the edge of the eyes When the edge comes first as per the signs I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that cleanses the head, and protects from all moisture, and make them sweat or bathe several times on an empty stomach.
After instructing to return his head, and making a fire cautery in the forehead, and making two small cauterizations on top of each temple where the nerves originate from both eyes together or from one eye; and bandage all veins and arteries that are under the crown so that the cauterization is long according to the width of the temple; and guard against blood leakage, and if you see too much blood coming out, then stop the burning as best you can.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and making the incision how to cauterize it; and never make a cautery or ligature below the two bones at the back.
about the body's tears (meaning: tear ducts)
When the tears of the eyes are ancient and accustomed and over the veins, or near the arteries that appear before the forehead; and it is seen to be from superfluous cold phlegmatic humors, then you do the cautery as I have said at the beginning of this work descending on them: one cautery in the head, and two cauteries over the temples, and two cauterizations under the eyes; and if there is a need for more, apply careful cauterization above the eyebrows with small cauterizations.
The body of tears within the eyes
When you treat as we have said in the division, and it does not help, then give the patient three cups of wine; afterward make a fire cautery on the head, and apply an oil cauterization; and two cauteries with "clavelis" (a type of cauterizing instrument) above the eyebrows, one slightly below the hairline; and be careful not to damage the artery. And this is the form of cautery called "clavelis":
When the skin of the eye becomes softened by illness and moisture, then use this "cautery," which is called "olivara," as follows:
And if you see two cauteries on the two sores as long as they are like eyelashes; do not let go of the hand except until a third part of the skin is burnt, according to the manner I have described.
should beaux: Ouze pnaz by that t ; it'chin. At no time do the hairs of the eyelids turn to scales, and prick at their owner's eyes, prompting cauterization in two ways: by fire or with burning medicines.
For fire cautery instructs the patient to let the hair grow long and even; if it pricks at its base, one must hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they are fully grown.
Once the hairs have grown long and evenly, then place the patient in a comfortable position; above their eyebrows draw a figure that resembles a moustache, and begin with the sign near the hairline. Then apply cotton soaked in honeyed egg white and musk oil to the eye, using this form of cauterization:
After cauterizing the wound you have marked with small and frequent applications, ensure the skin is properly healed in that spot; and signs of the health of the work are visible when the paper recedes, and the hairs rise to the length of oil; then gently wash your hand, and leave it like this for three days, then apply cotton soaked in butter until the burned area is healed; after applying ointment, continue until it is healthy.
And if after this the hairs come in and the paper is softened as before; then resume the cautery at that same spot just like you did initially; and if the hair falls out, continue cauterizing until the paper rises to its natural place, and it's even, without touching the bare skin.
The fiery cauterization of medicines is that you command the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a piece of parchment in the shape of bay leaves; then take French soap and lively salt, each one ounce, and grind them well together quickly, so it doesn't cool down, then sprinkle on the form that you made like bay leaves, and put over the paper; and if the illness is only in one place, work with a pinch, and as such, and put cotton wool soaked in oil beneath. And the head of the patient be in your hands clean and press it into the medicine, and squeeze every time the patient feels irritation from the medicine, for he also burns like fire. When you have done this for a while, apply the medicine to your wound properly. And when the mordication (bite) is healed, raise the wound flap and see if it looks raised as if lifted by fire or incision; and if so, it's fine. If not, reapply medicine to the wound area until your efforts are equalized, and your eyes aligned; then cover with a cotton swab in butter until the scab is healed, followed by treatment of the wound bed called "dyafenis" and others, until it's healthy.
And you must carefully guard your efforts so that none of the medicine reaches your eyes. And if the paper becomes soft again afterward, and the hairs poke through it, resume the treatment on that wound area as before; then treat until it's healthy; this is how a wind-blown fire behaves:
And know that the eyes of men are diverse in size and shape, and according to this, be mindful of the limitations; and do not place the correct path before one who is devoted to this art.
For treating a fistula with cautery
When treating a fistula as we have described in the division of diseases, and if your treatments do not help, then it is necessary to perform cautery according to this manner.
(prstroliud the ous and by pas qu: a mallemente de la bon les il oise prouss<byce tele s
After pressing the fistula if it is open, treat the abscess and drainage; and if closed, work on it, and push through the bend; then put hot caustic on it properly, and hold your hand to the caustic at the part without hair above the wound, so that your hands do not go mad; and place the caustic in the oil's fatty substance, and let it decay.
If you begin the cauterization up to the bone, it would be best. But if not, restart the cauterization once more or as needed, and leave it for three days; then put cotton in butter on the dried treatment until it is healed, and after forty days when it is not healed yet, apply corrosive astringent medicine until the bone is exposed; then proceed according to what appears in your treatise.
And there is a method of fire cautery for a fistula that the ancient ones did not mention. For an open wound and skin, after placing a very subtle stick inside it with its shape here: They make it the quantity of a .З. of lead; and hold your hand firmly or something similar, so that the patient does not move at all, until the lead has melted into its place; and then one must put cotton soaked in this on the affected area: the lead will fill it as needed from fistula, and heals with a remarkable speed.
And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have mentioned, it is good. If not, one must administer a certain substance to the wound, and return the faster through the body as befits its proper place.
of ruptures in the lips Many times there occur cracks on lips called "hairs," especially in the lips of children.
When you treat these cracks as we have described in divisions, and the treatment does not help, then apply a small ring-shaped fire cautery according to this form:
And apply haste treatment into those cracks until they are healed; after that, remove the wax layer until it is clean.
Of the incision of the abscess on the neck
When an abscess occurs at the root of the neck or in the eyelid, palate, or tooth roots, after decaying and rotting and becoming old and turning into a fistula; you treat it as we have described in divisions, but it does not benefit: then you must apply a cautery according to the quantity of the faster; after removing or opening the fistula, hold your hand until the heat comes out from it, and then release; perform this once or twice, after the treatment as we have described above, until it is healed; if treated thusly, it's good; but if not, you must expose the cavity and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you find in your treatise.
Movement of the teeth
When the gums are softened by moisture and teeth move, and you treat it with medicines when nothing else works, then place the head of the patient in a sling; afterwards dry the cautery so that the form will come after again in part as you put a wick on the tooth; and insert hot cautery into it quickly, and hold your hand until the patient feels the warmth reaching the root of the tooth; afterwards lift your hand and resume the cautery at your discretion; afterwards fill the patient's mouth with salt water and leave it for an hour and a half.
And in this way the tooth that was moved is secured again; the softened gums are held still, and the moisture dries up.
To alleviate the pain of the tooth
When toothache comes from cold or heat, and medical treatments are ineffective, then it is necessary to use cautery by two methods: cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cautery with butter is made by extracting butter from a calf, and shaping the end into a spoon of iron or silver; then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent, and form a ball of butter cloth, and apply it hastily to the painful tooth. Perform this often until its virtues reach the root of the tooth; if you see hair and cotton coated in cold butter, place it on the aching tooth and hold with a heated iron until the heat reaches the joint of the tooth.
Cautery with fire is as follows: extract an iron or silver spoon, and make it large enough so that the heat will reach the mouth of the patient; after heating the cauterizer, which causes a formation to come about, place it on the painful ton and hold your hand until the cauterer cools. Do this often, as the pain will subside either on the same day or the following one. And it is necessary for the patient to fill his mouth with good butter when applying that cauterizer quickly, and then remove it; this is the form of the cauterizer:
When scrofula is caused by cold humors and does not respond to medications, then apply the fire cautery on hair as described hereafter, with two openings for smoke from the other part of the cauterization; place the hot cautery once or twice upon an abscess depending on its size until it reaches the base of the abscess; if the abscess is small, use cauterization according to its quantity and leave it for three days; cover with cotton soaked in butter as long as the sore remains. Afterwards, treat the wound with ointments and bandages until healed.
When moistures overwhelm the channels of the chest, especially when it comes from cold complexion, then one must first purge the patient with soluble medicines; afterwards perform cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful not to come all the way to the throat, but only on the skin. Afterwards make another cautery at the joints in the neck near the head of the spine, and let the cautery that is called "clavile" as we have described before; and heal the wound so as we have said before until it is healthy.
Regarding the chest cold Regarding the chest cold, when it is caused by cold moisture and the patient has no fever or sweating, and the illness is early, perform two cauteries on the loins in front of the thighs; and another cautery between the buttocks; and let there be the cautery called "clavile" according to the form that was previously described.
When you see it, do cauterization by pricking at all the points referred to as "poins" from the previous ear disease; and let the points be up to thirty or more. After curing the issue as mentioned above, there should be three points in this form.
And because these points are lighter, you make them at intervals of three parts.
For the dislocation of the shoulder. When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot remain in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have tested, then you must first address the dislocation. After the evil spirits have been expelled from their backs and sides; then remove the kernel which is within the inflamed area of your left hand's thumb joint; and if the joint has dislocated, heat with a cautery that has two pointed tips as in its shape.
and heat the kernel until it reaches up to the ribs, with four figures of the cautery together; and since it is made with a cautery that has three points, for which the figures of cauterization are these three cauteries; and they resemble the nerves according to their subtlety like a tent, and it's the shape of the cautery that has three points.
And at no time is it placed near this nerve, because of which there are eight cauteries.
After applying the cautery to soften with soap; afterward let the patient rest and do not move their limb for a long time until it is well supported.
And if it is dislocated again, little happens, then do cautery on the thick base of the clavicle, or many cauteries at once. For the joint is repositioned, and bone becomes dry and the patient feels better.
by; If you see sul monstral Prussons:s.
They say that one should make root cauteries of Aristotle's herbs in this manner: take the largest possible root of Aristotle'e's herb, dry it and prepare it as long and thick as your fingers; coat with oil and hold over fire to cauterize. One large cautery between the earlobe and neck, two small ones slightly descending on the area below the beard; two cauteries between the fifth rib and sixth, tilting backward slightly; one at the center of the thighs, another above the stomach, one between the inner sides of each shoulder, and two along both sides of the lower chest; do not press your hand too tightly but open it widely as in smelling.
Some old ones say that no man should use a fire-like cautery without resemblance to razors; heat it and place it between the ribs until reaching an abscess; but in this case of treatment, pain follows as we have said with liver abscesses. However, fear or illness may cause death at once, or a fistula occurs that cannot be healed.
They say that no one should use cautery without resemblance to razors; heat it and place it between the ribs until it reaches an abscess; but in this case of treatment, pain follows as we have said with li abscesses. However, fear or illness may cause death at once, mice that occurs fistula cannot be healed.
When you treat the illness of mouse bites as previously mentioned in sections and it proves effective, then there are three ways to use fire cautery which are all beneficial.
One way is to make three or four cauteries, aligned according to the length of the bite, following the figure of the liver cautery as we have mentioned before; and do not press your hand too hard on any one cautery, while the patient lies on their back.
Another way of cauterization is to use the one with two nerves as we have shown in shoulder dislocation; and lift the bone where the malaise's edge comes from the left side, and make elevations to lift the bone according to its size, following the width and length of the body, while the cautery is wide enough for the body.
After he inserts the two inflamed nerves until the core is pierced from the other side, and then applies the fire cautery to it, thus there will be four in total. And if you see, cauterize with all of the cautery at three points. Then treat as soon as it has absorbed pus over a long time, which means moving like the previously mentioned cures.
Regarding dropsy (edema)
Cauterization does not help with dropsy (edema), but in the manner called 'asclytes'. When you treat according to the methods we have described in sections, and your treatment is not effective, then it should be done with four cauters around the groin, one on the stompitator, one over the liver, one over the kidneys, two behind the back above the spine, and one near the area of the genitals.
After leaving the wound open to heal and allow for pus drainage for long periods, do not neglect caring for the patient after cauterization; healing will be hastened, and both intentions are with God's help.
The form of the cautery for the abdomen is to be a small nail as we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, according to what it was previously presented.
Regarding the swelling of the fingers When the fingers are swollen in the one who is jaundiced, and bright with yellow bile, you must perform cauterization on their back between the little finger and ring finger; lift your hand with the cautery to turn. And do not enter too deeply, thus it will squeeebore out the yellow bile, and be as follows for the cauteries:
After doing two cauteries on each leg at the tip of the shin bone; make the cauterization long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, along the leg; leave the cauterizations lengthwise to let out the bile; afterward treat the other methods that we have mentioned.
For dizziness
When the solution of stomach comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive virtues that are in the stomach and intestines flow out, they cannot be treated by usual methods; and you see the patient suffering greatly with strong vitality, so make a large cautery on the stomach according to what has been discussed before or cauterization of the stomach, where the cautery circulates around it; four subtle cauteries surrounding the belly, all converging to one clavicular cautery, and two cauteries above the hips.
And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the elbow, and one cautery on each joint, and two small cauteries above the stomach near the large one, for the remedy is profitable when there is good assistance.
For the treatment of corns (likely a typographical error in original text meaning 'hemorrhoids' as "emorroide" would mean hemorrhoid).
When the bunions are at their foundation, or one or more, and are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and treated as we have described in divisions, and if nothing helps, then do caustics: three on the spine of the back, those that gradually approach from below to above almucantarat, and one under each big toe.
And if you think his stomach is cooled and the flesh does not cook, and you see swelling of the face, then on the face do a large caustic as previously mentioned, and one on the liver, and another between the ribs for all other caustics; leave the caustics open for a long time. Afterward, cure him until he is healthy again.
Of the fleshiness called "thelulus"
When you bandage the ulcer, first cool the cautery which appears like a shaving tool, and then set it all ablaze on that bandaged area; and let your hand and the cauterizing stick reach as far as the vein's source, from which blood flows; do this once or twice, and if there is much ulceration, cauterize each one as we have said; afterward treat with beneficial ointments until they are healed; and if you use a large cautery on an inflamed area, it will provide greater aid.
Of a wound poorly treated
When the ill cannot endure bandages or dressings, we will tell of it in its place; if a disease comes that cannot be healed but by fire cautery.
When any comes fistula, and is old and rotten with decay and corrupted moisture, you must dress it completely subtly, and know the extent of the entire tent. After scalding the cautery which seems like a razor, insert it into the fistula according to the amount that has entered the tent; resume the cautery as long as the body is at risk and corrupted until once, or twice, or three times, depending on the amount of flesh needed; beware lest you burn nerves which are therein, and great veins. If the fistula reaches the bladder and intestine, watch for these openings, and do not create a passage elsewhere than at its origin, remembering that it is not necessarily dangerous; after curing the opening until it is sound, if the opening is oozing matter, and materials have been present for a long time, then know the opening to be entirely healthy; and if materials are absent, understand that the opening is inflamed, with corrupted bone at its source. In this manner as one of those we will say in its location.
Of kidney disease For the tounz, li de la ou cest desai de plues d’ours tu l’ad ecrit. Le cordon neant les choses; orent sus le vienes prandans ses mains ester auet en lieu du ire sans lais quid f ados et s que il, et nos rons ouiement et li raient sus crainbaisse l’a.
Of the bladder When the bladder is weak and cold with moisture, and the patient holds urine, then you make a fire cautery on the part below the bladaderiverance of blood when opening a vein", "and incising an abscess", "and in the treatment of wounds", "and in the extraction of arrows", "and cutting into stones", and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Of the kidneys When the testicle is cold and moist, unable to conceive, and the flowers are corrupted with delayed maturation; and when they come, it causes great pain: then one must perform three cauterizations around the scrotum, as we have said about bladder cauterization, and two on the back; and let the clitoris be cauterized, as we have said.
Of the thigh
When the viscous moistures descend to the bag of the thigh, and because of this it moves from its place, and the sign is that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found that the lumps have departed with their veins, so one must cauterize the patient on the bag of the thigh with a cauterization similar to a circle, and straight ahead of the leg around the bag as it turns, so that the bag be within the circle; and let the cauters be such as those which were used in cauterizing the stomach.
Et si ces cautérisations ne sont pas présentes, alors faites trois gros cautérisations sur l'olivaire (oubit), et que la cautérisation soit aussi large comme toutes les autres; et continuez le traitement jusqu'à ce qu'il soit sain.
From the pain in the hip. When pain comes in the hip joint, and it is due to coldness and moisture, and the patient shows signs of what we have described earlier, and treatment does not help, and the illness has been long-standing: then you must purge the sick person of large humors with foul pills or other good pills that appear similar.
After the fire cautery; and the method for the cautery is in two ways: one with burning medicines, and cautery of fire. Cautery of fire has many methods, among which one is as follows: you cauterize three triangular burns on the gusset area, ensuring good depth and size, and leave ample space between each cautery like an olive pit; never place a cautery in the middle above the shoulder joint.
And if you see the triangular cautery that we have mentioned before for shoulder joint dislocation; but make it in such a way that the circle contains the entire gusset and all sides are burned away.
And here's the way to do it for sciatica when the pain is in the gusset and doesn't reach up to the thigh or leg. If it reaches the thigh and leg, you make two cauteries where the patient says the pain holds him, and one cautery above the ankle four times on the left side a little; and use a saucer-shaped cauterization, and burn off the fatty tissue; and if the patient feels that the pain spreads up to two of his heel or near it, then you cauterize at the place where he feels the pain three points or four times with the cautery called "points".
If the work is necessary and if there is more; and if it has been that pain is below the groin towards the thigh, make cautery with a cutellary or circular caustic, and give good care in all your cauteries so you do not harm either the nerves or large arteries, and do not cause further harm or constriction to the patient.
And I have seen others who performed cautery on the ankle joint of the foot, and they harmed it so much that the entire leg became swollen, as did the feet, which were then pierced and corrupted throughout; afterward, due to a stomach condition, he died.
And if the pain is in two parts together, do cautery on each of them according to this manner. // The wise men say in haunch cautery, which is as follows, make one piece of iron and let it be as large as a dactyl or slightly smaller; and let it have gaps between them and the space from one gap to another should be the amount of a pea'lete; and there should be two parts above each other, and they should also look like that; and it must have an iron rod well made; this is its form:
Heat it until all is red and pus flows out, then place it on the chamois leather of the bad hip, and turn it over along the ribs; cauterize once with a hot iron and leave for three days; afterwards apply beef suet ointment, and let the open wound remain uncovered for a long time; after applying salve, do so until healed.
Albuquerque says we use little of this cauterization because of its appearance, and few do it; however, these are good cauterizations, if the patient can tolerate them, and where they find relief.
From the pain in one's back
When pain comes to the back, whether from falling or percussion or from excessive bleeding, or from seemingly expanded cold matter, none of these warrant fire-cauterization unless it stems from an infusion of cold substance.
After the patient has vomited foul pills or other substances, place them on their back where the pain is located and make three lines marked with incisions, and for each line 5 cauterizations or more according to the vitality and amount that the patient can tolerate; perform the cauterization as done by "points" caustic. If so, do 3 or 4 at the midline according to this method:
Often this disease comes to young children, and the signs at its beginning are that they have a narrow spine when standing up, and fear; you will find it in the last vertebra of the back and an appearance that appears above the other vertebrae.
When you see this wound and have examined it, then cauterize with a caustic lancet as follows in this manner.
If the caustic affects any part of the spine, equalize it throughout. And if you see, then apply cautery around the spine with a lancet 2 or 3 lines apart. After healing as we have said, ensure not to place cauterization in scarred areas where nerves are present.
For pain from the joints
When joint pain arises from moistures spread throughout the body's limbs, and when pain comes to the feet, which those called "gout" properly, and if it is due to cold causes and medicines cannot heal it, then they are treated with cauldrons in this manner: make numerous cauldrons around the joint of the foot, and let the cauldrons be olivary according to this form.
And if there is need to hold up the face of the foot, make a cauldron over all the cauldrons called "point". And if pains come near to joints and other joints, which happens often, make a cauldron on each knee 3 or 4 cauldrangs from each part; and with the olivary cauldron. And if you need more, then make more, but do not hold your hand away for longer than the color of heat is visible.
And if the pains extend to knees and back, treat with the cauldron as we have mentioned in its chapter. And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the fissure 2 lines; and if there is no pain in the joints, then make points on each joint and on the hair of the hand; and if the pains come to the elbows or shoulders, treat each part, and do well with medicines for the sick. For if you treat them well and purge phlegm, they will be healed by God's help.
Of the disorder of the sighs
When disorder arises and the bowels descend as limbs and it is newly so, when you see such need to cleanse them, do not pass any day without doing so; use things that relieve the belly so that the fetus descends from the womb. Afterward sit down on your back with hands placed between thine arms. Command him to rub his knee until the bowels are repaired and the limbs reset, then grip tightly above the disorder at the bone of the wrist, and sign as if a semicircle over the body; afterwards apply the cautery in this manner:
Do this until they are white and emit clear pus. Then reset the bowels to their proper place; and instruct the attendant to rub his hand so that it does not return backwards; work well on the legs of the patient, and place a cushion and a sergeant beneath the thighs, and another under the feet which you grasp with your hands; then apply the cautery over the mark entirely by stretching out both your hands, and continue until you reach the bone, if not on the first attempt, repeat as many times as necessary until reaching the bone. Be careful subtly that bowels do not protrude when performing the cauterization; do not burn it; and ensure that no harm comes to the patient or other maladies.
When approaching the cautery to the bone, your efforts are in vain. It is necessary that the child's caustic be subtle according to their measure, and for large people also be large according to their measure; after three days treat them with a salve of butter until the burn has healed; then treat with other ointments until it is sound, and let the patient lie on their back 40 days until the wound is well sewn up; and ensure that its bandages are long-lasting, so that the joint does not protrude when they begin to walk.
After 4eb days, when they wish to stand, properly fit them with a bandage and bear it for 40 other days; and have good rest, so that they work little and watch out against too great repletion of drinking and eating, and excessive shouting; and when this instruction is completed, then they are completely healed. And I will now say after the treatment in their chapter on tailors. On treating wounds of the abdomen
When lice come into other bodies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, then make one fire cautery according to its quantity, and let it be hot enough; after the cure as we have said; and none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a cautery at three angles in this manner:
But first mark the lice's head and make one line for the width above the louse, and another lengthwise, and place your hand amidst all of the fire caustic. However, the first fire caustics are lighter and more mobile.
from ancient pain in any limb When pain comes to any limb, from falling or being struck, and this pain lasts a long time, with medicinal treatment proving ineffective, then it must be treated by caustication using the "point" cautery, applied according to the length of the member, its size, weakness, virtue, location of torsions, and degree of pain. If healed after the first cauterization, that's good; if not, another should be performed upon it, as custom dictates that the member close nearest to being healthy requires this, hence caustications must continue until the patient is well.
In the context of medieval medical treatises and practices, "de meselerer" refers to a field of medicine known for its specialization in surgery. Mesellers were practitioners who performed surgeries such as trepanation (drilling holes into the skull), amputations, and other invasive procedures aimed at addressing physical injuries or illnesses that required direct intervention beyond what medicinal treatments could achieve.
Mesellers are known to have performed surgical procedures occasionally aided greatly by caustication, particularly in cases of diseases arising from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy. Can you consider cauterizing, taking care that if the disease is at its onset, and if it is as we have said in the division, and does not persist or delay, and doubts whether the decay may affect the whole patient, thus .5 causters upon the head: one at the crown, another to the forehead at the end of the hair; and two from the horns, and the other from behind the skull. Let your hand that the cauterizer up to bone, so long until the dirt falls out as humors vents large, or may come ousture it out.
And if the melancholy is scattered everywhere and it manifestly appears, then one must use the caustics of these cauteries as we have mentioned earlier; and a small caustic where necessary, and two on the spine at the neck, and five along the spine of the back, and one large one above the navel and another nearby, and two on each shoulder blade; and two on the ribs, and two on the shin tendons, and one over each joint of hands and feet, and over the palms' hollows; and beware of nerves that are behind pressing downward to not burn them; and never do a caustic above the bone of the wrist, or one on the bone of the stomach, or one on the liver.
And know that the more caustics you perform, the greater the help and benefit to them; and understand that the patient does not feel pain from the caustic as a healthy person would because their body is already completely corrupted. It should be ensured that the caustics are large or small depending on the limbs and joints, according to what you will find in the handling of iron tools. After treating them with farinade (a mixture made from flour) with honey and other things until they are healthy again.
And after treating them with a paste-like mixture with honey, along with other substances until they heal completely.
When swelling comes to any limb and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, if it is not healthy, then make cautery on the limb according to its size and importance; the cautery should be slightly transverse in relation to the grain of the wood. Then treat with ointments until it becomes healthy. At times, cautery is made on the hand, foot, and back, where a nerve causes movement in the limb, thus causing inflammation; however, none interfere if they are not knowledgeable about the limbs and the pathways of moving nerves.
Albares refers to medical treatments or remedcuous.
When the disease known as 'albaras' is old and medical methods are of no use, then cauterize with a small caustic application according to the quantity of grain in the wood until it becomes pale, and its color changes; then treat with flour, lentils, oil mixed with rosewood shaveby and plantain leaves, as well as colon blood and heron's blood, one part each. Mix everything together, bind it with a cloth, and keep it warm until it becomes healthy.
The treatment of syphilis by fire cautery
When syphilis begins to appear and you see it can be stopped, caution by the fire of the cautery that appears as if a circle, around the entire circumference of the sore. Nevertheless, the wise say that one should also do cauterization at the center of the sore; however, I do not think this is good, for I have seen it become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never wanted to see it happen again; moreover, a more direct action is to caution around, with the fire called "circular," as we have said in many of cauterizations.
For the swelling that cannot be relieved
When anyone has an illness called "adubelati," and it delays dying due to excessive discharge or because of the condition's severity when they are very old (that is, too weak) with little blood, or time; and you observe them nearing death: then cauterize around many small cauldrons by pinching; afterwards leave it as such. For it will hasten to die.
And if you see the entire area covered in cauldrons, heat the cauldron with the shape on it:
And place your hand in the midst of the disease called "adubelati" until the cauldrons have pierced the skin, and make such cauldrons so that the patient feels them behind somewhat like a river's flow is directed. Afterward cure it until it is perfectly healed.
The care of fire wounds with iron
Another way of illness called "corrodens," is nothing but a clot in the limb, because it eats away at the members just like fire dries out lines. If you see this disease present that can endure cauterization with fire, then apply small and large cuoya cauters accordingly to where the body or illness is; after cauterizing all parts until you have removed all corruption, leaving nothing of it, so that everything corrupted be turned into bone. Then leave it for .iij. days, and put oil-soaked bandages on the burned areas as long as the fire burns are healed, and all corruption is gone. After ointment treatment with charcoal powder; And if after .iij. days the wound does not appear healthy, then it's good; and if not, resume cauterization on what remains of the limb that has been eaten away. This clot was never successfully treated by ague medicine before cauterization with fire; but in any case, cauterization with the fire is more helpful, and I have already mentioned the treatment with ague medicine in a previous section: take as much as you need.
The use of pliers coming to the feet
Often it occurs that in the feet a disease develops behind which we call "closed," and is a large swelling causing pain to the foot. The treatment for this disease has two methods: fire cautery and hot water cautery. Fire cautery involves heating a probe like an awl made of good iron, so it can reach through all parts around the nail; there should be sharp edges; after heating, place it on the nail, then turn your hand entirely around the nail until it becomes red at its base; leave in this way for three days until pus begins to emerge. Then make an emollient of mashed fresh herbs and oil, and let the dressing remain overnight, after which the nail will loosen and come out with its roots. Finally, treat the wound with healing balm until it is healthy again.
If they convert behind the body, and often occurs in hands and feet; then it is necessary that you perform hot water cautery: take a container of copper or iron, or an awl-like tool, place it on the nail with its base, this refers to warts; put the container around so it encompasses entirely, then add some warm water, and hold your hand firmly, turning back while pressing until the edges of the container reach the root of the nerve, allowing deep hot water to find its way down to the roots. Suffer a bit from the sting of hot water for an hour; then leave it as such, after which it will loosen and come out with all its roots. Perform again if necessary until you have addressed all that are on the body, then treat them with healing ointment.
by. Then the s so please of the lithes:
When someone trembles from coldness of nerves, or fever quartan (quartan ague) or another ailment, it is necessary to make .iiij. cauterizations or .iv. on the spine of the back, one between each vertebra; and one at the base, and one above the stomach with an olive oil cautery; this will stop the trembling and remove the cause of the cold illness.
Of pus-filled blisters
At no time should they appear on the body bathed or as pus-filled blisters that come from large corrupted substances. If at first when they appear, one makes cauterization over each head of the pustule: a subtle caustic stick made of myrtle wood, whose point is held in fire, or from long-stemmed aristology root, or with lenticular caustic. And if not at first when they appear according to this manner, and they cannot grow further; the excesses that come are broken, and it becomes healthy, but one must do so after blood evacuation.
When the artery is tied off Often there are great bleedings from the artery that has been tied off near the wound's edge, or at an abscess incision, or during cauterization of a limb, and similar things; it is very harmful to let them bleed out.
And in any case if this occurs to you, quickly place your index finger over the wound's vein and strain it very much until blood ceases flowing from beneath your fingernail; then apply small and large olive oil cauterizations with fire as needed so that they all turn red; then take some (ointment), whether great or little according to the wound size and its location where the artery runs, and place the cautery over the vein while you hold your finger in place until bleeding stops.
And if it jumps back when you lift your arm above the vein, and the cautery has cooled, then quickly take another of the cauteries that are on fire.
And continue to do one after the other until the blood flow is stopped; and be mindful not to burn the nerve near it, nor any further harm come upon the patient; and know that when blood flows from an artery, you cannot properly stop it unless by one of the four methods we have said: or with cautery, or through extraction if it has not been treated, or with a strong thread, or with medicines applied which can stop bleeding; and be tied and strained simultaneously.
Who will administer the tightly binding with cloths or applying burning substances on top, or other similar things if it does not help much.
If this occurs in someone and they have no direction or medicine on hand, then you should put your thumb index over the wound of the vein as we have said, and stretch it out so that blood rests above the wound and vein; do not move it, but moisten it with cold water often until the blood is congealed, engorged, and pooled; then make incisions as needed for cauterization and medicines.
We have told you in the first chapter all diseases that require fire cautery or burning medicines, and pustules, causes, effluvia, and forms of cauterization; I have included those cases up to the fingers herein, and will proceed through this chapter by the same method for what is easier to understand.
And so as I begin this section, it is necessary for you to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than with the first of cauterizations, and therefore greater caution must be taken.
In the practice of this chapter, there is often blood evacuation when opening a vein, making an incision into an abscess, treating wounds, extracting arrows, cutting into stones, and similar things; where doubt and fear arise, which leads to death in some cases.
And I warn you not to be reckless. For many ways of people come in healing matters. If they are from such who have been so overwhelmed by their illness that it causes them to die easily due to the distress they find within their disease, and its severity; and with these one must fear. And among these is one who gives you his attention and says: "Wait, I am ready"; but the patient is discontented. It does not serve to agree with those coming to you who have this manner, but provide greater reassurance in your honor than in your selfishness, and do not act foolishly but wisely on what you are certain of, and from which you can take lessons; and use prognosis and indication in treating the ill with whom health is converted; and this will help you to achieve good reputation, glory, and memory for generations.
My dear son, Our Lord grants you good understanding and rectitude, and if you wish to breathe of the holy inspiration from His hand, Amen.
Now I order this treatise by sections as you see in the chapter on cauterization, from which I have advised about burning from head to feet, so that you may more easily find what you need.
Full of water at its head
That this illness often occurs in children during birth, and when the child's head is too strongly constrained by the birthing canal; there has never been a case where it was successfully resolved without knowledge of its cause.
And I have never seen this illness in anyone other than children, and all whom I have observed it caused death swiftly; therefore, it seems to me that the treatise should be more diligently studied for such cases.
by# s. Pruss.
If the moisture is excessive, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in a cross-like manner according to this shape:
And if the moisture is under the bone, and the signs you see are openings above each part of the head, and they swell forcefully when pressed by your hand inside: it requires that you make three incisions on top as follows.
in thet les jeter les peircs: t’e ce est o cire, and toli, thatture they bile de quels il, ym:
And another method of incision is to observe where the head of the abscess and water are collected; for it never lies before, never behind, never on the right, nor ever on the left.
So cut where the head of the abscess opens, and water is collected; proceed as you are able with what I have told you; but be careful not to puncture an artery; watch for bleeding fluidly so that the patient may die from blood loss and evacuation of moisture.
To resume (to continue)
When there occurs in anyone a disease called "catarrh" affecting the eyes or the genitals, and the illness is longstanding, and medicinal treatment proves unhelpful, then the final remedy lies in the cautery with which one ties off the two arteries.
It is therefore that when you tie off the vessels, the patient should raise their head; then rub the area with a coarse cloth until the arteries appear, and then draw out the patient's neck at full length with one cloth; then check where the veins are after each ear, and they lie close together; then sign the eyelids with wax; then tie off both with a thin strip of two parts. Until the tail reaches to the bone, and it is done so through the wide gap at the top.
And if you see this, remove the strip from above the artery and cut it off as with two crossing knives.
And when the vein is opened, it bleeds continuously without ceasing.
And if the artery does not burst upon being felt, measure a length of .iii. thumbs (about 4 inches), then tie it off and cut until reaching the bone; put out .vj. dram (.26 oz) of blood as necessary, plus or minus depending on what the patient can tolerate and the reperfusion of the artery. Then examine the wound: if there is no sign of a spurting fistula upon making an incision, and pus does not come out, then drain the wound and close it, followed by ointment until healed.
For inflammation or swelling.
When early migraine comes, and acute catarrh due to moisture from tears and heat in temples and old headache and similar things occur, one is treated with methods of medical care and it does not help at all, so we draw out the arteries from the temples and cauterize them, as we have written.
The manner of extracting them is such that the patient feels a return in the hairs of his temples and hears an opening in the artery within the temple, as it opens well from its pulsation. It is only slightly closed like in some men who are too cold; if reopened, the patient pulls out strips of cloth around them, then rubs the area with rough linen, and applies warm water until the artery manifestly appears again; then take the spatula as described:
Then gently scrape the skin until you reach the artery, then cut it at the pinchers, and separate it thoroughly from each of the sheets; and if the artery is delicate, twist it with the tip of the pincers, then close that part according to the quantity of its two heads. Because if not sealed, it will never stop bleeding entirely.
And treat the wound with vinegar until it heals in 12 days; and if the suture is large, it must be tied in two strong double threads of silk so that decay does not come before the suturing of the wound, and blood flows through its length; then cut off the excess between the two sutures at the same time, and then, if you see fit, cauterize with a caustic caustic until reaching bone as long as the head is closed; this is the final work, provided the patient does not have fever and is of hot complexion.
For caustics are helpful in finishing wounds; thus they are more beneficial for wounds. When extracting arteries, fill the cavity with old cotton and place well-made dressings; and when removing them, treat it with dry medications that produce char, and bandages until healed; and if the remnants of the vessel are as thick as you work on it, then quickly cauterize the area by caustic, or fill the cavity with vitriol and strain in your hand to make the wound cleanse, and apply cold water on the cavity until the vessel is frozen, and bandage the cavity with a cool water as long as it needs to be. And the aftercare of artery extraction is that you cauterize the opening of this caustic two parts, but the sharpness be well-made sure longer holders; When strangury is too tightly held, it holds less heat. And it must have between the two knives a space as wide as one, and then when you have inserted both into their places, heat them with a glowing iron until they reach the bone, and tie off the vein in two ties; and let them be separated by the two edges so that this cautery is not too hot altogether; this is the form of the cautery.
From tears
; t.
And they call it the ancient "contusion cure", and you should do so for the patient with this condition, letting hairs on their forehead grow, then make 3 incisions or evenly according to the length of the forehead; one incision is as two fingers deep towards the nose, up to the nostrils, and the other two are at a width of two fingers above the eyebrows, and beware of artery incisions that lie on both sides over the brows; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the two jawbones.
From the incision that is from the temple up to the second incision; and scrape off all the fat that is between the two incisions completely over the bone, then make a new cut from the middle incision towards the other end of the second one, and then extract this spatula.
If inserted into the first opening is an instrument called "culteral," and it is very sharp on one side, while on the other side it is smooth, not cutting. And insert the blade cutting towards the lower chest near the heart, and the smooth side against the bone, until it reaches halfway through the incision; then cut off any vessels that extend from the eyebrows as long as the incision is continuous up to the one opening the eye, and then make another cut in the middle incision up to the other end; and then extract blood equally, and squeeze out the wool for the amount of blood taken; then put a piece of old cotton in each incision, and cover with damp cloths soaked in wine and oil and herbs, ensuring no abscesses form; after three days remove the ligature, and treat it with a large quantity of boiled water, followed by ointment made from basilicon herb oil, and other remedebles used for treating wounds until healed.
To examine the eyes
When any come from acute catarrh commonly, and you see the eyes swollen and small, and weakened sight, and burning papillae; and hair falls out, and at times there is severe pain in front of them, and patients sneeze; then by these incidents one knows that such matters and those catarrhs do not come from any single vein, but rather multiple vessels are involved, and the cause lies within them.
And it is that you instruct the patient to raise his forehead, then make a large incision on either side of it; starting from the temple's incisions and continuing up to the bone, but ensuring your hand does not touch the nerves at the temples while eating. When the bone is exposed, squeeze out all the blood onto an absorbent cloth, then carefully place cotton between the edges of the incision with linen threads; afterwards apply cleaned fabric soaked in wine and oil over it to prevent suppuration; when it has set, treat the area with substances that stimulate healing.
In this manner: take two parts of wheat bran and four parts of cocyn grass seed, mix them together, and apply to the wounds to stimulate healing throughout.
Of stopping of the ears
All that flows from the ears is one of four things: grains or beasts or stones like iron, or seeds like peas and lentils, or fluids flowing as easily as water and similar substances.
When it flows from the ear in stone or any other form that does not fit the ear, and does not grow within the ear, place the ear to sunlight. If you see a stone, then distill a drop of violet oil or sage oil, then apply extraction; and the patient will sneeze as part of this condition, and they blow out of their nostrils when sneezing comes, and put cloth pieces or wool around the ear; and place the ear above. This cure often works effectively; if it does not work, then perform extractions with fine pincers like so:
If it jumps out due to pinchers, that's good; if not, prepare the extraction with a subtle double needle; and if it does not come through this, make an eel of iron and push its head into the hole or ear slit firmly, stuffing wax molten so that the veins cannot enter with the tube; then perform the treatment properly, as often the force comes out as we have said; and if it does not come out in this manner, take a point of what is used for extracting animal beaks, and use some precise instrument, placing cotton inside; then press the glue on the wound or whatever, and apply the treatment properly. And if it does not come out from all the things we have said, quickly fracture the ear so that an abscess is there and pus comes forth, and swelling; and the manner of fracturing is to make the patient sit with their head between your hands, and turn the ear upwards, then make a small incision at the base or attached part of the ear near fatty tissue; and let the incision be as round as a crescent moon until it reaches the wound, then suture it as best you can, and suck it hastily into your mouth; and treat it until it is healed. And if it's the form of this: and extract it make it so that are as the poisons. If not bee aministrade.
And make an incision into that grain of sand. But do not attempt this when you think the grain is moist due to earwax, until you have tried many times; then extract with fine forceps and a suction device, as we have said, so that the extractions are successful.
Therefore when the water comes in the ear, it is good for the patient to sneeze first and plug the ear with old cotton. Keep something on that same ear where the water entered. If it still flows strongly, this is good; if not, take many small pieces according to the size of your fingers and lightly heat them, then place them on a fire for a while; afterwards put one or two pebbles from your finger into the patient's ear, and let them fall out through the other side, and pour another stone onto the stone that is in the ear. Continue to do this with stones until all the water comes out completely strong, as we have said for the previous method; then if you see it, take a rod, put one end of the rod into the patient'eart, and keep the other end on fire until the softer part burns off; then make another set of rods to remove all the water.
In the removal of the beastie if it is a small body like a flea or similar thing, treat as we have said in division; but if it is a large body that can be felt, prepare extraction with forceps; and it's easier to remove what is inside the ear.
During the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat them as we have said in the section on distillations and their treatment, if the remedy does not work, then examine the ear under the sun; if there are no visible worms, use fine tweezeburns, and if they do not appear, take the cone from which it takes shape.
And it is narrow at the bottom and wide at the top. Then insert the finer end into the ear according to the amount of suffering in the patient, then fill up all along the cone; do this often until all worms have come out. If they don't emerge, stuff cotton around the cone as I mentioned with stones; and if they still don't come out, apply distillations that the ancients tested in the excision of worms, and you will find them or treat distillations; and distill oils and medicines into the ear using this instrument, which is of the form as you see:
It is made of silver or tinned copper at the bottom and over with holes to pour in, and on top for distilling; and to press the distillation through an instrument of well-made tin wire, so that you insert a needle and wrap it around with cotton as needed, then pour your oil or juice into the cone, and put whatever amount of medicine from your treatments into the ear, and let the cone be in the ear; then push the needle through all the cotton, and press with your hand briefly until the oil is distilled or collected out of the ear; and it smells to the patient inside, and make the distillations two boil so that it's distilled into the ear, but do not be too cold, for medicine would not be good.
Of eardrops
No child is born who has no eardrums or ears; and the same thing happens to adults by a wound's bursting within the ear, and these ruptures come at one time fully in the ear so that they cannot be seen; and sometimes there occurs .i. small failure of sight, but the eyes see well.
Therefore when it comes fully in such a way that one cannot see it, there is of good healing in various dispositions, and where one sees this, you must place the patient's ear to the sun; and look inside: if you see the inflammamation apparent, then the work has done all this space for which the shape exists.
And let it be both before and behind all around flat, so that the ear does not bleed; if the inflammation is of a wound or body of the ear, then take with fine tweezebrs, and pull gently, until those cartilages are completely removed.
Et si les opilations sont émergentes dans l'oreille, prends un rasoir subtil léger et échauffe-le au feu, puis mets le corps de l'oreille. Si tu sens que la tumeur provoque une faiblesse chez le malade à entendre, percez légèreamoient, et assurez-vous de ne pas appuyer sur les nerfs de l'oreille; puis placez dans l'oreille un tampon selon la largeur du conduit, et enduit avec l'onguent égyptien.
Aucun jour ne passe jusqu'à ce que la plaie soit guérie, alors prends une gaze et enduise-la avec de l'onguent rose d'eau, et saupoudrez-le de vitriol broyé ; et si tu vois le gonflement de ler oreille, il convient de changer la gaze pour en placer une autre mouillée dans du cerotage faite avec de l'huile rose et de la cire, jusqu'à ce que le gonflement ait diminué ; puis panser tant qu'il soit sain.
Et si un saignement se produit, plonge une épongue dans l'eau froide et place-la sur la partie touchée, puis utilise les autres remèdes appropriés pour traiter le reflux de sang par des distillations qui soignent cette affection.
From the papers of Char
This small althel that comes in papers when they are moist and dry, one must stretch them with tongs and forceps, then coat the bottom of a glass beaker with its roots; afterwards place it over vitriol paste.
Pour ceux d’hauz à la voies: cauterise, puis les s’il est mires, eus de recoupe the altheluze avec pieces de paste, et lues a pluse a le paste; car tu çeples and li altes.
Of gravel
Many times come out of the skin something that appears as gravel in form and hardness, and for this reason, this illness is called "hailstorm," consisting of a large moisture above and below; its treatments are such: be aware if it moves on one side or another, which is an easy thing to know; then make the incision wide, then scrape each part lightly, then use tweezamoins, and sew. If you do not cover sensibly without perforating the skin a bit, nothing harms the patient; and if the fissure is large, assemble it with sutures and cure until healthy; but if small, make no forceful action, for ointments will restore and irritate quickly.
And if the hailstorm is descending into the ear's depth towards the upper part, turn back the skin and extract with tweezers, sew it up and press on both sides; and if the skin has been moved by the incision, nothing harms; but when the hailstorm has been cooped, give a salty water oil to drink, and cure the hollow of that which causes irritation until healthy.
of the fat from the eyes
It is a fat that forms in the folds of paper, which often occurs in children but rarely in adults; it greatly affects their eyes, causing them to have catharsis upon awakening, and they cannot look at sunlight because tears rush to their eyes; therefore, they lie on their faces with closed eyelids, sleeping, while moist paper covers the area around their eyes affected by exinach, which becomes apparent in oil. And when you press it back into place with your thumbs and feel the exinach inside.
The method of the procedure is that the patient places his head in your hand. Then take a linen cloth and prepare a tent-like circle according to the amount of exinach contained on each side, then place it over it; and press with both thumbs from one side and another so that the exinach comes together within the circle; then make a small incision in the moist skin using a sharp blade, ensaturating:
Remove the entire piece of cloth between your two fingers and twist your hand to the right and left until it is dispersed; and be careful not to press at the tear, that you do not move all together up to the head, so that you do not squeeze it.
And if the protrusion does not appear at the beginning of the tear, slightly stretch the tear until it appears; then extract as we have said, and moisten with linen and water, and place on the wound, and bandage securely.
And for those who chew and place them to spoil the moisture that has remained. Then heal until it is dry. And if there comes a hot abscess at the site, then treat with emollients until it is dry.
From hairs of paper
When hairs grow on paper in a manner different from their nature and become aged, they harm the eyes, bringing about customary diseases like tearing up and softening of the paper as well as mildew, until it causes destruction to the eyes; there are cures according to four methods: either by fire cautery together with heat, or medicine for ague as described in this chapter on cautery treatment, and is made using incision and stitching or with cantharides, as I will explain.
You must place the head of the patient in your hand; then turn the paper with its oil side towards your left hand; if it is turned correctly, that's good; if not, you should put a needle through each thread just underneam: and do this either at the margin of the paper or where hair grows near these strands. Then pull one thread across all the paper from the great edge to the small corner; then remove it from beneath the paper and close up the entire area around the paper, from the large edge to the smallest. After that, cut a single thread and place a small patch of cotton fabric underneath the paper, then cover the paper with an encaustic figure as if you're inflating bellows; and in any case it must be done according to how much hair is raised on the entire paper surface visible.
If needed to cut a large quantity of paper as it is softened; then make the entire incision along the two lines you signed, starting from the larger part down to small; and let one of the fissures be near natural hairs in the growth area of a root, then insert the needle into either angle that can reach, then scrape off completely; then sew the two edges together with a single thread using a fine linen thread, drain any blood, and trim away excess fibers along the eyebrows as needed; but if this is not done, don't worry about it, leave the stitches and fibers for three to four days; then treat the wound without drying or constricting substances, because the paper will regain its strength at the site of the wound and reattachment, but the suture is weak (as say the ancients), and this process requires no fear.
And it is that you shape the paper into a form similar to a fir cone as we have described, with three needle-like holes according to the following shape shown here:
Then shape like this way of pierce in a hole two small; and then. Qui li fesse the figure is like this, so done into holes de la forme comme nos avons ainsi the form as it is shown as we have made a for to follow the thus hole according li fuelle la ours forme qui semblable:
And if you cannot hold the pincers, and the situation is not equal, take a needle or one with thread, and place it on the figure; then insert another thread near the large joint, and the second near the small, and evenly tie together both threads; then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin over which you have sutured, as we have described, then stitch the two edges of the wound with a seam, and heal it until it is healthy again; if an abscess appears at your incision, soothe it with cerote and similar ointment.
And there is never a time when the paper hair turns back: if it becomes necessary to use what we have said about incisions; but the suture on both sides is more artificial.
The treatment of the wounds is as follows: and you must fold the paper and insert it inside according to what I have said, then make two stitches with a thread, and two fine strings as long as the hair and the width of the gutter are; then hold the heads of both threads by the parts where you tie the threads. Then neatly sew the one and the other on top of that lies above the paper oil, and pull out the two stitches from the two parts entirely; and leave it like this for some days until the skin heals and scars and shrinks and hardens, as long as they come out by itself.
If it is delayed and the bandage loses strength, then treat until it heals properly; and when the wound has formed a scab and the paper peels off, leaving no hairs, you will make the shape of two stems according to this figure and in the quantity specified for length and width:
For the treatments are such that you take a fine needle, and tie one thin silk thread on it; then join the heads and wrap them together delicately, enscuing their lengths equal to a palm in length; then arrange in sequence another subtle fine silk thread briefly, and wind around the main thread; then place the patient's head in your hand and be near sunlight so that the treatments can be seen clearly, for they are subtle and small operations; then insert the needle through the entire length at the root of hair closest to skin, carefully piercing the paper until you run it over the natural hair; then pull out the hair up to the shaft, and place in sequence that hair if there is one or two or three or more; then continue pulling with your hand until all hairs are moved along the thread with their natural hair.
And if the shaft is treated and hairs do not come out with it, you will pull the thread from below along all the thread that you arranged, until the shaft moves upwards through its root and can be seen by oil; then again you pull the shaft and the thread, trimming off two or three days or more as needed, until the hair takes hold in its place and grows over it. And if the hairs are short, add a long natural wavy hair, keep it alongside that which thou leavest it, as far as to let it grow outward and then lift it up:
Of the decay of the oil
When this disease called "aleacrati" or oil decay comes about in two ways: one natural and the other unnatural; it happens by sudden wound, cutting or cautery, and similar things.
In the case of which he is caused by cutting and sante l’esproveint; si tu ne se eulz aue quarte la coustume ou il est que li choses qui oitre les poinçe le maladie ollui dite de cuistis i, et dese nies.
And the essence of your care is to ensure it does not shift from its original form; and these treatments we have mentioned are solely remedies for this disease, so that it may return in its previous shape.
Of the pus which comes through the oil.
This disease that is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental. The accident arises from wounds, incisions, cauterizations, and similar things; and the method of treatment for it involves you taking a needle with double threading, fixing its point in the pus, piercing through to the left side till reaching the right, so that the threads appear at both sides of the pus. Then extend the wound upwards along the entire length of the needle, and attach a spatulum wide enough for this purpose.
If the alignment of the bone returns as it should be repaired, that is good; if not, take a rod and insert it into the gap, then realign the bone, creating two or three openings within the bone; thus, both ends of the incision you made have two angles each, so when they are joined together, the alignment should be as in a letter with one "L"; then remove that piece according to how much its edges need adjustment to allow for the bone's movement, and bring the separated parts close together, tying them off with a woolen thread; then continue with what we have previously mentioned about using softening medicines and bandages until it is healed.
If the illness comes from a fissure or stitch or cautery, it is necessary that you make a clean cut just below the hairline of the paper, and according to what has been said above; then between the two edges of a tent as I have described; and you must treat the injury according to its form because it is very diverse in shape, and wise masters employ all possible means to help restore the figure back to its natural state; and for patients, likewise, depending on what treatment and applications are required in various conditions.
If the illness comes from a fissure or stitch or cautery, it is necessary that you make clean cut just below hairline of the paper, according to possible means all employ its state; and li masters wise as I have described applications various conditions.
When this soldering occurs in human hands such that the paper above is well-adhered with the egg white, and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then it must be pierced at the tip of a razor beneath the paper, and lifted upwards; and hold steady with clamps until you scrape off what has hardened into the delicate spatulamine, which is neither too rough nor too sharp, so that the patient cannot suffer from overly aggressive or blunting the oil; and make your incision gently, allowing the assembly to reform according to its natural shape; ensuring it's whole, without causing fresh blood in dirty water, then rinse with soft clear water and colander; afterwards place a linen tent between paper and oil, and cover the oil with mull soaked in warm whey; after three days use the colander again and other remederals until healed.
From the nail of the finger
It is divided into two methods: one that it can be nervous and the other is smooth, but a certain kind of bainnee conserve them as you needle; thus to cut as the paper, which may not be sharp, and the poignet le croie li cure et l’oller en la chas.
The method of the incision is such that the patient places their head in tune with your hand, then you work the eyes; lift the paper to your hand, then clip the nail clippers slightly thinner; extend it upwards; then take a needle and insert horsehair, or goat, or ox hair; and use a strong thread. Double the tip of the needle a bit and embed in the nail fold, piercing through the entire needle, tie the nail with a thread, extending upward, scrape all the way to the edge of the nail where the prickly part and the silk hair reach until the top head; cut off any remaining stubble at the root of the crescent gently, leaving the natural or root bone so that through the incision it does not typically seep. And never do you stretch just the nail with a clip, but only with the thread as we have said; then scrape until all the crescent is smoothed:
Ensure that the crescent does not touch and break the skin layer, and that the prickly part is not pierced; after the incision, pour in a bit of burnt seal oil and also make a mixture with litharge coating, and leave it until the next day. Then cure whatever needs to be done until it heals properly.
If the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert a needle, and the knobs do not fit in, this type of fake nail has often been treated with medicines; they grow as I described in the division, and if you see them covered, work on the oil for the patient, and take the spatula lightly cut according to this method:
And raise the nail carefully, and if you see that it does not diminish and there is irritation afterward, distill from your mouth into an oil collier made of leadwort and red wax resin mixed with spelt bran, and apply the oil until the next day; then continue the other procedure as in this same work, until it is completely healed.
If nothing in the oil opposes you, as in case of a hot abscess, then dress it first and cure the hot abscess until it is clean, then continue the procedure as before, until it is healed.
And if the appearance of flesh at the elbow hinders movement greatly by causing harm, suspend it with a splint, and bandage part but not all, so that tears do not come; then flows into the arm red pus which is made from litharge.
From the powder that grows over the pupil
There are men who occasionally have red powder that covers the pupil, and it covers the iris and restricts its movement and twists to one side, appearing like an acorn rosebud; and in such cases, the patient places his head on a pillow as we described for this chapter of incision of the fingernail and small forces by which you remove sebum, just as it is shown after treatment with this procedure.
And when the incision is completed and bone is exposed completely, apply oil of seal or you may distill collier rouge and similar corrosive medicines, and place cotton with a linen swab over it; ensuring the wound stays hot; if nothing remains there, and the flesh covers the wound, and you doubt that the abscess is still hot, leave the oil and treat the abscess with soothing remedies for an abscess; then return to your original treatment until it is healed, and thus a bone can be drawn into place using this method.
However, it is necessary that you balance the use of each weak oil from the natural way; and in cases of accidental injury, using iron treatments; and do not put your hand into any of these treatments until you see that this limb has recovered from the treatment.
From veins within the body
Red spots that are covered over the eye disrupt its function and weaken it daily. Therefore, when you first look at the patient, observe where these red spots are located; beyond this, there is no other disease except for the red spots; then treat them as follows: instruct the sick person to place their head on your hand, and gently suspend those veins all around according to your wisdom, and let them be doubled in subtlety following this method.
And there shall be two veins looped by degrees into one of the arms as follows:
Then you shall carefully loop those subtle veins and draw blood every hour until you see them removed from the eye area; and be careful not to bleed the tips of the eyelash grooves, and perform this procedure at midday before sunlight, being very focused on your work so that only these veins are bled; and once you have done this, distill in the eye's collar a green and red liquid to disrupt whatever remains from the red spots.
If you cannot grasp all of this in that hour, apply an ointment soothing the pain of the eyes and leave it for several days until the pain is eased and the patient feels confident about a boil, then resume according to this method above until they are well; and this is how strength is restored.
From the fistula of the eye
The mires called "arissati" fistules: when you treat them with cautery and medicine according to what I have said before, if they are not healed, then make an incision over the boil where it must die off, and remove all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is uncovered, and you see corruption and darkness, return it to all the instrument from which its form came; called "sharp head," made of fine iron, with one end sharpened like a file in this present shape.
And place it back onto the bone with decay, then turn it between your two fingers, and press slightly with your hand until you know that the decay has been resolved; do this multiple times before replenishing its location with curative herbs.
If the wound is sealed and hard, and the body of the bone is also hardened, and remains so for 40 days without new sores appearing, and no complications arise, know that it is healing; if not, there is no other remedy than to bring the fistula back to its original state as follows: and it is to uncover the bone a second time with iron, and using aggravating herbs, and when it has been uncovered again, take a drill according to this form; and let the sharp head of iron have four angles, and the shaft be thinned up to the top as you see here:
Then place it against the bone near the cheekbone and move your hand slightly away from it. Turn back to its original position until it pierces through the bone and the patient feels pain because of this if he holds his hand on his neck; then restore the original position with dry medicines as I have shown you, and when pus forms and hardens in the glands, the matter goes towards the neck; this is an easier thing for the ill.
From the exit of the oil (pus)
When the nails are torn through all over and it does not come to disturb the kidney or shrinkage, then you bind the sickly; then cleanse them, then put on compresses or bandages without iron that can be pierced to drain, then apply oil made of acacia and aloe and incense and sarcocolum. Then strain the pus, and place a plaster over wounds with cloths and linens; and managing the cloths so you pick light enough cloths sufficiently softened by twofold each (i.e., doubled), then put one on top of the other according to as much as the pus has need; then strain it using a hard plaster, and again start leachers for draining without piercing them; then remove the compresses and let the pus stand all day and night, and if you see it softens much, so that you should be removed. Then remove it after the oil returns, is good; or else repeat as does not return plasters, cloths of the (it heals; and s:
The breaking of a bandage applied
When disruptions occur in the applied bandage, then open and arise from fragments as if a grain of resin, and are visible to see; therefore you shall view it closely; then surgery is performed such that one inserts a needle at the root of the part below until there is another on the upper side; or where there is double thread of the forehead; and pierce through it; leaving the first needle according to its arrangement; then cut off the double thread in place, and tie up an end of the bandage around it, and hold it tightly; then extract the needle and apply a moistened swath abundantly over it; and leave until the threads tear through the bandage, then treat with soothing things as long as the wound is healed; and at no time should the wound be restrained by the bandage in any part of a circle of cloth, as long as it is healed.
And if the eyes give a significant appearance, pierce at the subtle base which comes in through the forehead and follows the white moisture and descends into the eye, and enters immediately; then extract it as soon as possible until healed.
from the bow of the eye
This disease called 'alcunnati' is not just water that appears to be coming down like clear liquid in the eye, but it is not; the appearance of its operation is such that you make the patient sit on a chair with one side adjusted and level, then take their head between your hands from both sides, and move them as long as you see the bow coming up towards your eyes; then it should be pierced, and do not drain or clear away the lymphatic vessels, and observe the patient's symptoms as usual; if they don't come down, know that it is water, and if the disposition of the bow has been prepared as we have said. Make them sit between your hands again, then take a thin spatula and press on the cornified edge with slight pressure along its continuation with the cornea and crown, until the bow comes out; when it does come out, drip warm honeyed water into the eye or boiled fenugreek mixed with honey, then cure it with another remedy as long as it is healed.
of waters from the eyes
We have observed the similarity of dislocations in the division and that which is to be cut; thus, proceed according to health conditions. It must be done so that you make the patient sit between your crossed hands, away from sunlight for safety, and tie the cloth tightly with oil; then place the paper over the oil on your left hand if the eye is turned outward or on your right hand if it's turned inward; then take in your right hand, if the eye is turned outward, the instrument called 'almagda', or on your left hand if it's turned inward; then place the tip of the instrument near the crown by moving a ray from the outer edge to that side of the oil at the lesser outer corner, and insert the instrument gently, rotating your hand until you pierce into the side of the oil, feeling as 'alamoida' comes to an empty space; and it must be ensured that the direction of the 'almagda' is straight from the full measure of the space which extends from the plumule up to the end of the blackened area; this is the crown of the eye; you will see the bone in the paper due to the whiteness of the horned thread, and then place the instrument close to where there is moisture, and afterwards squee groin. If the moisture flows out now, you will see before you the patient and the instrument in his oil.
After resting a little, and when the moisture rises in the second way, put oil with the instrument, and when it is firmly fixed and does not rise further, gently twist 'almagda' with your hand slightly; then reinsert some gemstone into the eye and cover the inner part of the oil. Then place an oiled cloth or a linen soaked in oil, generously covering the area, and secure it with clean oil. We, and those of our time, apply comfrey paste liberally along that area.
.
Pierce then the joint just slightly, not too deeply, but make it a very thin cut, then apply medicinal ointment as we have said; and at the completion of the work prepare for the patient an appropriate bed in which they can lie on their back in a dimly lit room; ensure there is no movement from them, provide light foods, and do not move their head or arms to either side, keeping them according to their natural position until after three days; then remove it from that dark chamber, test their vision, show them various things, and then reattach the ligament up to the seventh day; and one should not perform this during the hour of treatment or immediately post-incision, but rather at an appropriate time because the healing progresses rapidly.
If an abscess comes forth, you should release the oil before the seventh day and apply what soothes the sore; and once it is calmed, remove the dressing from its face with a bandage to cover for any number of days, keeping it in that dark house. Then gradually leave the dark house little by little, and let him return to his own affairs; remember that no novice should interfere in this case.
Apply the oint soi qui tu est ardre de nos que tu esoie te tesmoient, nul leus a li vant se veut conter lor pais ne pas on les dous onsue que tu s’est parfait, mais quaies et prist ; et la terse en faus ei qui descez.
And these are the resemblances of the forms of amalgamation because those who do not know them regard them as such; and they are indeed mixtures.
And let there be the essence of this same subtlety, and its counterpart in three sharp corners.
from the fire on the neck
the un:
If anything remains that cannot be closed, apply all the subtle remedies lightly, ensuring nothing is left; and if there is swelling or an abscess, treat it as required; and if malignant abscesses are present, quickly cauterize until they are cleaned out and bones exposed, then pour water, oil, or wine.
If the treatment fails and moisture reaches the palate, ensure it is safe; and if moisture does not penetrate as required, check that food has been lodged in the bone above, then apply remedies do not cut without proper sizing: thus, wrap a linen thread slightly thickened by hand, leaving enough space between each layer; place the head on one end of the string with some leeway. Do this until it can be pulled gently through the mouth; this is often done for schoolchildren and is an easy task for those willing to do so; then hold the upper part that comes from the nose in one hand, and the lower part coming out of the mouth in the other hand, feeling each alternately as we feel with our fingers. Continue until you know that we have cleaned all food particles, then pull on the thread, extract blood if present, and moisten it with Egyptian ointment, then place it back into the nose as before; do this for three days or more until the ointments dissolve what remains of the debris; then put a pincenez in the nose for several days until safe; and use dry medicines if necessary. This is the method to purge the head, by which oils and medicines are distilled into the nostr [Input]
things as are the in, and s. 1 so
From the cartilage at the neck
Many times arises at the top of the neck a disease called "tellus," which grows and becomes visible until it can be seen; therefore, it is necessary to cut it out from the beginning, removing all the bone strongly, then placing the cautery or hot medicine on it; if it is not removed promptly as it grows large, take heed if it is hard, of sick color, lacking sensation: do not touch it with iron because it is an incurable boil, for when it is cut even once, it brings great harm to the patient; and if the boil is from a severe irritation, not of sick color, and you see that all can be covered, then relieve the patient and cut without fear, curing dry and constricting things.
When the neck is cut and healed
When solutions of continuation come into one of these cartilaginous works, it is not very effective in some people. Therefore, when this occurs with anyone, examine if the wound is fresh and bleeding throughout; then bring together both edges to a stitch and treat until healed; and if the edges are detached on each side, trim all parts of their flesh until they heal, then bring together both edges to a stitch, bind it tightly, sprinkle with powdered blood dragon's blood, and crushed incense; then place over the powders a piece of lead or other lead compound, leave it until it exudes through it, then treat with ointment until healed.
The manner of the stitching is that you assemble the sutures: by needles as we have said in abdominal stitching; or with thread, as I have shown you.
For abscesses on lips
When dense abscesses occur, resembling grains of pepper, small and large; then it is necessary to return the lips, cut on each side with tweezebeak, and grasp in each part; then place the liquid after vitriol incision dripping until it cools off; then provide relief and treat dryness around it until it heals.
From the decay of gums
Often arises on the gums decayed, which the ancients called "albulus"; it is necessary to hold them with pincers, cut at their root, and let blood or sanguine flow; then apply vitriol incision, or other powders that restrain and dry out; if that decay returns after the incision, and often happens again, re-capping and cauterizing: it does not return after the cautery; these are the forms of ulcers to heal.
Of sorrows
At no time are they gathered at the root of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, sores that are ugly and sharp; nor do the teeth become black and yellow or blue until corruption comes to the gum, and the teeth smell bad. It is necessary for you to have the patient sit in your hands, with their heads on your altar, and pull out loose teeth or sores as they appear, until nothing remains; then make it black and green, and yellow and other colors until they are healed; and if anything that was at first reason is removed, it is good. If not, start again from the second day to the third, until you have everything extracted; and know that teeth need various kinds of medications for recovery according to what the work shows, because the rasor whose teeth fail frequently require different forms than those whose teeth are between the gums; these forms and others should be prepared with you.
It is necessary when you treat the tooth's pain that you delay the grinding as long as possible, because it must not always be done; for this is a very high substebisituations such that there are no excuses for extracting. Then when the patient is constrained by tearing, it is necessary to be certain about which tooth hurts. Often the pain torments the sick person, and they think that it is a false or dead tooth; then they pull out the bad tooth; however, the pain does not leave due to this, until the evil has been removed, as we have already tried with such cases; and when you are well certain about which tooth hurts, it is necessary to scrape around the tooth thoroughly to protect the gum from all sides. Then move it slightly towards your fingers or delicate pliers at first touch and gradually until it is properly aligned, then firmly secure the tenailles; and let the head of the shoulder be in its right place between your knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
After the tooth is extracted properly and if it does not break easily, take any of these substances and fill them into each part lightly, and move as you did initially. And if the root is pierced and mingled, it is necessary that you fill it with dressings, where the openings are; and gently strain with pliers so that it does not break when extracted; and work very carefully around the gum to protect the to
Etre, mais cez ement: en crois a li par la dent les dent dose et qui brise teve sesque que nos replee ce quidontre l'en de melenent auquoient l’amorent lionce leu; si. dit; et; Et dure, tendre, les croisse estes; andel; li amis otre la dent par moi en bonde96: li qui par sablest si bris, mais quil eco que te de meur, puisent ce l’on le miege. 82 li retenir et, nee nusie aves.
The shapes of the strands, to which one must move the ends first, are with long points and thick knots, so they do not double when you pull the thread; and these are the forms:
And let them be large members such that they do not bend when pulled, and made of well-crafted iron wire, with teeth for easy handling.
from the roots of the strands the  (some. This. If they present que c sud.n and its;  is. are yourovleur est ca blacse bon. What islacks prumbons byz
And if the roots do not want to come out with all these pliers, it is necessary that you expose the flesh entirely around the root and use the instrument called "althali", which is a lever of this form.
And make it long and thick so that it does not break, and if the root protrudes through this, it is good; but if not, use all the instruments, from which these shapes come afterwards:
And if you use this instrument that has two tines, here is its shape:
And other things related to swellings, and this instrument which appears like large pincers, whose form is as follows:
And this instrument should not be able to break; there are many swellings of swellings; and other instruments that are not counted as such. The wise master craftsmen discover by themselves their tools according to their works and the illness shows them so, for there are various diseases or no previous teacher provided an instrument for its variety, and it does not break on the wheel or other bones where they fracture; then seek swelling instruments as I have told you, and aid with gestures - this is the form: And they should be large and hold well to grasp the bone without slipping, but also to grip it firmly and remove it; then restore its original position with suitable medicines for that purpose. If there is rot in the bone, and it's small, you have all this instrument:
When the tooth appears not in accordance with natural law, and the shape is unattractive, especially in maidens, it must be known if the root exists behind the tooth, and is neither straight nor properly placed; then file it down. And if there's a nerve accompanying the tooth, take this instrument whose form is as shown here with a small beak, and should be made of iron pointed at both ends:
And grip the instrument lightly for days due to the hardness of the tooth and because you do not move others; if it is possible to file it down, then grind with a portion as shown in this form.
And it is also as the grinding of needles; and gently grind the tooth a little each day until it can be removed; then smoothly finish with a file, ensuring that if the root is too sharp and cuts the tongue, you must grind down its harshness until it is even so that it does not cut the tongue or corrupt speech.
When the teeth are loose
When the teeth are loose due to impact or decay, and the patient cannot press down on what they chew without causing pain, you should treat them with binding medicines; however, if that doesn't work, use a gold wire for restraint as silver wires become green and corro#se, but gold does not change. The wire must be of medium thickness according to the space between the teeth; if you need to straighten the teeth, take a doubled wire fitting snugly between two healthy teeth, then insert the ends through the gaps where there are one or more missing teeth until you reach another healthy tooth. Then continue covering up to the part where you started and slowly extract your hand without causing movement; also be careful at the root of the loose tooth so it cannot slip away. Cut the wire with pliers, then reattach them and place between a healthy tooth, ensuring they do not touch the tongue; leave as tight as possible for as long as you can, if it loosens or breaks, use another wire; this will stay in place for its full duration, forming both the shape of the teeth and the alignment of the two healthy and missing ones as you see.
And if the teeth fall out, put them back in freshly as we have said; do not interfere with someone who is neither wise nor patient, and never create a shape like an animal's tooth bone, place it where there is a gap, and restrain it as previously instructed, staying this way for long periods.
of the tie of the tongue
At no time is this tie of the tongue which comes from under the tongue or its nature, such as when made in this way; or by accident of a quickly-healed wound; and the treatment is such that you treat the mouth with the patient's bad breath, keeping their head upright, and lift the tongue; then cut the nervous tie on the sides so that the tongue can be freed from its place, and if there is hardness or knots, and it is a quickly-healed wn, so you remove the sinew with scissors until cleared, and be careful not to sever too deeply as an artery lies below; and once done, raise the gauze of rose water and ease, or cold water, then place a linen tent under the tongue; and treat the patient each night so that their eyes cannot close. And if bleeding occurs, apply vitriol paste on it; and if blood does not stop, cauterize with a lentigo-like cautery which is good for this, then heal with another remedy until it is healthy
And if you see it to be colored or black and hard, do not touch it as the patient does not feel it, for it is cancer; and if it starts to sink inwards with moisture, pour onion water over it, and treat it from all sides with a fine syringe, and free it from both ends; and if it persists after your treatment, apply vitriol paste until it heals completely, then return to the previous treatment until you have treated thoroughly; then raise the gauze of eased and ease water, and continue other treatments until it is healthy.
Of abscesses of the throat
Never comes to the throat bumps called "godath," and properly they are the two almonds, and when you treat them as we have said in the division, if they do not heal well, take care: if it is a small abscess with flesh color, do not touch it with iron. And if it is red and the root is large, also do not touch it with iron; but for the blood flow, let it be until it scabs, and then you will cut it off, or it will break on its own; and if it is a pale color and the roots are fine, prepare the instrument carefully, but first check that the abscess rests calmly and is soothed. Then make the patient sit facing the sun, with their shoulders in place, and they work the mouth and have the pus between their hands, pressing the tongue down from all over the instrument; and it should be of silver or fine steel as a knife:
, asse tu thet cest en pus to let not prise ande ate; then be angrys.
When you do not have this instrument at hand, use a pair of pliers, which is its form:
And let it be sharp on one side and blunt on the other, and when you have caught up one of the almonds, cut the other in a similar manner, then after the incision gargle the patient's throat with warm water, vinegar, saltwater, and if blood discharge occurs, gargle again with warm water or grated pomegranates or myrtle leaves; until the wound is healed. And no other abscesses appear in the throat except for the two almonds, so cut them as well.
And I treated a woman with an abscess inside her throat, which was very swollete and nearly closed the entire throat, such that she could not breathe or eat through the blocked passage, and if it had continued for one day or two days, she would have died; the abscess was so swolled up that it had pushed out two inches from the two openings. I quickly acted, inserted a needle in one opening, pulled back the contents with forceps, and extracted a large amount of pus; then I repeated the process on the other opening, pressing the mouth and tongue; after inserting another needle into these abscesses, and sucking out part of it, but only a little pus came out. Thus, I cleared the passages in the woman's throat, and she began to drink water and wine, and did not stop draining this abscess for long periods; the abscess kept growing back, filling up the space that I had emptied until it became much larger; then I deceived it and cauterized inside her throat: thus it stopped swelling. After me, only God acted on it afterward.
From the eye
When veins descend into the eye and it becomes swollen and elongated, then call it "perpendicular"; if it is thick and round, call it an eye. If it has been treated as we have said in the division, but the treatment does not help, and you see that the wound begins to heal and is subtle, it requires excision; and if it is assembled and not elongated; and it is bloody or of flesh color or black, then it requires making an incision. For there is great danger for the patient. Therefore, when you see it as I have described in terms of its blueness and length, make the patient sit before the sunlight, and press their tongue with the instrument we have mentioned earlier; then insert a needle into the eye, and push downward, and excise at .i. of the .ij. strands that I have said in the incision of the .ij. almonds. And it is necessary that you do not excise more than the superfluous part beyond its natural limit; for if you excise more, it will harm their voice and speech; and after the incution, use what we have mentioned in the incision of the .ij. almondcuits. And cure until it is healed. And if the patient fears being cupt, then it is necessary to use a device for the sensory cauterization of their sense of fear. The manner of this caustic treatment is with clear water. And ensure that the patient places his head in your hands and then presses their tongue with the instrument we have mentioned or the chapter on caustics; confuse it with clear, living blood vessels; and fill the cavity of this instrument as follows:
What is the ouem sont l’est tout lemeet, si que tu met les coure lemede ce qui emmet en la medecle. Si tu coumest li est toutes le mte coure eltie luesse li medicine tous les cheut neant de coute coton le poutrescument sont ceste li venter, si que les .i ques tellel et mete ceulements qui tout ce la medec:
This treatment is better than the incision, not the cautery; if it is treated with fumigation according to this method, take calamint and ysope and origanum and rue and chamomile and avronne and similar herbs, and assemble them all or some of these in a pot, and set on fire easily, and the pot well glued with strong clay, and within the pot have an instrument tied according to this method: And it be of silver or copper, and one of the heads inserted into the mouth as long as the fumes rise to the eye through the vein, until the vein is suffused; restart often, as long as the veer dries up, and ensure that you do not commence this at the onset of a hot abscess, for many things may happen; and do not use it only when there's a decline in a hot abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a vein and place inside its head a piece of wax so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot; because the wax piece will not make the fume burden the mouth, and it is good treatment together with health.
Take a lor poignant la morsure qui se tierz les pais:
When the inflammation is bent at the head so that it can more easily enter the throat, and raise the head high; and watch to ensure you do not touch the epiglottis, as it may swell or move bones within; gently guide where the patient places the instrument because they will use muscles or the area is sore; then push upward or pull downward uniformly throughout all of the instrument until it feels firm.
For throat swelling
When swelling in the throat does not respond to medicines as previously mentioned for treatment of diseases; and if it proves ineffective, then examine the patient'cued at sunrise, pressing their tongue with the instrument I described earlier. And if you see a swelling, treat it throughout all using tiny pincers or delicate tongs that are suitable for this purpose. If this doesn't work, take an egg yolk and blow it into the patient’s throat, then immediately followed by hot iron application as frequently as needed. And if the afflicted person is swollen with water all day, then prepare a full glass of cold water, have them hold it in their mouth until they feel like swallowing, and move it with their hand often; and when the swelling feels the water, let it drain out.
If it does not come out as we have said, then fumigate the patient with vinegar using the instrument mentioned in the vein fumigation; do this many times, for it will be difficult to remove otherwise. The method of fumigation is such that you take a pot filled with charcoal and cover it with a cloth pierced in the middle, and through there place the head of the instrument; then pour your fumigation, and the patient puts their head into the vessel, sealing their mouth so the smoke does not escape but goes directly to their throat; this will cause them to vomit now. If it doesn't come out, restart the fumigatur many times again; let the patient suffer thirst, and eat dirty things mixed with salted water, and don't drink any water; then they must be made to excrete through this method of treatment.
The form of the instrument used for throat treatment is such that it can be seen to resemble curved pincers designed for entering the throat; and like a physician's spoon, and it has roughness from lime so that whatever it grabs cannot escape. And here are its proportions:
The form is made of instruments resembling a physician’s tool, such as it grains, and does not:
There are many kinds of abscesses, as we have learned from one and another in this book, and they vary between perforation and cutting; and it is in two ways - the first way has the same appearance, and because it holds moisture. The second manner is for those cases where there are heads or when they occur on the body. For abscesses of the head are different from those at the base, and abscesses at the elbow joint are different from those occurring in other joints, each with its own judgment in operation.
If there are abscesse which should not be perforated until the bowl is fully healed according to its completion; and for those such that it must be perforated when they have ripened, but do not die in accordance with their completion, as an abscess near joints. For when abscesses occur near joints, if left to dry completely, perhaps the ligament and nerve of the joint may become corrupted, causing contraction in that limb. Or if the abscess is near a main member, do not delay perforation until it has fully healed; or if it is near the base, pierce as soon as it ripens; and you must not pierce an abscess before digestion is complete, except for those at the base, which should not be left to dry entirely but extended internally, so a fistula may occur; and cannot heal completely.
And the pain and the9412-380.
In those that bulge, according to the affected part. And when abscesses occur in place of charnels, they should be left untouched until digestion is complete as we have said; for if you pierce them too soon, the venom spreads throughout the body and it becomes filled with much filth; and sometimes the edges harden along with the deep-set areas. And in any abscesses that are felt according to their size on the body, do what is necessary for the part where they occur. Therefore, small abscesses should be treated with small punctures; large abscesscups with larger ones and multiple openings according to the appearance of the extent of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses or their necks require sealing and dressing when they have become as flat as a piece of cloth, it is necessary to treat them similarly to how one treats hollows: and for those with three angles, or like bellows, and others that are roundly excised, similar treatment should be applied.
For those without a head like superficial abscesses, it is necessary to puncture them openly; and if the abscesses are large with a wide opening, pierce but not emptying the entire bubble at once, but part of it; then bandage the abscess until the next day, then do nothing further; repeat this process gradually over several days until completely emptied. Particularly in weak individuals, pregnant women, small children, or elderly men with decrepit strength, the eyelids may flutter at times due to the bubble's release, which could potentially kill the patient, so be cautious. Therefore, avoid this procedure without great care and after piercing the abscess, examine if the wound of the abscess is small; and if it is a clean incision, dress it with linen or old cotton bandages; and if there are large abscesses with many punctures, make each bandage touching so they press against one another; and if you have sealed part of the skin around the abscess, fill it with old cotton or linen rag shreds without moisture, securely tie until the third day; then remove it and apply ointment until healed.
s0sce icilement en teyde
And it is essential to know for treating abscesses; now I have told you how one should proceed before treating abscesses, and here is the chapter.
Of sores
Where small abscesses come from and are treated like the follicles of a female cat, there are many similarities. Some are fatty and moist like hair; others are hard to touch at their base, with no fear that if they are touched inappropriately it may cause harm. The technique for treating this area is such that you must use any instrument called "entromissoire," after which the wound heals as follows, depending on what it contains. If it holds moisture, then once drained and dried with cotton soaked in an Egyptian ointment (if available), or alternatively water and salt, and apply this dressing to the wound until the following day; meanwhile, reapply fresh cotton as before, on the second and third days. Then treat the wound with suitable medication until it is healed. If there is a fatty growth in the abscess, strip away its edges according to this method: use your fingers to pull apart all sides of the lesion; then drain any pus, and cleanse thoroughly from every direction, and apply all dressings as you would with hair removal paste (using hot wax). And if the sore is hard like a callous or cyst, follow these instructions I have provided.
And the abscesses of pus and moistness are easier because they have less blood; and if any of these abscesses or heads do not have moistness, such as those I mentioned in an old woman's head, where I found an abscess hard like a stone, rough and bloody, that could not be broken; and had someone struck it, they would have made a wound similar to one from a stone. In other abscesses coming or heads, whether they come at the heads of children or at the root of ears, keep the opening as high above for days until pus can exit; treat them as is necessary.
Of scrofulas
Many times these abscesses occur on the neck and below the collarbones, and at the edges, and in many shapes; and they never come elsewhere or body parts, and are large; and there are various types of those that contain moisture, and some with malignant tissues do not want to obey health. In which one therefore you see good disposition on touching, and is similar to the skin color of the body, and moves from each side and is not wind pipes of the neck veins or arteries or duct; it's not deep nor pierced; so that you cut off by above, and peel each part, as we have said in chief abscesses on top healed. And if necessary, as we have told head; and neither nerves nor wound nor the veins aneurysmolnail or neck of the wind.
When you open a vein or an artery and it does not allow you to work, apply vitriol paste or powders that draw blood to the wound, and constrain the wound; let it rest until the abscess is calmed and softened, beginning to decay. And when the blood has stopped flowing, return to your task until completed; then follow your proper course if there are no small scrofulous sores, treat and cleanse them. If there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, do not open it directly, but tie it with a strong double thread, letting it hang without harming it, then dress the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, then cure.
If you open the entire scrofula, it is necessary to join its two edges and hold them together, leaving no excess due to the size of the scrofula. It may be appropriate for you to deal with the root as described, pulling out flesh and cutting as we have said. Scrofulas that hold excess fluid, puncture where there is a hole; then pierce in the same manner as previously mentioned, afterward dress it with ointment and similar substances so that what remains from corruption becomes rotten; and when the wound is well cleaned, cure it with fragrant oil until healed.
When you have to be cleansed with myrrh:    cleaning with aromatic substances so that what remains from afterward  as previously mentioned; then ointment and dress the wound is thoroughly clean it scrofulas, with herbalsam deemed ointment of and cure until healing.
The ancients spoke and told of the treatment of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is according to their writings.
For those with squinching, it is necessary that the fissure of the throat called "epiglaster" be cleared; and this cannot be done by this method because all veins and the main cause of heat in the patient's mouth, or throat or two almonds are present. When the disease is in the channel of the main part, it is necessary to cover the epiglottis to avoid destruction from strangulation.
Therefore, when we wish to split the epiglottis, we should make the cuts below three or four circles or one small slit across, between two circles or by the quantity of the incision into the throat, not in the trachea.
And if those veins are connected to the cutting of the epiglottis, there is no bleeding, and the vessels are long enough in length.
And if the master is fearful, it should be stretched with leather across the entire throat, then cut into the tissue until it reaches the windpipe; and avoid bleeding of vessels, if you see anything else, and then cope (patch) the abscess as we have said.
It is demonstrated by the dislocation of the windpipe which breaks through due to a broken bone in its place and the resulting loss of voice.
And leaves an open wound exposed for some time.
And when the time is over with which one doubts the strangling, gather the two lips of the wound at its base, and tie a bandage all around sensing the cartilage; then administer medicines that produce heat until it is safe.
Until the throat is completely cleared of blood and clots, do not perform this procedure; otherwise, the patient may be judged to be near death, with lack of air. Then you must suture the epiglottis so that the patient cannot breathe through it and instead breathes through the wound, thus preventing death.
And so they instructed to leave the wound of the eyelids open until the illness is passed, which takes about three or four days. And then they ordered to sew the wound and treat it, until it was healed.
And I shall tell you what I have seen. I saw a maiden took a knife and thrust it into her throat, cutting off part of the windpipe at its beginning.
one; also, so the s (it with them: pe vount the pai's
I discovered the wound and found that blood had come from it; indeed, it was evident that neither vein nor artery served as a passage to the throat, and the windpipe lay open through the injury.
I hurried, sewed up the wound, and treated it until it was healed.
and nothing adverse happened except that she turned red in voice, and afterward returned to her normal state.
by the ou soft. But if. The c.
Of a large throat
These abscesses are called "throat hernia," and they are large abscesses of jet black color, occurring mostly in women.
and there are two ways: natural and accidental; the former does not have a cause.
the le te lest: And it brings fear, and one must not work on large wounds but only on small ones, and test and examine everything closely. If you find it similar to our fat, and do not cause any pain, as if caring for ourselves, treat all around its crown, if there are spots. And examine thoroughly, and heal as necessary, until it is completely well again.
; �re est: C-C eXe : the bentide ne tre t esstf: they de laugh by a, et ce faire leli sept. If you said e c on the acr leur.
There are many ways for us to do this, of which I will tell all the similarities;
And so I must explain all the differences between our methods and theirs.
I say that the fever and heat are present until they boil over, and it has subsided and completed decay; then rests the fever and heat.
With our man having neither heat nor fever nor pain, and containing a pus-filled swelling which is its own sac and resembles the natural color of the body, it begins to grow like glass.
And they have similarities such as softness, or greasiness, or wetness, and their colors are as I described in the classification.
It is necessary when you come to treat ours, that you first examine and inquire about the entire instrument called "entromissor", according to its form or chapter which follows this one.
And the manner of inquiring about abscesses in us is to grasp or insert more moisture where you find it in the abscess, and turn your two fingers gently, so that you know the pus has been felt by its core, then according to the size of the abscess.
Then extract the interloper, and be careful as it may burst.
If moisture runs under the skin, if its color is thus, do so as I have said about other abscesse
And if after the interruption there is no moisture, assume it's fatty, then rub accordingly with a cross motion and grasp firmly at the edges, carefully scraping off each part, ensuring that the skin remains healthy as you do so.
And if you cannot treat it healthily, then cut it into pieces to ensure there is nothing left behind.
Because if anything remains, it will return to us many times;
If it lingers a bit and the wound aches, apply some poultice of corrosive powders to the wound, bind the wound, and place soothing substances on the abscess, and treat with other remed cures until healed.
If it is severe, cut out both edges of the wound, and treat as that which causes burning pain.
If it is the opposite or another condition and you hasten to use a poultice of vitriol broth, leave it for two or three days until the wound heals, then let the blood evaporate; afterwards return to the remedy that was previously applied.
See here the forms of intruding strangulations, and they are in three ways: large, medium, and small; and there are three kinds which are called "albaret," and one which is called "breb," and among them there are again three ways: large, medium, and small, to encircle the abscesses of fistulas.
And they are like the needles with which one draws blood, and made of brass, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow in color are more effective for treating black abscesses of fastoids.
And they come in three ways: large, medium, and small, depending on the quantity of the width of the puncture.
The forms of tumors are of many similarities, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and in tumors that have two natures with three different types.
And in tumors that have three protuberances, and are of three different types; and in tumors that have two protuberances, with a single protuberance only, and they are of three types; all these must be located therein.
The tip of these that are cut is sharp, and among them there are some that do not cut except in one direction, where they scrape the skin, so the vein or nerve is neither severed nor cut.
And among these dislocations are those replaced in fingers, so that the patient does not perceive it at the onset of abscesses.
and there are three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see.
and it is not used anywhere other than in the charnels (body bags), such as legs, arms, bellies, elbows, and similar areas.
the bones; you that theyt is soie on them tur, notspul�s. Some possible.
And place it once again with certainty to its natural position by connecting veins, and arteries, and then they return according to this great method.
At no time do the nipples of some men become inflamed when they begin to be corrupted, until they appear like women's breasts.
And remain ugly and swollete, and if they need to be treated, then according to this method of this line B until G: In the l'ardroit the noun, as they have ne que t le benfit; ous i est
When the limb falls onward and is weakened by its size as it often happens in women, they make two cuts above it with similar splits. This is to ensure that one is held against the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line B to line G. Then scrape the skin between the two lips and remove fatty tissue. And prepare with stitching and powders as we have said before, and all that is necessary for the treatment until it heals cleanly.
And if it is not cleaned, or the incision is not completely made, because the patient does not want to rest or due to blood loss, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in a corrosive salve. And let it remain until the residue and fat are removed, then cleanse until it is healed.
From abscesses to elbows
These abscesses that arise below the joints are hard scrofulous swellings and if they contain moisture.
Those that contain moisture must be cut according to this form, from line B up to line G: When the li mordoir les jussoie de les moient li plue biete la tues sois parolez venu en lignes ointes, et yte ou ses c. ici dores, et puis est a qui sont l’oeuvre nul le ligne s comme le ce est pine malaise li de tout les mesme pas l’est, si les mele lues biau la est une.
And if the abscesses are of a similar nature to warts, treat them as we have said for openings in warts, and if the wound begins to bleed, then apply the fire cautery as we have said before.
From cutting into the artery
When the artery is cut and the skin is hardened on top, many times abscesses occur, as does the vein becoming swollen and an abscess.
s And when you feel it on your elbangs, there is an intense strain; and if it's from the vein, it has a reasonable absence.
And it is madness to attempt this abscess; especially when it's from the joints and bones and various other places, and it is very large. Therefore it is necessary to avoid the application of iron, and those who are atop should also avoid it, as well as those with swoln arteries above the long skin.
Therefore it is necessary to avoid the application of iron, and those who are atop should also avoid it, as well as those with swoln arteries above the long skin. by. If; C : thtud monge they should and sc.
Then insert a needle above it and pierce to the opposite side, and tie off the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have shown you for extracting the two arteries that are behind the ears.
Then mark the spot between the two ties with an instrument until blood flow stops when inserted, and then remove the abscess.
Then prepare a bandage as instructed by me until the wound heals. Then apply poultice as needed to this, until it is healthy again.
And if there is an abscess from the vein's size, it requires that you apply poultice to your hand as much of the abscess into all the skin. s and le cat numbers as much (Ct the same example of Mar; it; ça CZele conterple: Then close the abscess, as I have told you, or join one of the two parts with a suture from one side to the other on the skin;
and if you doubt that the thread is not strong enough, then pass another needle through all four threads of the suture at the incision made by the first needle, and pull the strands into four loops;
then cut away the excess from the abscess until it stops oozing, and then cut away the fatty tissue, leaving what is joined.
Then place a cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then apply poultices of tent and unguents until it is healthy again.
For abscesses of the nerves
Just as abscesses come in arteries and veins when injured or from too much labor, so do they occur in nerves for similar reasons.
with the t, but the and de...
And when it is firmly held back, the patient feels intense pain, not throughout the body but from below the head.
And it moves well in all parts, neither forward nor backward, upwards or downwards. For those with dislocated joints should not be bound by iron as they may experience contractions;
And those who are in the head or forehead area develop hardening of the skin at the temples. :d. This m butt to-carline paragraph.
If it is large, suspend at the incision and eschars, then the bone and join the wound to the stitching, and treat until it is sound.
Large hanging heads Never occurs in other parts of the body except for "fungus", as it resembles worms and has subtle roots, and thick stems; there are also small and very large ones.
by the tuisse; (and i so. And the olds.
I bound and found them at eighteen ounces in one and twenty-five in the other, and with their incision made thusly you should observe if the patient is damp, and the color of the articular tissue is bluish and moist and of fine root.
If the wound is wide enough, and be present in your presence, apply the fire cautery. For at the tailor there are often large blood losses, and if the vein gives way, then promptly use a cauterizing agent.
and if you see the patient hopeful yet fearful of the incision with iron, then take a well-made thread and bind the articular tissue as we have said, and leave it for two days;
And then you restrain it, and continuously strain the thread until it touches the artery, causing significant effort; and if the roots are thick, be wary when inflating fully for the abdomen, but ensure to properly inflate most of it.
Then cauterize so it does not reoccur; then treat the wound, and ensure that you do not inflate the testicle if it is of a sickly color and poor feeling and lacking luster.
For this is an incision for syphilis, and I will come to treat the chancre hereafter.
When the mouth is filled with fury
If the appearance of swelling comes from a wound or incision in the mouth, and is located on the stomach and elsewhere among veins or arteries as it occurs in other cases, or from bleeding from veins or arteries depending on what lies before, or inflammation.
and if it is from the incision in the mouth and discharge of pus, then the appearance of the boil resembles the natural skin color, and it is easy to come out without pain, with various openings. And if it is due to an issue with the intestine, then there are various things; and when one presses it on its sides so that it pops back, and then returns, and sometimes it may be swollen, and greatly increases at the entrance of the bath and from hard work.
And if it is from moisture, that's an easy thing, and opens quickly when you press it with your hand without constraint; and if it's for blood, then by these signs of large and hard abscesses, and it occurs in quantity.
and if it is for inflammation, then it's tender to the touch, and the symptoms are such that you observe whether its appearance suggests blood from an artery or vein, or inflammation. If it is fitting that you leave the healing alone; for there is doubt and fear as I have told in the chapter on abscesses, by artery and vein.
And if the appearance is for the intestines or bowels, it is fitting that you instruct the patient to soak his string, and let them be stretched straight out, then tie off completely around the fold. Then command him to lie still between your hands, Then go around the area where you have fixed it completely, ensuring all is properly set. Next, extend the dressing over the abscess to cover above the entire large incision.
t and that do not f the se que t sire Tardo et to so a c re:z; e canntry by th; they chir pa. If you find it caught by the ligament, dislocate it, and insert the intestine through the exit of the belly.
If you find swelling, drain any pus and remove excess fluid;
If the artery is twisted or bleeding, quickly return to your work and take two needles, thread them on a cord, and insert the needles around where you previously made an incision, crossing over it.
First strain the abscess in four places above the needles, and if you see them, remove the needles, and leave it alone until it heals, and expel the dead flesh by itself. Or you shall cut when it becomes thin and ripe, then treat as necessary, and remove the abscess as we have said.
Or you shall cut when it becomes thin and ripe, then treat as necessary, and remove the abscess as we have said. And draw out any blood or pus you find, then treat its wound as needed, and bandage it up.
Of a carbuncle
In our division of the resemblances of ulcers, and how one must treat them with medicines, and how to cleanse the wound of iron; and we shall speak of carbuncles that arise in muscles, requiring great caution for treatment, and ancient physicians say that when carbuncles are present or can be removed as those which are located on the thighs, buttocks, and similar areas, they should all be completely removed at their beginning; and when they become large and old, it is not advisebre to approach them, for I have never seen one healed; nor has anyone ever been cured before me.
And the treatments that are present or can be removed as we have said, is to purge the patient of black bile once; then make him lean for treatment if he shows signs of repletion, and prepare the patient a good place to perform the operation; then apply ointments or ulcers, and scrape off all hairs and fat from all parts without leaving anything; let blood flow freely, squeeze it well into your hand or any object, and if the bleeding changes direction from the incision of an artery or vein, cauterize until the wound is closed; then treat with another remedy until healed.
From dropsy We have said in the division about the resemblances of dropsy; and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each kind, and the treatment that is done by medicines, and what is cured by iron; it only shines. One should not touch with iron on these two kinds: namely, tympanites and hypodipsia, as it is a deadly thing; therefore when you treat this dropsy resemblance called "eclites" with medicine, and the treatment does not help, then look to see if the patient is weak or has another disease besides dropsamo, such as abdomens and similar things; do not touch with iron, for there is doubt. And if you see a strong patient with only dropsy, who is neither too young nor too old, you should act thus: Lay the patient with his back to your hands, and let the assistant press the abdamen'., driving the water down to the lowest part of the thighs, then take a spatula made in this way: It should be sharp at two parts. And always ensure it does not pierce too deeply when you insert it until reaching the intestine; and do not let it bleed.
Then look to see if the jaundice is caused by intestinal issues: if it should be that you make an incision above the elbow, three fingers' breadth from below on the palm; and if the jaundge is due to liver disease, make the incision on the left side of the elbow, three fingers' breadth; and if it is caused by a tumor, make the incision on the right, ensuring that fluids do not flow weakly towards the patient.
Then pierce the skin with the instrument and empty it, then lift your hand to remove all fat between the skin and vein as if you were scraping a small amount like an onion peel; then pierce the vein until the space reaches eight lengths, which is where the water flows, then cut through this vessel, and insert the instrument of which its form is: It resembles a thin silver chain, made of copper or brass lightweight, with one small hole at the top part, three holes on one side; it tapers like a feather, and the shape of the incision that writers make in the quill.
At the top of it is the vein, so when the effluents reach the water, proceed with the instrument now; then empty either half or one-third of it, for if you empty too much at that hour, perhaps because the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit and body, where he suffers hand cramps, or comes close to death.
However, according to the amount of its virtue and what the dispositions of the patient's virtue indicate, as well as his hair; then adjust the instrument and retain water, now held by the key that blocks the duct above the sacrum, which I have explained you should pierce in this manner; then resume the instrument on the following day if you see the patient suffering from it, and extract a small quantity of fluid.
Do not do this for any day but ensure to avoid emptying until it has moved slightly and only a small amount of fluid remains; if you doubt the patient and leave out much fluid, then resort to the burial remedy or hot sand, along with sweating, baths in sunlight, and drinking wine; as well as using drying medicines until they are healthy again, and cauterizing over the stomach, liver, and spleen after the fluid extraction, just as I have said before.
Of the erectile dysfunction At no time are children born without foreskin on the penis, or if it is small, or not in its proper place. If necessary, it should soon be pierced with a very fine needle according to this method: then insert a very thin strip of linen and tie it so for three or four days; when he needs to urinate, untie the closure, allowing him to urinate, and then reapply it; however, sometimes there is no need, because the urine that comes out does not keep the closure open. For those whose foreskin is small, there is a medication with the strip of linen as we have mentioned, it will enlarge. Those who do not have the foreskin in its proper place are afflicted because no child is born with the foreskin at the top of the penis, so they cannot urinate until their foreskin retracts; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot reach the testicles, which is a very unfortunate illness.
And the method of treatment is that the patient lies on their back, and the head of the penis and scrotum are lifted up to the size of a pen'ill, so that the foreskin retracts as needed; and guard against bleeding which often occurs, and if it does occur, then use the stitching thread to close the wound until healed.
From pustules of the penis Many times these abscesses come in the penis, and it appears as an ugly blemish; there are both malignant and non-malignant ones; thus, you should puncture them with a fine needle, drain all pus, then place cotton soaked in refined Egyptian ointment on top, and cure the wound with this ointment until it heals. And if the abscess is malignant, of putrid color and full of pus, then you must apply fire cautery. After draining it, if the abscess is within both hairs and skin but outside, remove the one that's inside first; and once removed, treat the outer part. Because when treating them together, they are not certain to prevent piercing of the penis shaft, leading to blackness and decay in its area; it is necessary to address everything that is blackened and corrupted, then place upon a plaster made of honey and flour prepared from acorns and elderberries, then cure with other ointments until healed.
If blood flow changes, then prepare the lunar cautery in this way: The cautery is prepared with two dispositions together - that is, for the change of blood and corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, one must insert or direct a plumb line to the penis so that the patient urinates among it; and when the hairs are dirty at the top of the penis as in those who have not been circumcised, resulting from injury or abscess, then one should scrape with an instrument until the ligaments are released and the head of the penis is freed on all sides.
And if this is a serious matter to discuss it, one must scrape the area with a spatula gently at the top of the penis and hair; then carefully separate between them, and place a fine linen cloth in cold water so that it does not become too dry.
It pertains to circumcision.
Circumcision is not a discontinuation of wounds like the others; however, when we perform this work of our own will, and properly for children, it is necessary that we make the best and easiest work for health.
I say that the ancients did not mention circumcising their children, for they do not practice it in their laws, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Because I have wanted the greater part of masters and saints who practiced circumcision in one day, and with force, and all newborn; it was there keys because there are two locks, and perhaps a cupboard is hung over one and another stays underne.
When it is recaptured, the pain doubles, and in the softening which is not far from death, the point of the limb is not assured; and sometimes during the softening of the nail, the iron escapes, causing harm to the vessel, and many times this occurs so that there is no need for further treatment.
In the softening which is done with force on all parts of the sinew, I have found the effectiveness of the experiment, as the forces cut precisely both above and below.
For when you press your hand, cut equally in all directions with the grain; but ensure that the fibers are properly separated near the skin. And make the first incision so that if a child feels it, he may think you are only tying the thread around his penis as much as necessary, and then allow him to move freely in any manner possible. Then the joint is straightened with your hands throughout, and it regains strength in your hands or below your feet so that children do not see them or any strain; then place your hand on the penis and blow or squeeze, guiding it up until the shoulder of the penis is aligned; then cleanse well from the filth assembled there; then tie the joint securely with a double thread; then bind below .i. loop to another loop; hold as two loops by the second bound at the pouchet and index finger, keeping between the two loops; carefully lift the foreskin and guide the head of the penis.
Then the joint is straightened with your hands throughout, and it regains strength in your hands or below your feet so that children do not see them or any strain; then place your hand on the penis and blow or squeeze, guiding it up until the shoulder of the penis is aligned; then cleanse well from the filth assembled there; then tie the joint securely with a double thread; then bind below .i. loop to another loop; hold as two loops by the second bound at the pouchet and index finger, keeping between the two loops; carefully lift the foreskin and guide the head of the penis. Then allow the blood to clot gradually, as it is a wound; and place powder on and over the powder with .i. rag glued from half of a cooked egg yolk tempered with pink water, mixed with fine rosemary oil boiled well and fresh, leaving it until the next day, and treating it with another cure until healed.
The form of cleansing is this: both sides should be held and sharpened, and the edges should be as large as a hazel rod equally.
The error of mummification is when the core inside flees to the incision; therefore, it must be stretched with your fingernail, so that the core makes an abscess; and cut evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then use pincers, and then cut.
And if they transgress for three days, and that which is below the rod is swollen, leave it until the abscess has subsided, and lightly scorch; cut as you may move, and protect the part of the rod, it will neither harm nor benefit.
Therefore treat the sudden wound of powder, as we have said or written about powders, and if you cut beyond measure, and it goes to the top, it will not harm; treat accordingly, as we have said, until it is sound again.
Holding back of urine
The retention of urine is due to inflammation of stones, frozen blood, or arrows, or similar things that we have mentioned in the section.
And if the urine is not retained and you see that it is due to a stone or kidney stones near the bladwal, then let the patient be laid on their elbows; put their feet up on the back, and stretch out their belly from above the back, and restrain the sides of the bladder as much as they can. Then you constrain the neck of the bladcu to express the stone on top, which causes urine to flow freely.
the t c.
The manner of urine discharge is such that you take a double thread and tie it with a small piece of wool or cotton, then insert the head through the string inside the syringe. Trim any excess wool and insert it up to the top of the syringe; then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and have the patient sit on a seat, and inflate the bladder and penis with moist oil, olive oil, and water.
Then gently insert the syringe into the penis up to the base of the penis, then twist the penis towards the foreskin; then insert the syringe before reaching the bladebreak. Allow the patient to feel urination until it's completely emptied, as this is not done in this order due to the direction in which the conduit goes being twisted; then pull out the thread little by little and let urine follow the thread, and extract it.
And restart with the syringe as long as the bladder is emptied out, and make the patient sit upright.
of bladder diseases
When there are scrapes or blood enters the bladder, or rottenness is present, and you see that you must distill waters and medicines, make use of all the instrument called "clampsyr": it has this form.
It is closed and has three openings: two on one side, as you see fit; the upper part through which the medicine will be poured sufficiently to soak the penis without addition, allowing for urine drainage when necessary.
.
And this is the form of the subtle suppository used to cleanse the bladder: it goes thus:
And it is made of silver or horn, and the head is higher; from one breast, the ligaments tear. Then take a sheep bladder and place in it the liquid to be used for cleansing the bladder, then bind together with two strong threads, warming some of the moisture over fire. Then insert the tip of the suppository into the penis, then quickly hold your hand on the bladader as soon as the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
And if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle, then roundly perforate it; then insert a strong thread through these holes, assemble the circle as one assembles a net, and put in there what you wish with oil, moisture, and water, and tie it up using an instrument. And do so as you did with the bladder, squeezing your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
From the stone
We have previously discussed in the division the methods of stone extraction and accompanying medicines; and we described the difference between stones caused by rain, and all other signs, and where one must work to cut into a stone; and regarding the bladder, and the penis; and I will now tell you clearly and briefly.
I say that stones formed in the bladebody are more common in children and this is a sign that water leaks from the bladder like a stream of fine water; and there is often blood in urine, and men suffer with their penises, and they experience many spasms; and from such leakage, their foundations weaken; and it's easier for children to heal until they are four years old, but severe in the elderly, and moderate in those who are between youth and old age; and treatment is easier for those with large stones than for those with small ones.
And when we come to the treatment, it is proper first to purify the patient by enema, in order to evacuate all feces from the intestines. For often there may be an obstruction due to stones.
Then take the patient by the arms and make them stand and move slightly backwards, so that the stone descends to the front of the bladpressure; sometimes it emerges from above. Then let the person sit between your hands properly arranged, with their hands below their thighs, so that the bladder is fully inclined forward; then grasp and touch within.
If you feel the stone in place, hasten to grasp it with your right hand's thumb and index finger dipped in oil. And if it does not come out completely on touching all around, moisten your left index finger with oil; or your middle finger, if the patient is a youth; and grip the foundation of the stone, grasp the stone, and when you feel it at your thumb, move it to the neck of the bladder; then press above your thumb, and push the stone out where you see fit.
And instruct the minister to press the bladder into his hand, and tell him to extend with his right hand the joints upward, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the joint where the cutting occurs; then he inserts the cauterizing spatula, which gives it its form.
And make between the joints and the foundation, not through but to the side of the left thigh; then be straight above the stone, with both legs together or apart at the base, so that the incision is wide below for adequate removal, and inside narrow, depending on the quantity of the stone, not too large.
be if you and sed de songe too. Hold e t, f:
Make the celi greater where there are angles and edges; and if it does not move, then you must stretch above using pincers that resemble a file at the top to pull out the stone so it doesn't slip away; or place it under the delicate instrument curved at the head; and if you cannot maneuver it this way, enlarge slightly the opening, and if the stone is protruding, strain with vitriol.
And if there are more stones, first remove the largest from the bladder neck, then cut down, then crush it further, and do the smaller ones afterward if there are any. If they are very large, let them be softer, and make a larger wound. For two things happen to the patient: death or urine coming in through the hole where the bladeroids cannot close; but nonetheless strive for traction or grinding with pincers until you crush it into pieces.
And after completing your work, apply incense and aloe oil to the wound along with dragon's blood, strain it, and place a cloth soaked in oil and wine or oil and rose water and cold water over it to cool down the abscess; then restrain the patient on his back until the third day.
And when you reset it, the joint rises quite well into place with oil and water, then heal with diaphinic unguent and basilic unguent until it is healthy again.
And if an abscess arises in the wound and ulcers, and blood congeals in the bladder, causing urine retention, which is known to be without heat with the urine: thus insert your finger into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, the bladeback will corrode, and the peritoneum.
then cleanse the wound of water and herbs and honey, and heal in all ways you can, until it is healthy again; and it is necessary that for all wounds you cure, tie both thighs with a bandage, and apply medicines at the site.
If the stone is small and it leads from the groin, firmly lodged inside, and urine cannot pass; for the treatment as I have described before, you must widen the passage many times with this procedure. I have seen such cases thus.
Take an iron stake according to this form and make it at three pointed ends in one piece:
Then take a thread and wrap it around the groin below the stone, so that it cannot come back into the bladeboard; then insert the stake gently into the groin until it reaches the stone; and turn the stake slowly in your hand within the stone bit by bit, as you are able to pierce through the other side of the stone; urine will come out soon after, then press your hand against what remains lodged in the groin inside the stone. It is immediately broken apart, and it flies away with the urine, and the patient is relieved;
If you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, take one fil from below the wound and another above, then make a rod at the spot between the two bindings, then pull out the binding forcefully, and loosen the ligature, cleanse the congealed blood in the wound; and treat it until it is healed.
From women's wounds
It often happens that the wound is inflicted in women, and if it occurs once, then it is a serious treatment; there are three reasons: one is that perhaps the woman may be a virgin; and the second reason is that we cannot find a skilled female who can undress before mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
And the third way is that sometimes it may not be possible to find a woman skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stone from the woman's side is more dense than the man's stone, so deeper incision must be made, which requires great caution.
And if you need to do this procedure, it is necessary that you find a skilled midwife and inform them promptly, and if you cannot find one, seek no other but an experienced wise woman in women's health or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to carry out what you instruct regarding the investigation of the stone.
and examine thoroughly if the woman is a virgin: then she should insert her finger or vaginal opening to search for the stone; and if she finds it, she must constrain it from its place, and advise her to insert her finger or that of the sick person's left hand onto the bladder directly.
If it is dislocated, one must gradually move it from the entrance of the bladder to below, until it reaches the root of the thigh; then cut on the stone at the root of the thigh against the inner knee where it becomes entangled, and feel for the stone in that area; do not move its knee above or below the stone, and let the skin be closed after a small incision.
Then insert the needle into the thigh; if you feel the stone, continue to make an incision until the stone can come out freely, and know that stones have many forms: they are small or large, sharp or dull, smooth or rough, long or round, with veins. Understand these forms for knowing their nature.
And if the stone does not move, apply warm vinegar paste, and keep it on for an hour until it loosens; then return to your work, as long as the stone can be moved, and have the dressings that I told you about in the extraction of stones at home to help you in your work.
If the blood does not subside, and it is from an artery that has been severed, then apply powder to the area and compress with bandages and tapes, without restarting this, leave the wound alone unless the patient dies, then treat the wound.
And when the heat of the blood is appeased and the swelling subsides, return to your procedure until the wound is healed.
For inguinal hernia.
Assembling of water is nothing but moisture or white scum, which is below the root of the veins, contained in the urethra; and it is called "syphilis," and not once properly within the lining of the urethra when one thinks it may be another object; and it is the leather of the vessel between the white syphilis that we have mentioned; and they do not occur without cause.
And the origin of this scum is weakness in the vessels, and it spreads that substance.
And many times it comes without coloring: or red, and this is blackish, or it is yellow.
These are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is white and foul as we have said, then the abscesses are small, i.e., short like an egg's shape, and do not open up on their own, because they are entirely moisturized.
And if it is moist in its own fabric, then the abscesses are small with part of a vein, and for this reason one thinks they are another egg.
And if the moisture is between the skin of the veins and the white flesh, it smells quite well; therefore when you see to know the color of the moisture, you try on all sides of the enclosed area, so as to discern its form from before. According to what comes after the intermission, judge by what is within.
According to what comes after the intermission, judge by what is within. And when we cure by iron, it is fitting that the patient be made well as much as possible and their body nourished; then they lie on their back under a slightly raised object, with much cloth placed above them.
then they lie on their left side, and command the assistant to sit to their right, extending the rod to one of the two ribs near the heart's hinges;
the t
Then pierce the sac clean with water through one large opening and extract all the fluid, and then apply linen bandages, and extend the sac upward; do not touch the heart of the veins, but only the sac itself. Carefully cut or in pieces as needed along its thin edge, so that if you don't cut it skillfully, the fluid will return.
And if the vein springs forth during your work, when you have completed the treatment of the sac, then unite the two sides of the heart with stitches, and heal it as other wounds until it is healthy.
And if you find the vein affected by another disease, it is necessary to tie up the vessels that are dilated, suspecting blood discharge; then cut the vein throughout its entirety, and extract the vein, and heal it as we have said.
Et quand il est assemblé en deux parties ensemble, reconnaissez que ce sont deux branches; coupez l’autre partie de même manière que vous avez fait pour la première, puis évacuez le sang, et mettez dans la plaie un linge mouillé avec huile.
and place another clean cloth soaked in wine and oil upon it, and put bandages on both sides, and cover with doubled sheets, securing them across the entire binding as per this method.
Then take two sheets and place pieces of rags torn into strips according to this pattern and sew them together at the waistband, with one end reaching from the groin up to the back, and the other towards the base. Take another pair on both hands, and secure all parts together in a loop around the lower garment.
and never is this branch of medicine a fire cautery for cutting iron rods, and you shall take .i. fine caustic pencil, and cut the leather straps, and soak them as we have said, that the white sack containing water may be uncovered;
if you take the caustic according to this method and puncture that white sack near the veins, and apply it with hot fine caustic.
And the bandaging in all ways that you can, until everything is covered; and ensure that the fire does not touch the oil; and know that this work is more healing; and take care to prevent bleeding out and injuries from cutting.
If anything opposes you, or an abscess forms or bleeding occurs or any other thing, then treat the issue that goes against you, according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is afraid and does not wish to wait for this procedure due to its horribleness, then make a perforation as I have instructed you; and it is when you are well certain by the meanings that we have said earlier that healing occurs.
If the patient sits on his raised seat; then pierce the abscess below all of the surrounding tissue lengthwise, and place the incision along the long body; and make the orifices wide enough that all fluid runs freely.
Then place cotton on the wound, bind it, and allow for healing of any remaining moisture, then treat until the wound is healed.
And if the cloth does not allow moisture to escape from the wound's opening, it is necessary to insert a pen or tool used for treating dropsy as mentioned before; and slightly enlarge the wound so that the moisture returns, coming together after 4-5 months, and once assembled again, thus will pass the patient'angs.
For abscesses caused by gonorrhea (presumably a mistranslation of 'des coions', which could mean 'of the lepers' or something similar)
In this part of the treatise on dislocations are various postures to be feared by many;
and I shall tell you about the workings and appearances of an abscess;
And at this matter much oft in order to apply and is herein it comes li pois ence; of the blood and pains that of aillements are often applied on wrye healing, sme semble le pouvre et les meurres pour la mourde que and the plustarments.
It is known by excess of bitter and water-like substance, which spreads to joints or from impact;
The color of the abscess follows the color of the body's core; and there is no pain, and it is a severe abscess.
And sometimes it may be a fearsome and sharp-piercing abscess, with fox-colored discharge, without any blood or vein swelling coming from us.
When it is through our artery, it is recognized by the heat of the abscess when pressed with one's hands. the good understandt.
He who is affected by vein inflammation is known by his tendency to react when touched on the joints.
and may often swell up in this manner or other parts of the body. and you must cut out the core of the gallbladnack; then stretch it upwards, extracting the white filament attached to it, and releasing all ligatures around the duct.
ke la moremplet: in the t d, and so f as. Theophropches byrte le mort.
If it is inflamed in the thigh or within the vessels, one must release all that is held, and wrap roundly.
And if the birth of a hernia is where it is located behind, one must cut it all out and remove the intestine, as we have said.
And when your works are completed, apply the wound with cloth soaked in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other remedies until healed.
For abscesses of pus
This is an abscess wrapped in a covering resembling a lump, with the softening of the tissues. and it moves abruptly when touched by the patient.
and the treatment of this disease is as fearsome as the one mentioned before.
And thus we shall tell you about it, according to what the ancients did.
It is necessary that you have the patient sit on a raised seat, then apply the supportive sling around their shoulders and arms. Apply it to all parts of the vessel that are close to the rod, and tie up the masters, and stretch them out straight.
Then cut with a sharp scalpel over the entire area of vessels, until they are fully exposed.
byn::t t (1. I hope line ; if tot the s so croste ben.
Then insert a needle where there is one with a double thread, and attach it at the first place where the vein appeared, and securely fasten to the opposite end. Then wrap a bandage tightly straight across, according to the length of the body, targeting the corrupted sores.
Then treat the wound as with other burns, ensuring that neither of the tendons are damaged.
by and: If the bone loses its support due to the incision of vessels, it dries up and cannot heal itself.
On the treatment of wounds on the skin The treatment of this condition involves the incision where there is swelling or extension over the belly in the forearm region, causing the intestines to descend from that wound into one of the sides.
c. And the bobile; uch; but they I; the  a not so. The same as v.
When the signs indicate an extension of a spasm or swelling, it occurs gradually over long periods, and does not come suddenly. And it is equal boils up to near the origin, because the sack hastens the intestines.
And the signs are when it is of cutting the sack, which brings sudden pain at the beginning, and diverse boils appear from under the skin, due to the exit of the intestines and the body's response to the sack.
And no time do the windings with the intestines occur and are retained inside, causing great pain for the patient, especially when they are pressed.
And in these treatments with iron by fear, it is necessary to flee from them.
And the manner of treating it is to instruct the patient that you guide the intestines back into place with their hand through the wound if possible. Then be sober about their neck between your hands, and lift the buttocks.
Then elevate the key above, and cover all the skin of the joints along. Then insert into the groins of the loin hooks according to what you need to open the wound and they are such that the bones can protrude.
Here come cez les autres eus toques sont they puits then as c ondes are the ose ist beards les cares d’elles sois, est la oui lons tu.
Then insert your index finger where it suits the joint, between the white flesh which is below the skin of the elbow and between the second sinew.
and move that which is behind the elbow, and between the second sinew; then flex your right hand into the joint's cavity, extend the white flesh upwards to your left hand, and lift the elbow with all the sinews towards the belly. and command the assistant that he extends the elbow upwards, and releases what is behind the ligament.
And if there is any entangled intestine or hard scrofulous swelling at the joints of his two hands, and if you find anything like that, cut it from below towards the belly.
Then take a needle with a thick thread made of nine strands, and cut into the hard swelling at its rear part, which is after the hoof's leather; near the waist, then remove any hairs that appear in lines until you have four strands. Then join them one on top of the other in a cross-shape and bind the swelling, which is as we have said after the hoof's leather, with two strong ties from both sides; First wrap the heads of the children with two bands so that none of the animals feeding them can enter inside without a boil forming. And place the ligature according to the first band, two fingers in length from it, and after these two bands leave a piece of sacking that is half an inch below the corner of the bone.
Then place the other according to the roundness that the eye carries; then cut into the part below the skin of the joints so it does not move freely, and the bow, as we have said before.
Then treat with fine linen soaked in oil, and apply to wounds, and there treat the ligament as we have said. And do not cauterize white feces that we have mentioned, after the incision, due to fear of blood loss.
For this happens often, and leave the ligament until it heals by itself; and if it takes too long to heal, then be elevated with warm water, and do as we have said, until it heals.

Of inguinal hernia, a fleshly swelling.
In this chapter I have never seen anyone dare to perform the treatment with iron.
And the ancients said it is done as if the chapter were like a screw assembled with the eyelet, in such a way that you fasten the threads after the edge slightly above below.
on: the text iciés et it is not w.
At no time do the stones come loose, as we have said, and open the eyes; and none of the internal organs are torn apart at the joints, and if they are, it is slight, and everything returns within hours.
And in any case, if it remains too long at this point, believes the wound or hernia until the intestines protrude.
And this occurs by the extension due to the hernia which is within the stones, as we have said, because it is extended, then softened and swollen are the eyes and open.
And the treatment is by cautery as we have previously said; and it is treated with iron in this manner:
And the patient lies on their back between your hands, then clip the swollen area of the ulcer as wide as three fist-widths.
And then extract the sore which is above the skin that follows it, and take the thread and place it under the visible part of the sore.

Then remove the head of the sinew, and do not cover it with a sack nor extend any skin or other thing, as I have shown to you in the treatment of internal intestine inflammation.
Then heal it with the treatment for wounds. And when you bandage the wound, if there is swelling and you treat the wound, until it is healed.
The sack is constricted, and it has no appearance in the healing process, and the cautery is more effective at this place, and closer to health.
From softening of the skin around the joints
Many times the skin around the joints is softened in certain individuals because the tissues within are moistened, and the sweat is visible; when one wants to treat it, they make the patient lie on their back, and cut the overgrown skin above the natural skin; then join the two edges with a single stitch, and if you see any excess softened skin, do so at three or four firmly placed stitches; next sew between the stitches like other wounds until it is healthy again, and let it heal.
From hardening of the tissues around the joints
Dislocations are described in our law and because I prefer not to discuss them in this book, it is only necessary for two reasons: one so that the master responds when asked about dislocation and its treatment, and the other because we often need animal branding to aid us, such as with goats, sheep, deer, and other animals. Thus, I say that treatments are done in two ways: by attraction or by incision. In the method where we perform it through attraction, make the animal sit in hot water until their joints become soft and pliable; then press with your hand until they are reset and you no longer feel them.
Hermaphroditism is a condition involving both male and female reproductive organs.
The condition where the menstruation of the luex 23. L’ajutoit les sages. En ce est .ijsie. Descoits de la tires à plusur, et li a cuis un ego; et des coi, si poies.
Of displacement
Displacement is a protrusion from the natural part, so much that it's unpleasant to look at; and many women consider it as large as an arm, and that is the remedy. It is necessary for you to remove the excess of displacement with your hand or fingers gently; and do not press too deeply, lest bleeding occurs, then treat again until healed; and another protrusion from the mouth of a bone, and its cavity, and perhaps it may leap out forcefully, resembling a cow's udder. Therefore, they called this "the ancient disease kowee". If necessary to remove it as we have said about displacement, and treat until healed.
Erratic is the movement of an object or individual that does not follow a fixed or regular course; often unpredictable in behavior or direction.
If it is erratic because the nature of women's body is not pierced or their earlobs are small; and it is innate by birth, or occurs by disease due to malnutrution when it comes about; or it's caused by a charm, or by subtle syphilis or worms, and originates in the marrow, or ribs, or shoulders, or wherever; and prevents conception, pregnancy, and possibly bearing children; and recognizing this is done through observation of behavior. If the swelling appears imminent, it may be on both ears or behind. If it's subtle syphilis, and it occurs in two spots, seek haste, and follow these steps: place the woman on her back with spread legs; then extend the two fingers fully, until the syphilitic worm is removed, and overlays the swelling; then take flaxen linen soaked in oil, and apply it to the area daily until healed. And if the syphilis is hardened and persistent, one must use a foley catheter resembling a spruce leaf. If the swelling is due to a charm, suspend an onion on a string at the site; then have antiseptic medicines like dragon's blood, incense, abundantly mixed with olive oil; then prepare a wide gauze bandage so that the wound cannot close over; and keep it in place for an extended period, and also apply a linen tent drying method; then treat with other cures until healed. And when charm swelling occurs on the ribs, it must be treated according to this manner, unless it's a hardened abscess. Because at hardened abscesses that occur in the marrow, one should not touch with iron.
For hemorrhoids: One should apply creams or ointments containing ingredients like witch hazel and hydrocortisone to reduce inflamm<|im_sep|>Here is the translation of the text:
Piles are incipient veins which without usual habituation become swollen; and we have previously discussed their kinds, signs, and symptoms, and now I will say those that receive treatment. I state that piles and the lump when they are entirely in the marrow cavity do not appear upon touching, only they can be cured by iron. Those at the mouth of the marrow cavity can be touched, those that can be treated. Therefore it is necessary to place the woman in a cold house, then extend the swelling with tongs, and apply a bandage near its roots; then powder with medicines restraining blood, such as dragon's blood and incense, among other things; then pour its juices into cloth for an hour, then place it in very cold water. If there is bleeding from the area, make her sit in a decoction of sumac bark and pomegebo tree peel with gallnuts and similar substances, then take barley flour, confit it with honey and oil, and apply a poultice to her back. And if she is not improved, well; if not, apply blisters on the back and near the armpits without iron; then take linen cloth, and milk or elder juice mixed with old wine, and apply them there. And when the abscess has rested, treat it with ointment until healed; and those called "albathir" are red, and similar to a rough area, so cover as previously described for lumps; then cure until healthy.
Marrubias abscesses
. Thes cestiernt isll’s c;flece:sit tzelescaste qure tous
During childbirth
The first thing in childbirth is that the midwife must know the figure of natural birth and its signs, and when you see a woman hasten to give birth and desire to smell her: then quickly expect the baby to be born; therefore, if you see these signs, it's necessary to gently press her belly so that the baby is soon born; because as they descend on their head, they come with them, and the feces of superfluities are removed by good mundification; but those who come otherwise do not come naturally. Sometimes they come under their feet, or they come to the body or the neck, and hands that come under her belly, or sovereigns, and can be turned accidentally over her collarbone, in other malicious ways. It is necessary at childbirth that she be wise and subtle in these matters, and avoid errors and deceits; I will show you all the figures as to how one must assist them.
If the baby comes naturally with its head and the mother gives birth gratefully, and the strength of her is weak, then she should sit on a stool or women hold her; and let the natural ointment of oil or fenugreek be cooked and then apply it to the midwife between his two fingers: this is how you shape (the poultice). Et fend la secondine, and cut the sling as long as the moisture that is now coming forward; and press the woman's belly until childbirth descends, and if it does not descend, then you must enema the woman with a mixture of muscatel herbs and fenugreek oil; then let her rest and induce coughing for an hour: now extract the child.
From the release of the child on its feet When the child is born onto its feet, it must be lifted upwards. And then turn it slightly and slightly more until they are equal;
Then prick one of the pieces gently and extend slightly.
If it does not work as commanded to puncture, then do not blow on its condition; If it falls out again, if God wills so.
And if it does not fall as we have said, if turned slightly and slightly, until according to the natural shape. For then it is gently.
: And apply to the nature of a woman within, this ointment. Then let her sit in cold water until below the ribs.
And when she is milky underneath, give her a glass of myrrh, and place it there, leaving it for an hour. Then the child is made to sit on a chair, then they are induced to sneeze and their mouth and nose are held, and the priest touches their belly gently, as the baby moves now. From the dislocation of the child's knees When the child comes to this condition, the bailiff places his hands gently and gradually.
that le plus et la dur: It requires devising a method to return the hand. If it cannot be brought back, lift the woman and go away;
If she cannot walk, lay her on a bed with legs bent at the knee;
iciens, and so itt.
If it does not give birth, make her sit on a chair, then carefully attempt to realign the hand. And wrap the child according to its natural form, make it sneeze, and command that it cough until it expels what has been ingested forcefully.
From the child's neck, and let its hands spread apart, and turn its face towards its mother'cuest. It is necessary for the barber to wash his hands, then turn them slightly and rub lightly.
And when they are even, apply the resinous and oily substance as we have said, then instruct it to move slightly.
And after you have done this, if the wound sits on a seat, and command that it be pricked; then let the patient sneeze. In this same manner, give them all a second dose
In this same manner, give them all a second dose When it comes in this manner for everyone's second dosage, drain the second dosage to your fingertip until all moisture is drained.
and if the child lies on his face with his head raised, then drain from his forehead and neck without holding it back, allowing the child to move freely.
by e p; TB dont mon cher et m, and they le t ougttor;
From the issue of joints It is known that many times multiple gemelz occur, but never four at once; and this is not a strange occurrence, and rarely happens. by.
I know this, which when multiplied, are released by their scrotum who seizes them, attached to the bull.
and never naturally come out as do all underneath, as we have said.
And if they come out suddenly, and the care as we have said, then let a skilled physician be involved, who makes it quickly and lightly as needed. And make as when it may move toward health. And many children
And many children :
It is necessary for the barber to know all this, as sometimes similar things happen. He should proceed according to what is appropriate.
of a child dead
When you treat a woman with a dead child or womb as I have described in the section, and she does not bleed, and you are compelled to work by hand. until they too that pas;
If it is necessary for the woman to lie on her back with her chin lowered and legs raised.
And you should bind the twins from two parts so that they remain attached to the bed, ensuring not to separate them prematurely during childbirth.
Then rub the womb's mouth with oil mixed with almond meal and fenugreek seeds, then apply these oils and meals to her hands. d:; s m.
And take care if the child is reared so that it descends on its head. If there are knots in the ears or neck or mouth or under the palate or from the beard or near the throat or by the sides of the chest.
Or sois the sides and tiens the l'o oreth on his side a to les peorside on the cheveux est le be it is de l’ou en son diee ou esprend, sus you make an diez he li.
And it is necessary to tie the sling with his right hand, and place the yoke between his thumbs of the left hand, and he pushes gently with all his hand, inserting the sling in any of those ways we have mentioned, until it reaches its proper position.
Then place it against another sling or if you have need for extraction, so that they are equal in length;
And then stretch evenly by moving both parts, so they can be moved outward, and have the pegs inserted to hold them in place, as shown here.
And if a part remains stuck, then grease some of its ends with oil, and push it into that part, and treat the other part.
And if none remains stuck, then place this peg or another higher up, and do so until it comes out completely straight.
les lesi'ssire; est le cta, with the m gramizl on tr. They are so fat L's the  (tides. And then and there.mother their. If it becomes necessary, wrap around a cloth so that it covers entirely.
, and s�ll. In thise cefort: ca et e the qu'sgration; 20* (t :
If the child's head is large and difficult to deliver during birth, or if it has its forehead pressed together. And when this occurs, you must push the spatula-like spine between your two hands and guide the head out while extracting the mold. or you use an instrument called "almidach," from which the shape comes with tools or charms that follow this one.
cannot igne; it s; And then treat with tongs the bones to be extracted,
And if the head springs back and is held with forceps, so that it be split until the dislocations caused by moisture are released.
Then release, as long as they come li estraie qui les moiture and in a long and even isse en l'iss. Et li poinz à be at which are well and it even the cautere ou quiterousque le pelez saufet on. êtes et puis;
If it is swoln at the belly or below the ribs, one must pierce until the moisture runs out.
If the child is under its feet, then the pull is light, and the direction towards the mouth of the worms is easy.
And if it is strained on the belly or the breast, you must stretch it with a cloth wrapped around by hand; And if it causes discomfort in the belly or breast, until the swellings within are healed;
And if another limb is aching, and the head remains stuck, If the sailor cuts his hand at the base of the thorn bush, and draws it up to the mouth of the thorn bush. Then he applies some lime or two, and bandages it tightly.
s cue ou;k; Then it is necessary to administer wet and fatty substances; And for healing the wounds, one uses clear soothing and moistening ointments.
And if a child is on their belly, you can lay them as we have described for a living child.
And if one cannot do so, they may cut it in pieces, leaving nothing of the secondary tissue.
When you have accomplished this, if there are any abscesses as we have said coming to the bone, then
and if bleeding occurs, it should be stopped by applying a tight bandage, followed by other treatments.
And I saw a woman with a child in her womb that had died, then closed up one of the twins and brought out another dead one; this was the other live child. s;
I was called to treatment, and for a long time I thought, but could not heal the wound.
Underneath my strong suction came out a bone, and after some days another one. I felt very much pain because the belly has no bones.
to se a; and lesse ld be on the time, and so as wee de la.
To treat the wound, and strike hand bones until the woman is at a better stage. And the woman waited thusly for a long time until it settled back into place slightly.
And are so that du not the stone osse: ne ble s's to be well dextap;t les ondus movement cest fie ise in or; and li boine the wound it bone est, et reu quis: heu que bo :
To return the head of the bone to its original position
After this comes the form of pressure, to which one may refer books; and at two ends there are two heads of two ligaments. Anyhow, the horns should be more subtle with a restraint, and made from smooth or boxwood.
And let the mouth of the club be two thumbs wide, and the margin of trees one hand's breadth, and long half a palm. And between the two joints be two hinge placements of the same club, which are firmly fastened in both, half a palm long or slightly more.
And these two hinge placements are fixed to the mouth of the mallet to open when one turns both horns.
Another form, more subtle and lighter in its likeness to pincers, may be crafted from ebony wood or boxwood as per the design of pincers. and it has two heads and jaws, just as you see, one handspan long, and two thumbs wide;
And when you see the entire instrument opened wide, make sure the woman sits on a bed with her feet and legs exposed. Then apply the two supports together at the shoulder, holding the head of the instrument between its thighs. Then work with your hand on the entire instrument in the same manner as you did with pincers evenly, according to the quantity needed to open the mouth of the shoulder so that it does what it wants.
This instrument is all similar but has various appearances; and the more masters you have prepared them, the faster the work will be done, and higher for their quantity.
If you do not forget to prepare the instrument which is necessary for its use, as their needs are not excusable.
When the secondine is held during childbirth, it requires that you command the patient to tighten her vagina, and then make her sneeze with a condition, and restrain your hands at her mouth and nose. of de la bouquette les mains lesme l'est riette les plues d’herent; si tu esplein li la oumant. Li reine mots et on ne quitte the ise, qui que est herde. And it at.
If not, take a small pot and make a lid or cover, and place herbs that can open the mouth of the abscess such as calamondin, rue, anise, chamomile, arnica, and caraway.
All these herbs or none of them should be boiled or cooked in water over the fire; then place a rag or cover on one side of the pot, and the other end into the abscess's mouth.
And keep it there until the vapors come out of the abscess; then make it sneeze, as we have said. If the second rib dislocates, promptly set it right. And if it persists after this treatment and does not improve, the nurse is commanded to have the patient rub their left hand with oil of sage or camphor paste, then wash it off naturally.
and if there is pain in the shoulder again; then gently stretch it gradually, ensuring that the muscles do not contract during extension. But it must be moved gently to the right and left, and then pulled; it will come loose and relocate itself.
And if the mouth of the gallbladeback is strained or extended, we have said the remedy is to induce sneezing and inhaling smoke from herbs.
and if it does not respond to all that we have said, then be careful not to attempt the extraction;
line is in. If you give c said f theta C:
If you probe it and reset it, it will return forcefully; however, if a bad smell comes from the stomach and head when probing too deeply, it weakens the patient.
If necessary, then fragrant smoke baths should be used here: none of the ancient ones have tried smoking with dried sorrel and figs.
The form of the instrument used to smoke the woman for retention of locks (pubic hair) is this one:
by; butto. The final. ánt. The initial; and es the t
And perform the smoke treatment over the charcoals until it is consumed, then begin again with another.
And of piercing the foundations.
To c tissung and te charcoif it not s li fudfue de ou les venter of ecrit as and must be healing the donee it's. ould in such that you le fonde, do so l’oilpainte le wound to lourelie avi. If it is necessary to bandage him, ensure the gauze pierces at its proper place and not of straw-like texture, and secure the dressing so that it does not touch.
Then apply a linen cloth in wine and oil, then the healing of unguents until it is cleaned.
And if you doubt that it does not heal, then apply a bandage with boiled linen and let it remain on for days, and remove when the child wants to go to bed.
the t.
Of the fistula from the base foundation Fistulas that arise from beneath the base are inflamed and grow as they come near to the foundation below or within a span of two parts.
if there is one fistula or more; and when the inflammation of that fistula is old, work it, and apply moist pus or subtle bandages.
the they.
And if to the fistulas that perforate up to the bladder, and up to the shaft of the penis; and they reach the joint of the thigh, and our side of the knee.
And thus is found a persistent fistula at its base, and not healing. And you must insert your index finger or base and then thread a fine needle of willow or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
If there is twistedness, and it inserts a subtle plug of wax or a horsehair, so that you feel the plug or hair where it should be;
And if you do not sense anything, nor does purgation or winds occur as we have said. Wash them so they are not torn; if you hurry, use a poultice.
And when the fistula reaches up to the bladder or the urethra, if it leaks urine and cannot be treated with remedies.
If it is pierced up to the hip joint, then pus flows into the abdomen; he did so f. That yous, and ougnement the c.
In these persistent fistulas there is no certain cure other than effort, and the foolish pride of those who intervene in them.
In those that are neither persistent nor old, with hope for healing through iron as I have tried.
: is are not and desu: Then apply a tent of flax or linen if there is twistedness, until you know where the tent comes from.
If the patient feels pain around the base, it is necessary to apply your index finger there.
always feel that the tent is pierced; and beware or you sense between your finger the vein or artery, then know that they are present. que de unt the in ;
On can do everything to properly treat someone, but it happens rarely.
and the aid that is provided to them, which is carefully applying the fire cautery according to the size of the fistula as previously described. and the fire burns all over the fistula until it reaches near the base; then do this two or three times as long as you know that the charred parts have been burnt off, which appear like the feathers of a bird.
And then treat with bandages soaked in oil until the swelling subsides, then apply ointment to both and bind them together.
If it is thus healed, that's good. Since this cannot be otherwise healed;
and if the tendon is affected, and does not pierce to its full length which extends or lies at the base, and between your thumbs and bandage place an thick covering of wax or syrup, and you see the fistula through what covers the area with a color indicating infection. the emde: (1 not par benga; irm certaine tre que bon; d.
And it will be freed from the stiffness, and will grow; then mold those crooked joints that resemble a bird's feather, and leave none remaining.
And if the limb remains weakened, causing tension between you and your work; caution with fire or medicinal poultices.
For the fire cautery gathers two things: that is to say, the hardening of these agitated joints, and the coagulation of blood and prevention of moisture.
s; (1 2 so the s sile as much and there*bon.
Then treat the wound with heated resin for a few days, and they are drying medications.
Because when it is restored, it is cleaned and does not return.
And if a fistula comes up to the base of the foundation, and is pushed away from the body, feel your knee or foot, and check this.
s. çt; 1; That la c, to the quill as t le tat is an; it; The mains (don’s Clavist by anye oculessus they p� igne; but if not followed.
When you cauterize it as we have said, or pare to the bone, or if it shows signs of infection, treat accordingly as first.
And do not go too deep, so you do not cut the structure that supports the foundation, and let excretions come through as they will. Then treat it, as we have said;
Then treat it, as we have said; first. Then make the defective cartilage which is in the wound, as much as you can.
Then examine to restore the wound, and hold the fistula in the area above the base: if it is a light thing malicious.
And on no occasion are there running sores as follows: and when you strike the tent in the fistula, and it is near the foundation below the leather above. if one takes a pierced tent as follows: And he inserts a twisted thread at the ends, and then he puts the tent throughout the entire thread in the fistula up to the top.
treatment. The following?
And train the head with wire, and bring together both heads as one, and hold them tightly against each other, and leave for one or two days.
And keep the strain unfastened at no time until the wires cut through the bones that lie between them and break.
Then treat the wound until it is healed and cleansed.
If the abscess does not break open, make it punctured in all ways that you know how, if it is not too deep.
For it does not require for the lancet to be inserted if too deep, and then treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
The shape of the spatulum used for making an abscess is very sharp and pointed; the t the ben with:
Boils are in two ways: either they lie deep within the foundation like resin granules, and there are small and large ones, along with pus. and there is one or more of them that lie deep within the foundation and near the top of the foundation. However, those that are deeper have little moisture,
by a sofck: This:
And the treatment for those who have them within the foundation requires that you instruct the patient to strain themselves in order to urinate into chambers until their foundations are firm and cracks appear. If you hurry, and if it is attached with tongs, or held to your fingernail, then cut it at its roots.
And if the nails cannot be held due to their length, then take them with a cloth or thread or a piece of camlet. And extract your toes, then wrap them up, and powder with hot ashes that are in place of fire cautery. Or you shall cauterize as the chapter on fire cautery says, then treat with other remedebut until they are healed.
And if the foundation cannot be expelled, then you should administer an enema with pungent and bitter substances to cleanse what is at the base, allowing it to exit openly.
When patients touch themselves, and if their hairs are strongly rooted at the foundation, then the cure is easy. And that you pluck them with your fingernails or pliers, clip the ends, then treat as we have said, until they are clean and he fears a cut by iron.
If it is necessary to stitch according to this manner: take a twisted thread and thread it onto a needle, then draw the thread from below and pierce the other end of the needle, and turn both ends of the thread around the eye of the needle. t.
Then place on the foundation a soft cloth soaked in oil or wax, and put it over the area, and instruct the patient to rest.
And then let it remain until he sweats, and when they are done shedding, treat with ointments or other remedies until he is well again.
In the same manner as the base layer Many times it happens that fistulas occur in the intestines, and due to natural constriction, and when the illness is old and medication does not help.
If it is necessary for you to reset at the tip of a splinter or under your fingernail with its covering which does not allow for moisture. then heal until it becomes solid as it should be.
byt: the t and bon: Then treat until it becomes well again.
The tremor A flea is a small creature that appears on the body and moves mostly around.
At no time does it find relief from cold, and the pain spreads to him just like death by convulsions, affecting his entire body, more in his hands than elsewhere.
And the treatment is to take a quill from a goose feather or a strong vulture feather and place that quill on the convulsion until it fully covers the area. Then turn your hand to encompass the quill completely around the convulsion and press it firmly, uprooting the convulsion from its source.
And if you see it, make a sling of wool or iron according to this form, and be subtle from below and pull gently from above.
as have ase las prises et and moste leu the pointte le plus les conseme tre les points et s'st:
of the form of the suppository Never made is a suppository of silver or brass, or melted lead or wax; and never made are these small and large extracts according to those who have prepared them.
Therefore in the treatment of children who are weak and suffering, they make small suppositories.
The form of the suppository is small or large depending on its width; where the belly is tied following this manner:
And if there is a displacement or the belly is tied up, as you see, and the head is pierced through; at one side two eye slits, and on the other side one.
c, ceux des est of these lie de, tu;
And between each pouch there is a need for space, then insert the thread through these pouches, a strong, twisted thread in ten or twelve turns, and form the belly as one would with a goat. And when the medicine is dense, if it has been pulled forward by a strong thread, then cleanse with an enema; and this is the circular form.
And let the medication not be too hot or too cold, and rub the head with an enema of oil or butter from a goat's udder, or similar substance, then apply it gently.
Then the physician places his hands together on it until fully warmed, then extract the enema, and elevate the patient's legs near the surface.
And if the physician wants to remove it, as much as he can; and if he sleeps all night uninterrupted, then greater help is achieved.
And if you administer the enema for a bowel complaint, and the physician hastens to remove it, then let him continue until he is well again.
m
And this is the form of the subtle suppository through which the bladder is restrained.
Wounds
do sockets they com:
I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to their sources or where the wounds are made, and for what purpose they are made.
The things by which wounds are made include piercing of stones, cutting with a sword or knife, or from lances, clubs, arrows, or similar objects.
or are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that bleeds from the neck, head, thighs, stomach, liver, and similar limbs.
And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, beginning with simple head wounds, for memory shall come in its place.
I say that when a simple head wound occurs and the bone is not broken, be careful if it's from falling stones or similar things, and the skin is entirely torn and the wound large. and if you suspect a hot abscess mildly: If the bandage is immediately made on the head mainly if blood comes from the wound, then make the bandage opposite to the affected area.
And instruct the patient to relieve themselves with wine and large meats.
And if he does not wish to fast, let his meat be reduced, and do not drink wine or dine on flesh.
And place a cloth over the wound, if an abscess comes forth, apply a cotton ball soaked in oil only, or in thickened wine.
: so and de the in.
If it has been moved by the arthritis, apply certain ointments until it is healed.
too m
If the wound is exposed to bone, and flat, and holds but barely at all with dressing; then treat the wound with medicines, and restore hard leather in its place. And instruct the patient to eat fatty meats, as tested with wheat cooked and eggs, among other things.
And if you find or suspect gangrene, and it does not reach the bone, then dress it fully, apply moist heat, and treat it.
If there is an artery in the wound or vein without a covering, and it cannot be tied off with medicine, then find the artery, and if you discover it to be dislocated, secure it with a thread. And if that does not help, then burn (cauterize) it.
And if these wounds are small and simple, then the treatment is easy: and it is that you put this powder which heals just as well as the salt has moved (dissolved) it.
And the manner of the powder is as follows: take incense one part; blood of dragon two parts; live coal three parts, and grind finely. And apply to the wound, and embed the form, until it heals well and reconnects with all its blood.
And then bind it securely, leaving no slippage if it doesn't swell; for the medicine is not removed until it has healed.
; that;
And if the wound has moved, especially while it is healing, do not apply this powder at all.
But apply soaked poultices or wheat flour mixed with water and honey until it cools. Then continue to treat other wounds as long as they are healing.
and sucht that s (prima ond do not can be pleust the w and t and they oint ecrit.
And I will tell you hereafter about fractures of the head.
Of the wound to the neck
If a wound comes or in the neck and it is straightforward, there is no difference between this and that of the head, but one finds veins or arteries in the neck being cut.
byet: And do not place anything cold on the wound, for the essence of the veins is cold, and their continuation with the brain, which is the highest body part.
But use the medicine soaked as if washed in gentle water, and mixed with rose oil, and boiled similarly in gentle water. And other bones of my body according to this method, and moistened unguents.
m il phsi: 1 t
When wounds are deep and filled with pus, puncture them or go lower.
And if the arrowhead is stuck and bleeding comes, expose it, remove it, and cauterization may be necessary.
And if the thorns of the throat are stuck or the cartilage is damaged, and the pathways are guarded, preventing flesh from passing through. If it enters through the opening of the throat, do not touch the throat but reset according to its natural shape. and then immediately straighten it, leaving it for some time, then treat with washed ointments until healed.
and if the wound has affected the bone, you should treat it; te prent en. Ift the mainly he does; And it has been dislocated and realigned;
And if the wound is fresh, apply the powder as I have instructed. and he of ys: ici ne tu l'a les pest le plage soi les morgue his purgatif to you for it all sontre la mercuryne est of love the same, et cures him de a li, prandres anfist. And I pray tell luys themesquat dure of your l'en, and le jus quid tu, si en son ce ou he with its
Of the wound caused by a lance or knife
If it is a wound from a lance or knife and the wound is deep, if you see pus forming in the wound causing the patient great pain: believe then that the wound is deadly.
If it is not deep and the wound is fresh with all its blood, do not apply powder in the first hour or tie herbs that stop the bleeding from flowing out. And it returns to the body, causing pain to the patient. but apply an attractive balm and bind it two times a day;
and if you do not have ointment, then place clean wool in the wound to absorb moisture.
de : If it does not come from spasm, nor a harmful shaking of the body or twisting with limbs. And when you see proper positioning of the bones, know that the wound is healed. Treat with tent and other remedies until it is healthy again;
If it cannot heal or work properly, then understand that there is an abscess; treat as one should.
And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision and it is straightforward, or worse elsewhere, treat as should be for that which lies before.
If it is large, bandage with cloths; if small, powdered, and if imbedded in bone with parts of the flesh torn off, treat accordingly for each wound, and remove any embedded fragments. f
And for other wounds on other limbs, there is the judgment just as we have said.
And rupture of the belly
The ruptures of the belly are large and medium, and small;
be lons et:
The stitch is more troublesome, and on no occasion does a small wound fare worse than a large one.
for it requires that the intestines be reset with force, if they are not done so gradually; because the intestines can swell quickly when they feel cold, thus becoming harder to manipulate.
the ou Farize man:
And know that the treatment of the abdomen follows four methods:
The first two common suturing techniques occur in the belly stitching,
and the suturing of other wounds on the body and two other specific types of sutures are common for other wounds;
de:
When a wound is small, and there is no entanglement of any intestine within it. And to reattach such things, this can be done in one of the two ways: or due to the small size of the wound, as we have mentioned, with it; f, to make theyd’s lesse :e d t, and so:
When it is cold, warm it with a certain method: And moisten an sponge or a piece of soft cloth in warm water only, Or boil it in soapy water and cleanse and scrub, s de:
And no time has this done any restriction, and it is allowed to rise up so that it can expand.
And when you see the swelling begin to separate, if the intestines are wet or high and ill-cooked. for by this it is linked with little substance;
do not that.
And the first treatment is to straighten what has been bent, that none should cut it unless there is great necessity.
and this is the tension for breaking:
if wei, then the text de that cane any. 1 none so to it is a way heal ong;
And when the wound is enlarged, and the bowel has burst forth, If you reset according to its natural shape in its proper position, If you can, because it's necessary.
with: if it becomes necessary to make the patient lie on their back, and raise his legs higher than his head; and if it is on the part below the belly,
And similarly, if the rupture of the belly is in one of the two parts, If you agree on what is set in such a way that the injured part is higher than the other;
And thus you must treat as I have described for large wounds and small ones.
For small wounds, apply what has been provided.
Then have at your hand an emetic minister who can grasp the entire treatment with his hands. they say, that healing or more is the Latin: 1. And this is the common way of suturing,
And this is the common way of suturing, And it is that you choose a needle or more, depending on the size of the width of the wound, then leave at the head of the wound two spaces, and insert a needle with strong thick thread; And pierce the two heads of the shoulder with the two ends of a spade; and let them glide gently within, without causing pain or pressure; and when they are well in place, bind tightly to ensure stability.
:: a. Then promptly join together the two sides of the wound immediately.
And then leave space for one finger, and insert another needle. Then tie the thread just as you did with the first needle, the p, then: Until the entire wound is closed;
and be needles both fine and coarse; for fine needles penetrate deeply into the flesh, and too coarse ones cannot enter well; It is necessary for them to be moved back;
and it is not necessary to insert needles too far from the joint and into the skin;
They should not touch or operate on the wound before the suture;
And then wrap the shoulder with splints so they do not bend and disturb the patient while sleeping. And place tents or cloths on the shoulder to keep it in place. and let the wound remain until it is healed.
by d unt; For indeed a needle was inserted there or two.
The second suture is common, and it is that you join the two heads of skin with an arrowhead or have one strong thread in the middle; :
: If you reset the dislocation at the part where you began, as one would sew with threads.
and make space between each stitch the size of a small finger;
these stitches hold the flesh together,
c.
Who was tormented by a knife. and had a wound greater than one palm wide. and his intestines were torn to pieces, two palms in width.
al. I returned his intestines as it had been for twenty-four hours.
and it was the wound closed up until the fifteenth day, and treated, and healed well.
And the physician had judged that he would die, but it was a miracle;
And did not treat it with ointment, for I was in a place where there were no remedies nor any medicines to be found. And placed a piece of old cloth on the wound twice daily, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Here I will tell you the two proper ways to dress wounds:
1 in av...
When it has felt the edge straight on, then place the head against the sphenoid or near where you inserted the needle.
and cut away from the dense part up to its inner space.
and the understanding of this suture is that you close it as a tanner does with hides, c ;[fle
The second manner of suture, which Galien refers to specifically
if it is as one might do, who joins the two parts together naturally and apply one of its edge to the other edge, in such a way:
that: il pate the. medieval in a way the is theret; c s. And let both shoulders lie as they were. Then remove the needle, and pierce it through from the part forward up to inside. And let both shoulders lie on as they were.
Then make a cut in both the forward part up to its core, in two other shoulders that are opposite each other.
And it is the proper manner of stitching and most common.
Galien says this word, and no one attests to it.
&:
And one must push an awl from one side, and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew straps.
And sheets when the rupture is within the belly, If this wound is more serious than others in the belly,
theysst asdire
And it is so when you find a fresh wound with much blood, just as an arrow has moved it. If resetting the intestines and edges, then apply powdered incense on it.
If resetting the intestines and edges, then apply powdered incense on it. And if the arrow has moved it, then apply any poultice that is available until the wound heals. by: on f (or: Then treat the wound as with others, until it is healthy.
If you lack medicine, apply honey or old cotton as soon as possible when it starts to sway back and forth, And move it two times a day until it is healthy again.
When you have no need for other medicines in cases where wounds are simple.
And if you doubt whether the wound has caused communication with the main limbs. If it is necessary that you grind linen lightly in lukewarm oil or rose oil, And place it back among the shoulders, and under the elbows;
And if they feel pain or swelling at the joints, which often occurs, then apply black wine enemas and especially when the swelling reaches as far as the intestines;
And it perforates internally, and knows when it is the large intestines, then it is easier to heal than the small ones.
The intestine that is called "jün" cannot heal when it is inflamed. and this is because of the severity of the wounds that are therein, and due to the subtlety of all the body, and its closeness in nature to the nerves.
And if the spleen falls from the wound, reset it as well as the intestines while they are fresh.
And if it is old and has turned gray or black, then you must remove the dead part so that bleeding does not occur. because there are veins and arteries.
s byzus; O’s. And place the two heads hanging from the part below the wound to ease extraction when the nerves are cut, and the wound bow.
From the removal of the boil
When the intestine is loose, and the wound is small, If it can be restored in some individuals,
because I see that a man was tormented or stabbed with a spear;
and the wound was on the right side of his abdomen, they that de by:s as the line them.
I applied care according to what I could, without stopping my subtlety until they were healed and their joints secured.
And when I saw them joined, I doubted the patient had something wrong in his belly; and there was nothing amiss, but he remained in better spirits, eating and drinking.
s the patient lesse ons and they c; Take large forceps, then gather the edges of the wound. And when the forceps have pierced the opening, place them on both sides of the edges,
Then apply another treatment in the same manner as before, until the wound is fully healed.
And cover the wound. first, it's :
And one can tie the intestine with a fine thread cut from the intestine of an animal.
In this manner: Take the head of this intestinal thread that is thoroughly cleaned, And then bind to the head of this thread a fine twisted flax thread. Then insert the thread into the needle and sew along the intestines, then stitch it in a row.
And this manner of stitching from injuries is not contrary to the method of trust and hope;
by:
of a fistula or if it exists Say that any wound or abscess, when it becomes old, is universally called "fistula". and especially when it swells up and bursts open.
the de: And just as when a bird is plucked of its feathers;
And at times clear like a bowstring, and other times thickened; And at times sparse, and other times sufficient;
And I have spoken about wound healing in this section, that any untreated wound has no healing, and there is no scar. It exists only due to one of these seven causes:
This means that it is known as follows - by the smallness of blood or body; bone in. Because there is hardness within it, do not allow any growth of hair on the surface. Where there is too much bowing. When the sinew is torn, and the matter is of poor quality. and: When for this reason corruption is a form of plague; Or because in that region there is late digestion and delayed health, and flees by nature; Or where there are wounds or bones:
and I have already shown all these causes, their signs, and medical treatments in the section.
Thus you must be informed about the treatment of a fistula that is performed by hand work.
It's said that a fistula can occur in all parts of the body; : and so heal they should be it's. Or on the face, or to the intestines, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs. Or to the spine of the back, or to any joint of the hands or feet.
by thestre.
And if there is any fistula that does not reach to where I have said, but you trust in the healing. and you recognize it, then take a tent of linen or iron if the fistula is straight, take it.
When the fistula is twisted, carefully trace a thin line with wax. because the wax bends easily around the twisting;
and if the fistula is narrow and you cannot well trace it with tentative lines, to m:
For moisture comes from one pores to another, and is cleansed.
Then apply your strength gently, so you know if there are bones or nerves, and it is swoln upwards.
and ask well of the pain that the patient feels upon pressure from your hand, and its location where it is felt.
And when you truly know its location, and if it is far from the joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of those places I have told you, following what I have instructed to do,
or in any of those places I have told you, following what I have instructed to do, and extract the other bone and corrupted cartilages that are within it, And then the treatment until it is healed.
and if the fistula is well placed on the right spot, it's necessary to cut into it as much as you see fit. then place tied bandages with medicinal herbs and tie them up to the top of the faster,
then place tied bandages with medicinal herbs and tie them up to the top of the faster, the so: ictes try.
And then he applies soothing unguents with holy oil, until it is well.
If not healed by this method, then you should cauterize as we have said.
And it shall be of the ait is treated with hic, if done; and ours untie et que ne puent par les plaies, puisne quid est parfaire. If veins or nerves are involved or principal limbs, as we have said;
And if the bone is uncovered and there is decay and blackening, until the king has all the bone decay. Then treat various extraordinary things until they are healed.
but if not healed, and it protrudes again as before, you should know that do not go near water:
the bone, and if ise. And remove all decayed bone, then return to its place.
And if it is thus sanitary, that's well. But if not, say that decay is too prevalent, to which you cannot come. If there is no other remedy but using the splint according to its design.
and if there is a small deformed bone, and you can pull it out with tongs, if the fracture involves such an instrument (meaning a foreign body),
And if there are several bones affected, do not leave any of them untreated.
but if the moisture acts contrary to this, and it has no mistake or fear, if heat and moisture and cold are present, free the bones.
byt: and let it rest until it is resituated among the bones.
and then when [they] will have the bones more easily.
and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, If you reset so often the decay until the darkness is all bone, then heal the wound;
and if there is significant part of the decayed tissue, reaching close to the bone; .
And I will tell you of a case of a boil on his leg. If you need an example and assistance in your work.
There was once a youth about thirty years old who had pain in his leg from a cause that came into his body.
As long as materials came to the leg, and there was an outbreak of a large abscess, but no need for further opening.
However, by their madness, they worked so much on it that the abscess opened. and consumed a lot of substances, turning into a fistula, and much pus emerged that all exited through the body and moisture.
;
As long as he was called upon, and I saw his leg and the remedies with which it was treated. and what seemed to be necessary by piercing the skin of great body parts; and it became red in the young man's body, and had a citrus hue.

And I found that one part of the leg approached another from all sides.
So I hurried there and cut into it until I uncovered a bone piece, And found it rotten and smelling, and the decay reached up to the inner part of the bone;

And began to heal the wound with salted medicines for long periods of time, but could not bind.
and then I began again, and exposed the bone as before.
And I found the continuous decay in the bone, and its nerve, and then the vein, and I endeavored to bind it back together.
However, I could not move it as much as around an inch of bone, and the fracture occurred completely. Then I returned to using medicine; and it healed quickly and securely.
and there was no need to resume the treatment except due to the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, it; the next by: For evacuating blood often brings distress, but he was entirely cured.
For evacuating blood often brings distress, but he was entirely cured. and in the place of the bone arose a hard thorn, which was well-formed and did not cause harm or contrary effects at all, neither on approach nor departure.
And they are protruding heads, so you pull out the decayed cartilage from underneath. and uncover the cartilage where it is seen to be soft, ensuring that the tissue does not hinder the cartilage. and place a peg or a stick below the bone to move the decayed cartilage away; by n’t f Tue d sis not line of charger that: cigh they are all; m ;
If the bone is corrupted, it does not break open, and the corruption is within or in a part. If it unveils the whole wound; then place a shard underneath,
And then bring from one part to the other the corruption, and make it as long as we have said;
When there is a rupture at the joint, repair the damaged joint, and take out the bone on the other side.
And if there is a rupture in the span of the two joints, unless there is another injury besides coping.
And if there is a rupture at the wrist or elbow, that thing is very strong. the c (I'the: that doce tot the main; the most aura et more and so far conlemd. And cleanse thoroughly in all ways you can, but do not allow the vein or nerve to hinder you.
and be aware that surgical instruments and sutures for repairing these bones are numerous, according to the position of the bones and their appearance. and their thickness and subtlety, their size and smallness, and their hardness; :
And know that your work will show you the instrument of which you will need, according to the knowledge of this art. and by the testimony of its signs, the ways of diseases; if consider the instrument which you need according to what suits it best.
By fire The head swells or due to internal causes, or from excess.
and when you have applied the remedy for that corrosion with curative medicine, but it does not help, to be used medicin a medicine and the ws: it is nott ond it should dose but, or. 1 and how they don't heal lyson les huj; the de s: If the patient escapes due to death or evil (harm), which is greater, from the injury of the limb.
If the patient escapes due to death or evil (harm), which is greater, from the injury of the limb. and the signs are such that the limb becomes black, as if it were burned by fire. And after the blackening of the limb, then follows the spreading of corruption from member to member. And it extends throughout the body; if you hasten with a cup,
and if it is through the impact of any venomous creatures such as sea scorpions, adders, and similar beasts,
if the corrosion is at the top of the finger joints, and you bind it with a bandage, do not give any space for it to reach up to the hand.
if yout:l’sis sonce au est et de te le c (fait.
And if it occurs on the arm, seek a splint for support; and if it passes through the splint, there is death. And there are no remedies except in the quantity of its virtue;
And do thus when the scab comes or pus: if it comes to the first joint, then apply after the other joint.
, and so please by de the text as fewdroit of lait la is the c lido, and m t that they n’s; Oulbobud st., otherwise: If it rises up to the leg, strike at the hip joint.
And if it comes above the hip, there is no other remedy than the lancet for the patient to die.
and the manner of dressing with linen or silk cloth on which the limb should be tied above and below, : And you sever the cartilage between the two ligaments to a wide space so that the bone is exposed;
Then wrap or sew it, and place on each side a bandage of linen, so that the suture does not touch the healthy flesh; And bring another wound and abscess to the patient.
on ne ski sonce as they e: When you apply certain binding powders; then return to your medication until it is completed.
Then bind the wounded limb with a bandage and treat it until it is healed.
And I shall tell you that this happened to one man in our time:
by c rthe the laie aut.
And that erosion first appeared on his thumbs to the inner part of the foot, so much so that it destroyed the entire foot.
When a man sees the erosion, he hastens with a copper knife to cut the foot, and is saved.
And for many years after that, the erosion reappeared on his thumbs, and it came upon me,
s. 1 that son: This is as it’sute:
And I hope to cup his hand, not wishing for any harm, with a desire to restore its matter. and also feared that if I cut into his hand, he might die. for the virtue of the man was weak; and he became disheartened, returning to his homeland. And if he has broken his hand, and is healthy again;
and I do not include this remedy unless it is necessary for other purposes when needed.
Never does an abscess appear in a dry place, and if it lingers so long that it forms a large mass of pus; by thet: Et le cuir qui est dessus est aussi subtile que du drap délié, and they shall not reach to the bone nor nerve, and such diseases are called 'healed',
But if it is so extended that it reaches almost to the bone at its origin, then it is called "fistula";
And if the swelling is such that you can cut through all of its skin, especially when it is as fine as a piece of fabric. and not for fear of decay.
If you should le: the unt;  (1 deu: And the skin is stretched with a linen cloth, thus cleansing with an enema:
Look if the breasts are large and the bow that is there has a foul smell. Then the Egyptian medicinal enema prepared in this manner: Take ease, mix with oil and litharge equally, and put to cook in a container over fire. until the medicine is red and thickens as honey does;
and then take of it according to your necessity, and make with water and honey, the first. And let the medicine remain for two hours, then extract by squeezing out.
Do this many times until it is properly aligned, and there are no protrusions.
and never administer an enema with ash water. when this remedy is not available, take ashes from the wood of a vine and pour water over it,
at, inm:
If the patient cannot endure it, neither Egyptian medicine nor ash water will help. If the enema of water and honey with a bit of litharge is given, or if the enema of honey and sweet wine is given, as honey has properties to cleanse and wash, And the wine makes one feel faint;
And when you have done so, and ensure that the wound is properly cleaned, if a cleansing of what causes heat to rise in him;
And it is that you prick with a pointed object at its extremity, and they do so using oil-soaked rosary beads and in wine. Or you enemas the patient with various medications and unguents, as I have mentioned their properties in treating unguents.
And if the wound is too small, and the tube for the enema cannot enter it, I the old: Or basilisk oil, so that it may be spread.
and if the wound is too wide, leave only enough so that either suture or a cleansing enema may enter.
And if a projecting bow is present above it, cover or place it lower than where it lies. For when the bow is in its entirety, do not let blood flow freely there. and if you cannot cover the chest above as you see fit, then ; c s la quo:
And if you cannot cover its ends as you wish to see. If shaped in such a way that the bow moves easily upward, and leaves nothing of the bow behind; as iste ou:
And they are supported by a large cloth bandage that covers the entire chest; Then apply your force at the spot beneath the chest, where one portion is slightly wider than the first. And then apply when the secondly bandaged section. There are as much and broaden according to that wide, with the skin beadet is wider at than the first: And place it on the raised pit of the chest to ease swelling, without removing the large bandage for many days afterwards.
And those who are near the pit of the chest often do so to remove the swelling. and you should know whether it is due to the swelling: if poison, a small amount or a large one, easily digestible, or difficult to digest.
And take care if the patient feels pain or numbness, and whether there is an abscess.
And when your treatment has spread in such a manner that you see its nature break through the skin of the chest, if you know that the breast is swelling, and approach it gently.
that he est not so s’ll uter; it; ous que lesstile, then are to let that, and ct; t (bissime the they we should be the. And so: If a different bandage is used, renew the ointment.
And if the breasts become irritated and indigestible after many days, assure that they do not swell. And if subtle poisons linger for long periods of time, do not despair over the health,
prt la, and in;
When bowel indigestion causes it to fall within the chest after many days, know that the breast is not inflamed.
When the breast is late in healing and becomes protracted, apply dry medicines with a moist base and dry effect. If the remedy ends, for there is a large part of vitriol in it, and this is the last medicine;
can s c�; but when one.
Then he compresses it and uses it; and likewise makes wounds heal faster. when a poultice of dead man's flesh is not present,
or you take myrrh and aloe and frankincense, and crush them, and grind into powder with honey when it is on the fire. First, apply a strip of cloth, and then stretch it over the chest, without using any ointment or lengthy surgery. and roots of the holy basil, which are like flour and semolina.
and roots of the holy basil, which are like flour and semolina. and in using simple or composite remedebroil it into a powder, and add honey as mentioned earlier, and use it. the s:nuit antre; t
the s:nuit antre; t Thus you must understand that decay is first, and it pressures on the bone, or on hard limbs, or on ligaments. If treating a fistula as we have said before.
For the incising of an abscess on the nail.
Panarics are abscesses that arise under the nail of the palm. If there is stone, or in some cases it exists elsewhere as well.
and when it becomes ulcerated, if one does not take care of it, an abscess may develop there. And they rub and pour hot oil until it reaches the root of the nail, and by chance it may cover all of it.
And comes the erosion up to the bone, causing pain and an offensive odor, with double-sized shoulders, and a discolored appearance.
As we have mentioned earlier in the section regarding treatment and it proves beneficial for them. If it is necessary to scrape with an iron all the excess flesh remaining from the nail. Then cauterize the wound afterwards. The caustic treatment is of great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is also healthy;
ichta; so that do not f cat numbers. If it is necessary to place a splint under the nail where the vein lies. and wrap it upwards, gently and subtly exposing that vein. and apply on the remaining part of the wound potent and corroding medications to remove all of it;
When a tumor is in the bone, cut it away, and treat thoroughly, for as long as the bone corrupts there, it cannot heal.
And if you see the joint corrupted, cut into it with a curette as previously mentioned. then scrape until it is smoothed out.
the t boso they are prudo ct; The oug a re t (conta ce tulard ou that se the on this. Then cut the nail of the great toe at an angle across.
and be sure that the cutting does not reach up to the bone which is below the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain.
and if it happens, apply something above to soothe it.
The dislocated shoulder found among some people by chance is completely covered with flesh. And by chance it may have bone fragments, but never a nail.
and none of these arise at the root of the joints, or where their birth is in our shoulders. Those who are born with any of our two diseases do not move. and those who are born with the disease at the joint, may also move.
the stature of one who is plump should be somewhat lighter in manner: the, which.
Those who are born at the root of a joint are particularly difficult to treat: hold them with your cup-handled instrument.
For those who are born or develop afterward in the same place, it is necessary to first cut around the circumference up to the bone. then cut the bone with an appropriate incision, and then treat until it becomes sound.
the t. If thra et le;
If it is necessary to cover the swelling so that it may heal according to its natural forms. Then place between two tents or linen cloths soaked in oil of roses, so they do not stick together. Or you put between two pieces of fine parchment until the wound is healed, as needed.

Of evil ones
They are large wounds covered with excessive moisture and melancholy, coming to many body parts.
And more often occurs in the legs of those who walk on pilgrimage and work and carry loads, than others.
which ine. the tand:
The treatment with iron is in two ways: one is to cut them and drain the black blood; And the other way is that you open the vein and bleed it thoroughly.
The cutting method goes as follows: initially raise the leg with hot water very strongly so that the large veins are thoroughly cleansed. bele loin and li c, orlez de t unt (th:le ke peckte; Then wrap the vein at a point, or two points, or three points wide, with a bandage of linen.
Then draw and strain the black blood into your hand, from one end to the other, as much as the patient's body can bear of its virtue.
And then remove the sludge, and command that it be soaked in dark meat for purification.
Theophrop a them: *; if they present; the old by his tre ons.
The emotions of the patient are as follows: raise the affected leg gently if there is much hair. Then place it in a bath, and soak the leg with warm water until it turns red, and swells the veins;
And if you do not have a bath, heat it over the fire, and then wrap the veins with long cloth at the top of the calf or in the area below the ankle.
and such: you see s 1 the c  m
And it is seen red and black, and when it enters or cuts skin, it seems like a bleeding rope.
Then pour the edges apart until they separate from the skin, and then bind with a light bandage.
Then apply in another place three finger's width above it; then scrape the skin near the vein until it appears. le ne bon lesle d (e
Then measure another length, or more if you need to, then weigh it out, and cut with the two fingers.
Then shape and measure up to the second length; then extract from size to size until it is all full-grown, then cut.
and if you cannot shear and raise it, then place a needle through the entire strong, double thread, TT lesme o for the ou Lithestus:cuse me: n’s (e on. the length, she: And keep it from slipping out, for if it does slip out, one cannot draw nor lift it, and this causes harm to the patient.
And when you have drawn it back completely, place a soft cloth soaked in wine and oil over the wound site; treat until healed.
And if the vein is twisted and tangled together, and it is not straight as we have said, s pues: n' 1.
s pues: n' 1. The shape of the iron used to open the vein is curved, and does not cut or tear, only opens the vein.
and is of significant curvature, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein, but since we have said it's large. This is its shape:
From civil blood (referring to venous bleeding as opposed to arterial)
by way and sesle les Marbtul; it's:llkfard.
And sometimes it occurs elsewhere than in legs, as from rot that arises from underneath the skin.
If it comes into the body as snakes and worms, entering between skin and flesh.
When the signs of this vein's beginning occur, there comes a great inflammeboom to the leg. Then changes occur in the joint, and the vein begins to protrude outward, like a root from a plant.
When the head is exposed, it is necessary to wrap around with a strip of cloth three and a half ells up to four ells. And then,
and let the cloth hang down from the leg, and every time it is not being used, wrap around with the cloth, and the wound. a ex tloro;llt is not so har ELE. If you manage to do it, it goes back into its place and causes an abscess and decay there, leading to a serious illness.
For this reason, it must be treated little by little until complete, leaving nothing in the body or heart.
And sometimes this vein is not treated when it's done with five or six long palms (measures), or more. And one man came to me, which extended for ten hand lengths, and when you grasp it, there is a drop or puncture, and pierces all the way to the bottom.
And it becomes completely hollow; and the material inside should be emptied, then fill with healing salves and herbs for a certain period of time, then treat as an abscess would be treated.
And no need to open this vein again, especially when it opens at the joint of the foot or heel, And it often comes from a fall, causing great harm; treat as we have said before.
From veins that arise between skin and flesh
This disease is called in our land "ox sickness" because it often occurs in the knees
And it is a small worm that arises between skin and flesh, traveling up and down throughout the body. and he feels extremely well as he moves from limb to limb, so long as it touches skin where he goes, then jumps high.
and is prone to decay of various bodily fluids, such as when snakes and worms and roundworms or stomach issues come upon him.
the nusse t e quadrat; he est la ; thet o; that s as are; and there;  C. The w; no less is an armzard: they c. Sometimes it returns on its own, destroying the joint; this often occurs.
When you see it being treated and milked, one cannot force when it goes:
It is well done properly with a li bon sies so liges.
Then cut around it and follow up on the wound, and if the vessel is fully pierced into the vein, and you cannot find it. If fire cautery is used upon it, until it dies;
and the greatest harm that it causes is that they burn with oil, as we have said;
n're par terre. Do the same:
And it is customary to use remedies of corporeal purification for dissolving maleficent humors through various methods.
and if boils arise, treat with inwardly rotten meats.
From the pain that arises from flatulence. the physand other and s and: And thus, he moves from member to member; and I saw what I tell you.
I was called by an ill woman, and found her with swollen arms, and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm.
and shortly after, I saw him rising like a snake up to his shoulder, Sooner than anything else, just as vital silver when struck from one place to another.
The pain departs from there and shifts to the shoulder.
and then a little later spreads throughout the body, until it reaches the other arm.
they
I wondered greatly how it moved from limb to limb, for I had never encountered this illness in such a manner before. Certainly, I believed that others must have experienced the pain moving from one place to another as well. however, I had never witnessed it myself, just like in the woman;
a mt. And therefore appears that constrained swelling;
And it does not appear as per this reason in those who are lustful, and have wet bodies and veins replaced;
And when you see treating this disease, if the patient feels that pain as we have said; If gently pushed above and below, then quickly wrapped so that the swelling is held in place. And cauterize at the site; and if it does not appear visible to your eyes,
if the treatment of what causes excessive swelling, like foul pills and sycamore bark pills, and similar things.
t. The line estt;
The arrowheads are various, according to their appearances and where they pierce the body.
The variety of them is such that there are those with large points, small ones, and bristly ones, and tied. And of those with two angles, and those with tongues, and those with pieces; and that which flows into any limb without flowing in two ways: or into the principal member.
as if brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and other members. ; sire in sonce of bone la; he ones. If it is necessary to extract this arrowhead, for death comes in various forms afterwards. And when this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrowhead is not entirely embedded, then pull it out, and treat the wound.
And the sign of the skull when the arrow enters and pierces the bone, and causes a swelling over the forehead. the pruss and so you. The same: And sometimes it is without strength of smell or ears; and occasionally affects speech and voice. And jumping from the wound appears as white hair-like substances, and in leaping just like wet chaff.
And when these signs appear, you must treat the wound, and extract the arrow if it is not yet out.
and the in they, a likerse par le t. If het that the old, but lfors ; f with all the eist not can beste if est m. And sometimes the patient moves just as hairs do, with black blood in their stool, and comes cold chills and cold sweat, and fainting. And thus, they have no doubt that deaths will follow.
and noir, yet the paist ents. And:
When the arrow falls into the area of the lower breastbone, it is near the small ribs; causing great pain and sighing, they move all parts of the shoulder blade.
And if the arrow falls into the belly, perhaps it may be from an open wound where there is undigested meat.
And if the arrow falls into the belly, and it does not exit through the intestines, there is no hope for healing or extracting the arrowhead.
When an arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine flows out with a gush, causing the patient great pain; understand that the wound is deadly.
The other limbs - how they are made and the neck, throat, shoulder, upper arm, spine of the back, buttocks, thighs, and similar parts - are safe according to various arrangements. When an arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not poisonous - as I will tell you what happened to me so that you may do likewise.
It happened to a man that an arrow struck him, hitting first at the root of his neck. I tried it, and from the other side cut through the fatty tissue behind the ear, but without any result.
And with another arrow struck in the fat of the eye below the eyebrow, When the arrow was reset, it could not reach more than the tip towards its shaft. And it was the large arrow from a Turkish bow with one iron tip on each end; the wound healed and no further complications occurred.
And an arrow to his throat was Arabic, and it was the arrow of one earloing ears:
I sought out Barbarians, and pursued them subtly until I betrayed her; she was saved by the Christians.
And I betrayed an arrow to his abdomen and thought he would die.
and after it had been there for thirty days, there was no change in his condition; ase t. Doie the wt.
And if you wish to see a man with an arrow wound to his back or belly, and the injury was swiftly treated;
And remains lodged within it, not disturbing its natural position. It causes no hindrance in any of his natural functions.
And behold a certain man, to whom an arrow fell on his face, causing a wound that was quickly closed.
and remains in such a state without suffering great pain; and many similar cases.
And pierced one of the arrows into a man among the princes near to the king, which entered in his groin. And it was slightly inclined to the right side; and the arrowhead was fully protruding.
I went to seek treatment after it had been three days. The wound was found to be very narrow.
It seemed as though it were completely healed and I felt no pain. thet: I thought it was from the point of the arrowhead
I placed above him an appliance that stimulates digestion because his eyes do not swell. and it appeared to me the point of the arrowhead.
and it appeared to me the point of the arrowhead. they:t; c
Until he felt the dislocation within his neck for a day; and then I told him. I applied medicinal ague to the wound until it was healed.
and tested it, feeling that the head of the dislocation had returned to its place. Then stop at the opening of the wound with that particular medicinal ointment until the head of the shoulder appears clearly.
And it passed well through almost two and a half months.
Then I examined if the wound where I had placed the pincers on both sides could not be removed.
Then cease not from subtle and clever methods of traction, until I took one day with well-made tongs. According to how the shape appears at the end of this chapter, as long as I treat it and keep the wound closed.
And the physicians judge that the cartilage in the nose cannot be restored: ; this line; that. In fact;t the f the t.
Then I have told you the quality of extracting certain arrows. If you apply your treatment to that which I do not mention here, for the book cannot fully comprehend it all;
But wise masters know very little about it, and what is before them and failing. Nine works are done, nine instruments used, in descending to the strange occurrences that happen in this art.
I say that arrows do not remain within the members where they are stuck unless according to two ways: is in so.
The translation of the given Old French lines into English is as follows:
And if it does not jump now, let it be left until the flesh is thoroughly healed and the injury fully closed.
And similarly if it is embedded in the bone and cannot come out, let it be left for several days and moved slightly each day.
the utrudie with:
And they dont pas; s (fors l'st assidiant to try de lesby; the empi is not. And if you feel it, then guide it with any suitable instrument.
and if you cannot by the widening of the wound, and by piercing the arrowhead, and there is no bone or nerve or vein, so infect it until the wound becomes large; ond they.
ond they. If a bone is fixed by two parts so you can move it, and then break or bend the arrow's shaft as far as possible to extract.
and then break or bend the arrow's shaft as far as possible to extract. and carefully ensure not to break the arrow, but rather pull it out more firmly.
it; and mont that heal not d the f et they prese bon line y or. Doe to you know them: And if there is a contrary flow of blood causing symptoms, arrange for the treatment as we have described in its chapter.
and be wary of incision near nerves and veins, and make provisions as you know to draw the arrowhead without danger.
right away or slowly, firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the form in which the arrow pierced him. it can not so s; please and le:  (xx as much after that the fofuisse, even c said heal J (b by theq Flower.
When an arrow comes from elsewhere, or opens any wound, causing the skin to swell noticeably where it is seen or felt.
Thus make a cut there, so that the pincers can take hold, and then extract: if the arrowhead now protrudes.
And if it is caught in the bone, turn your round hand, until it enters the bone and widens it, then extract it.
by S.
If it is from an arrowhead, then remove all of it.
And if it bleeds, and you see the need to apply pressure, if you use a sharp instrument. If the tip of the arrowhead pierces into the tool; then proceed with caution,
byt: semble et he.
And if the arrow is grazed, it is necessary to cut all around where the poison is, if you can see. Then treat the wound as needed.
And if the arrow falls or lands in the abdomen, groin, bladder, or ribs, and it is near, then cut into it as you see fit.
the t in f. And treatment until it is healed.
The form of the pincers used to treat arrow wounds resembles a bird's beak, and so does this one:
And there are many kinds of them: large, medium, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow shaft.
in common body openings the d, ce of c.
This is to know: two bellows located behind the ears, called 'herbechs'. and the two arteries that are visible in each temple. and two veins that are located on the temples of both eyes, which are called 'aspiracles'. it la pe les so that the same, as atich c’m; tous on:. And the two bands which are around his neck. and the two veins that are on the lips above the mouth, and these are called "augehirch." and two veins which lie underneath the tongue.
The veins which are commonly bled are five in each arm:
one is the superficial one, and is on the left side of the ribcage, and they call it "chief's vein" in English. and the middle one is called "fast", and it is composed of both the superficial (chief's vein) and deep (basilic) ones. by s and they call it "wound of the belly," located near the windpipe. and it is one of which we can see clearly under the collarbone.
And the savior's vein is between the little finger and ring finger, and it has two branches.
And in the leg where there are three veins: one is below the nape of the left shoulder blade, and the second saphenous vein which is at the ankle of the right side, and the vein called "innest", that is in the foot of the other side.
and in the other leg are three veins below those mentioned.
on the w::t  (you: an example by the old prud I don'he t, eceze t. And the quality of the ligament, as I have told you, is to raise the patient's head.
And the quality of the ligament, as I have told you, is to raise the patient's head. and rub their level or veins with a coarse cloth; then tighten the collar of the patient with a cord. until you see two veins appear behind the ears, in two separate places from the top: by far son f: I sant n's.
Then take the lance, and insert it from below up to the bone, then lift your hand along the entire vein. and cut and remove the skin and vein well. Make a double incision, and let the blood flow out until you see it stop.
then straighten and hold it, as long as it is aligned properly;
And I have already mentioned incision and cautery in the first book.
The blockage of the two arteries that are in the temples, if it is an old migraine, And sunsore, and aching eyes, and weakness in the body with watery tears;
And the quality of the chiropractor is as I say: and it is that the patient's head must be moved apart, so that both veins appear openly; and feel under the elbow joints, then bind securely.
 Lift the vein upwards, and cover it with a bandage as you have done in two other veins, and make sure to dress the wound according to your need.
Then raise the patient's arm, and place your two fingers on the vein for an hour, then put a cotton swab over it.
Then apply the plaster and leave it on until cleaned; we have already spoken about their healing and extraction, which is where the book begins.
s: I's; If lesche le telle estnt la pe chude; ça se’mient; l’est h’t; So.
And its quality is such that the patient twists their neck until it appears. Then take the instrument called "fossor", whose form is as follows:
And place the tip on the vein, and pierce it with your hand or another object, allowing the blood to flow out according to the quantity you see. de so that liump;
Indeed, it is not necessary for the flames to be too large; and the shaft should be straight, as the bone is close by, and sometimes the flame breaks when it becomes thin.
The treatise on the two veins that are in the temples helps with the eyes, and with twitching, and with redness, and with trembling of the eyeball, and with face ailments.
And the quality of their treatment is that the patient turns his neck as if twisted from any ligament, just like before.
Then treat it, and securely fasten with straps of some length and width, for there is no friction.
And if the flames are subtle, perhaps they break; then apply enough blood as needed, and afterwards bind with gauze securely.
The straps of the vein must not be too tight; they should allow room to accommodate swelling and severe conditions such as diseases. byzelle de: quires (and ne.
The quality of health is such that the patient grips his neck, then strains his nose towards your left hand. and takes a thin long thread, weaving it between the two nostr <|endofgeneration|> because the veins do not open well with this method, and the blood begins to flow at once;
.n; that a que le t as yous ond've if heal: and o dear.
The dryness of the two nostrils assists in the expansion of the pharynx, and at the onset of inflammation, and many diseases, and impetigo, and erosion, and herpes, and sties.
and the quality of dryness is that the patient keeps his neck away from both sides, as we have said. que il so fat; s’sile dJJMbofie le t gor se la; thatt; c and de ; the: with a an ou est ond. Tudus they? by is not quite no cetailed. If you in the latter: donorter, but I want to the Haj; it’s tropwed heuze le tat t.
Then seal the vein for a while with something long and wide enough, then bleed it promptly as much as necessary.
Then repeat on the other vein, and tie off the vessel, gently compressing the veins in between. so that the patient does not strain themselves; leave it until morning when the wound is healed.
Here: The healing of vein lips above helps with boils in the mouth, and decay of gums, and splits in lips, and toothaches and throat problems.
And the quality of this healing is having the patient sit before you, and hold their neck as I have instructed. Then turn the lip, and look at the two veins of which one is on the right lip and the other on the left. bytous paragraph; Thus hold both together, and if you do not recognize them, and are uncertain.
Thus hold both together, and if you do not recognize them, and are uncertain. If you grasp the larger of each part, and make them from two veins that lie above and below it, as it is all one kind.
From the vein under the tongue if yout the t.
Et the quality of the gland secretion is such that the patient squeezes between his hands in front of the sun, and lifts the tongue, and looks down each cheek for a black vein.
Then cleanse both [cheeks], but do not go too deep inward, as the arteries are downwards.
The veins of the cheek which one commonly cleanses are cleaned according to two methods:
When taken at all with one large measure of myrtle or subtle oil like sharply cutting knives, and is called "anesil." And are wide and fine according to the extent and stretching of veins. The form of myrtle paste is much renowned, and it is broad as you see:
the. And this is the form of an olive flame:
and it is more finely pointed, used for treating subtle veins, where there is a fine lemon-colored blood.
The vein of the windpipe, which is one of these subtle veins, helps with illnesses that are beneath the throat, and neck, and groin, and belly.
by nt isnt f. And if you come across an artery, and bleeding begins, then it must be staunched as I have said. And it should not be pierced with a flame but heated as is customary.
And if the bladder does not open clearly, you must extract it and replace it with another. il’s, et so s that he said lesse que not s the covser; ougue lo se t. And the sling soothes inflammation, as we have said.
And if you see the location of the sinew, then it is necessary that you stretch out the arm and touch the area until you feel the muscles. Then mark the origin of the joint, and then bind the limb, and soothe the vein with a sling for inflammation.
the number of le t ounerotaril and to be; Dexemk: (ou sofait il s, et the bie les que aubole, thetide he en;stost, Et so that n’ve te l’mwisle;
And if you see it protruding upward as a child's urine, and the veins are red and fine, know that it is from an artery. Hasten then, and place your hand upwards for a long time, then remove your hand where the veins are constricted, as often happens.
If it is on the arm, leave it like this and do not move the patient's limb; and be afraid, and do not move it until it heals.
the re la tholes.
And take a sliver of pitch pine, and grind it, then take one half and lay it on until the following day.
If it is not adhering, that's fine; if not, then use the powders that coagulate blood as we have said.
and there are no more than a few positions for the adhesion near the small edge of the wound, and it is possible with the flexibility of the arm joints.
as t s: Jes; Because it is composed of the pelvic and cranial, as we have said.
And it behooves the surgeon to wash for the nerve that is underneath, and if he punctures too deeply, then he may injure the nerve. And it swells and the health suffers greatly, and sometimes it cannot be cured.
and this nerve is often opened multiple times, and if it cannot be found in any person due to its subtlety, then you must secure the instrument safely; and avoid injuring the nerve as much as possible.
And if there is a vein between two nerves, it causes long pain.
The salve of the head helps to draw blood from the forehead and benefits the eyes.
And it is proper to heal by grasping the cloak of olive or myrtle, for it is the safest of all venues, as there are no nerves or arteries beneath it.
Nevertheless, one should seek the easier place first and do not press anything during the first time, and start over again. And sometimes it causes swelling in some men, but one must not press anything at first. The quality of the wound is according to your thought.
The first thing you must know about wounds, is that a wound is treated solefly to maintain healthy condition.
and to avoid coming diseases. Et so it be done on one of the three veins which are there named: that is to say, cephalic, saphenous, and basilic. And it should be done at the beginning of pre-fasting in spring and autumn after eating, when signs of repletion appear.
And it must be done for the first day or third day, after two or three hours into the day.
The healing prescribed for illnesses has no set time, but when needed it is by day or night, at all hours and always.
And it does not require healing for children until fourteen years old or women who are carrying a child during the last quarter of their pregnancy up to the seventh month. Nor should you treat an elderly person over sixty years old.
c1 If it has great fever retained, such that the veins do not attract excesses from the intestines which are harmful to the main members.
Nor does it heal those who consume too much meat or alcohol, regardless of their strength and thirst.
and if one is afflicted with diarrhea after the pains of colic, vomiting, an upset stomach, frequent intercourse with a woman or manual labor, wakefulness and conjunctions, as well as any other weakening factors, whether by weaponry or injury to the body.
; (t; they nei;  1 and: the s. This tet cont m.
Then apply a bath if there is no obstruction, to promote blood flow.
and cleanse the vein near the wound with a third bandage as we have said;
and avoid work, pain, extravagance, and similar things on that day;
by the le par lesse:
Then stretch out the ligaments moderately, for when it is too tight or loose, it cannot be corrected without.
and then heat the area with hands until the veins swell, and they become hot to touch.
then moisten the sinew with a bit of old oil, and place your finger from your left hand on the vein just above the head area for as long as you wish to strengthen it. That the vein does not open at being struck. For there are veins that escape like ropes from the juggler, and some of which are flat due to thinness. if when placed upon the flame, it retreats into the flame and cannot open the vein, thus they are such.
as de le couits to ond; and:  c.
And if the vein works on the first attempt, it is good; but if not, try again for a while from that place where you worked hastily, unless the lump has swollen.
And if the lump is swoln, and the patient becomes hopeful, let him rest for a day or two, and do not tie his arm. Perhaps he will come to abscesses soon; do not enter the bath, then resume the medicine if it pleases him.
If the perforation is small or if there is subtle bleeding and you doubt that it does not release as much blood as you see, apply pressure directly to the same hole.
And tend the wound slightly tautly so that the flesh swells; because this often happens when the wound is small.
If you see the flesh swelling, do not continue to cleanse it, and put a little oil on it, as it eases pain in that area, and is an effective substitute for lime at this location.
And thus manage with oil each wound you cleanse by cleansing the veins to stop the flow of blood.
And it is done with triacle and bowels as well, when placed over the wound; so subtle are the veins that they burst if too large.
And if there comes an abscess often, particularly when it has not been healed and the opening of the vein is small at that time. the.
And it is necessary that you do this after the blood issue of the vein, and if it remains at its place for some days without any blackness or greenish color, then it does not harm. And if you see, apply some of the juice of aloe or myrrh mixed with wormwood, ointment, or similar substance.
And often occurs an abscess and appearance of the sore on the bladder: so place your hand over it, and if you find the area soft to pressure with your hand, then that is the bad sign. Then accordingly do not place anything on any of the things we have said, for perhaps in the court without touching an artery; but make a dry plaster with .i. substance to harden the area, then heal it with another remedy until it is sound.
And treat each wound according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
For if the blood is black, let it flow until it turns red; and if you see that it is thick, let it flow until it becomes thin; and if it is too warm, let it cool down.
And it is necessary for those who are flat and extended, and need blood extraction, to make them wider wounds, with wide veins.
And for those who are weak, do the opposite, and make them bandage lightly but frequently, and it should be bandaged by cutting across rather than pricking.
And this way of bandaging is safe from blood flow and nerve pinching, and it is better for the bandage to be long or wide than narrow.
the tretes. Thene ne se mainsich. Butt this. And if a
If it is of cold complexion, mix the medicine with bread soaked in syrup mixed with honey-based syrup or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and fragrant syrup.
And if the palm is affected by the disease after bloodletting, it is necessary that he inhales a blend of gum and fragrant, subtle syrup.
and apply other things as we have mentioned in the treatise on fainting, for the evacuation of veins.
If he wishes to unbind the arm and suspend it another time if needed, when weakened by great fatigue, so that it is loosely done according to the amount of its continuous strength.
And if he wishes to unbind the arm after the first suspension and is strong-bodied, then it should be loosened for six hours after the first suspension or after the ninth hour.
And if he wishes to suspend another limb, then he must do so on the second day or later.
When there is much blood within the body that has been scorched, and it causes fever; therefore one must draw a large quantity of milk-like fluid, and dilate the veins until they flow freely. Then you should address all aspects of health and place your hand over the pulse when it beats, to prevent death from occurring in that area. And this often occurs when healers are neglectful,
And it is not necessary when you see a dislocated arm, to make blood flow the second time and the wound be closed, but rather apply pressure firmly on top. If it is bent, extend the arm quickly, for that would be bad.
but let it heal the second time; or at the tip of the flame, until the blood that has clotted in the vein flows again. man's c, but by t;  (their. If;
If the vein is swollen, leave it alone and do not bind it, until the abscess is soothed.
And if bleeding is needed a second time, cleanse the same place or another vein, or on the other arm.
The veins within the arm are cleansed in the area of the main vein because it is composed (of them).
They M. The word se p s and so: some to the next theta time by Magb a deux t lest-you's, and d. This is not f (hte la m.
Then bind it securely so the vein appears well, then suture now across, not wide or long.
And let the puncture be large, and stitch well near the joint of the hand so that nothing can escape from it, then place the hand in hot water, allowing the blood to flow into the water until there is enough.
And if it's swollen, do not place the hand in hot water again, as one places it more often in winter than summer.
; and en kumboltaille the f; t fas by l's;
The condition of the salvatelle of the right hand is applicable to all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner:
Straighten the hand, and put it in hot water until the veins are expelled, if you can see them. and if the condition is twisted, and if you bind it all around completely, do not cause harm to anything else;
.
And then put the hand in warm water if it is frozen in the wound, and cannot be removed from there.
And when you have treated the wound as much as necessary, apply oil and honey to it for rapid healing, and do this with each cut.
The salve of the eye in the left hand is effective against the disease of scabies, and do as I have told you with the right hand.
they c: it’s: The line:mfe ETD e t (in themdiz not cetoreard and so; if na ben ça et f. As with diseases of the muscles, paralysis of fingers, and illness of nerves, and old ailments of hips and legs, and similar diseases.
And the nature of his health is such that the patient will vomit up clots in hot water, and rub on the vein until it clears. and lie above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and from there flow many nerves.
Clean the wound or enlarge it further, whether at the joint or ankle, ensuring movement is possible.
And if you cleanse it at the foot, beware of any nerves that are exposed, and dress the wound as when bandaging a limb; let the padding be evenly placed.
And if no blood can escape, put the foot in water and ensure thorough draining of the vein.
cannot ce emt. Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and similarly treat the other arm equally.
The lameness of the sciatic vein is at the ankle joint, and its swelling causes pain in the hip when it's hot with blood.
And the quality of its swelling is such that the patient goes to or from the bath and stretches it out 4 fingers above the ankle while twisting.
For otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, then the blood flows in all ways that you can see, and across. and must be moved so you catch it, for the vein is loose, and it has risen greatly towards the hands.
and must be moved so you catch it, for the vein is loose, and it has risen greatly towards the hands. And if you do not catch it, let any part of the vein that is opened or torn flow out through its end or side, and towards the small finger, and protect against numbness.
sue Ca (h:
Of suction cups
Suction cups are made of horns, glass, or ivory; and suction is done in two ways: by piercing to draw blood, or without piercing.
And the suction method that does not involve piercing is done in two ways: either at full heat, or without heating.
And two more on both sides of the neck; and the vein from under the chin; and the hernia of the two shoulders; and the hernia on the crura. and the hernias between the two arms; and the hernias in the two legs; and the hernias of the two ankles; and the ventosation does not treat blood loss, but for small veins scattered in the flesh.
: s. And it is not necessary for it to be cushioned or warmed with fire or any warmth, in any illness that arises from overrepletion, until all the body has been emptied of fluids.
And if it is necessary for illnesses to be drained, or by habit, let us drain each hour at the beginning and end of the month, and every other day.
because there are those who, when they have need to be drained, also suffer headaches.
And for those who experience swelling and redness on their face, and head, and neck, and darkness in the eyes.
And those who experience a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and bleeding. And if there are those who think and see through numbed blood and agonies and deaths and similar things.
And when we see these signs, especially when it is in the middle of the month, we order to ventose after three and a half hours past noon.
The sainted of the mouse helps with greatness of the head ... that comes to them, and it is not necessary for this to be after the evacuation of all the body;
This windwounding is located at the site of the head's injury.
And it should not be used by those who have a cold constitution or scurvy, as it causes them great harm.
And it should not be used by those with weak eyesight or cold diseases of the head.
And those who suffer often become forgetful, and therefore it is necessary to apply the poultice slightly lower due to suspicion of dislocation.
The wind-washing inside the neck is in line with the inflammation of the head and the spleen, and thus it serves to lengthen the affected area. and to incision of the throat channel, and all other matters, including enlargement.
cas marckie as m
Ventilation of the two ribs near the neck causes pain in the head, otitis and migraines, strangulation, and pain at the roots of teeth.
And it is in the sanctuary of the basilica; and you must instruct the nurse to express his hand in placement, so he does not cut the artery or bleed excessively.
Ventilation from below the chin causes mouth disease, and decay of gums, and various diseases that are in the mouth; it is in the sanctueby the two lips.
The swelling of the shoulders is an illness that comes from heat and filling up.
The swelling of the joints is as if it were three wounds on the arm. For it draws blood from these large veins;
and instructs the surgeon not to cut too deeply, as the tissue is close to veins and arteries.
The ventouse placed on the buttocks is useful for hemorrhoids and conditions below them, so it must be large, made of linen, and need to be well wrung; and sometimes if they are too thin, they may break; causing large wounds.
The buboes of the legs drain blood readily, for they attract blood from all over the body, and are worth their weight in old-time headaches, and of kidneys, and bladder issues, and relieve spasms; and they lie at two sophistries, and two ankles, and generally weaken the body after long use, and bring about paralysis in various conditions.
The way to apply the bubo is that you first put it in an empty place and do so promptly, and set it quickly, and move equally, and do not cease doing so until you see the redness and swelling, and appear with a dull blood; then tighten, and remove the ventouses, and take care of the condition of the body, for there are some who have scabies and clear pores: it is sufficient to prick once only, and make large shallow cuts.
And if the bubo is large, you should prick twice: the first time to facilitate the way of the thick blood.
And if the bone is severely damaged, one must strike a third time; and when we wish to draw out little blood at a time, we should only do so once.
And if we wish to draw out much blood, let us begin often; and if the bone is severely damaged, strike it deeply at first, ensuring that the joints are swiftly pierced.
and it is appropriate for those with thick and hard skin, who have these characteristics, to apply the eyes of absorbent oil that are invigoraturative. If it is this way, with oil of violets or almond softening, or squash seed oil.
And if it is healed, with watercress oil, or of lilies, or chamomile, or similar substances.
And if the swelling is large and cold, take oil of frankincense, or balm of galangal, or aniseed oil, and other like substances.
And if you treat those with tender and wide chairs, there is no need to put oil.
But it is necessary to wash after the ventosation with pink water, or cold water, or blackthorn water, or gourd water, or porcelain water, or any similar substance.
And those who have much moisture should get up easily, or water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
And those who have large excesses should get up with old wine, or water of suckling, or an extract of anise or chamomile, or other similar substances.
Et il ne faut pas qu'on soulève avec un garrot avant ou après le bain ni pendant le bain, mais une heure ou deux après le bain; et ne dort pas après la compression.
Et il convient qu'on l'arrose quand on doit souligner et quand il a été soulevé. Et garde-toi de celui qui a le foie colérique, et dont la peau est trop grasse et inflammée ; If it is necessary to apply cold things, such as ripe pomegranates and endives and lettuce at ease, and similar items.
and mashed pulse, and quail blood, and moist meats.
And those who have a cold constitution should apply honey syrup and fragrant wine that is neither too old nor new, with small portions of mashed pulse, along with mashed legumes and small birds and wildfowl.
nusckt to f: (so fatir KZRchfat.
And it is proper to give certain individuals either triacle or muscat wine before or after, to strengthen the main limbs. And be careful in administering it; however, only those who are hot should drink it.
The cupping that is done without injury are those placed on the liver and kidneys, and gout, and abdomen and headache and rheumatism and hip, for that limb cannot be struck there.
line; (prie marx tocarontir C' bye la formmanis. If as we place on the eyes when they are healthy; to remove the hardness that is in the limb, as we apply bladders on the belly and on the thighs to reduce the limb.
And remove pain when there is swelling or stones, if extract by its attracting power perhaps the swelling, and displace the stone from its place.
And so do it when placed upon the liver and groin where there is retained windiness,
And these blisters are arranged with empty cups to drain as needed; and sometimes they are filled with fire, and at other times with plain water.
And if it is like pneumonia, and in such a manner that you fill the blister with hot water or water to which herbs have been boiled.
The form of the blister treatment using fire is as follows:
And it should have two pieces of width and half the length of a palm at its front, and around the millieu there must be one small hole, just as to insert a needle.
And it should have an opening, soft in front so that it does not harm the patient when placed on the limb.
and within the middle there must be a crossbeam of linen or iron to hold in place a candle holder.
r progress. M:
Car the pustules of children are not like those old, and lean as fatty ones.
And should this pustule be placed upon the limb thusly?
And take the candle of wax or a salve and place it within the pustule across the shaft which is within the pustule. If the whiteness is at the bottom of the bladder, so it does not burn the patient.
Then place it upon the limb, and your thumb should be under the palm as we have mentioned, so that when you want to do so, a vapor arises and you open the bladder.
And wrap it with the lining as before, and repeat often if necessary.
the final.
And here is its form:
Without exception, they are placed only in limbs where one cannot apply cupping due to their small size, such as lips and gums. and on the naked areas of flesh, like bumps or nipples, and similar things.
be c coms gist:
And they place her on an inclined soft bed, until she is accustomed to it, and has no discomfort in the belly. And then provide veins and a poultice, then rub the limb until it is reddened, and apply bandages.
And when they are filled and have healed, if you can place them near where the poultice is, then do so, as it is very beneficial.
If not, raise the limb with ease, then thoroughly moisten it, very well, then squeeze.
And if the limb is too much after being moved from its normal position, soak it in cold water with a linen cloth, and apply until the swelling subsides.
And if there are multiple areas of swelling, apply crushed vitriol or gall nuts and similar substances until it subsides.
(un gue los tudroit lines
And if you need more remedies, then take other substances.
And if the medicines do not work, rub the site of fresh blood with a needle until they take effect. and then apply them there, and as soon as you feel the blood, let it rest;
they are so e t s f.
This begins the book of fractures
These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine and involve the treatment of fractures and dislocations.
Know, dear son, that the wise physicians are versed in this treatise of mine, which they have never seen in any old books or letters read.
bytum:
And I know nothing, but through the knowledge of ancient books which I have studied so much that I have mastered their teachings, and by experience, and from the habits of my life.
And I have described here in this chapter what is contained within it, and shortened at the end, and clearly shown the forms of treatments that are applied, as I did in these two previous chapters.
Therefore, we must say or prologue of this book contains the essence of words and chapters in which the wise man places his understanding, and remains on truth so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
When fracture or dislocation or twists or sprains occur in any part, it is necessary to support the injured person on both sides if nothing totally supports them, as with a weak body, children, or elderly.
And if the pain is not too severe or very cold; and mix warm foods such as cold broth, meat of birds and rabbits, and do not drink wine nor consume any fatty dishes, nor fill oneself with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt about a hot abscess or discharge of matter from the limb; then the patient returns to his previous state as he has been accustomed.
And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to feed the patient with meats that cause nourishment or thickness like cooked wheat in water, and rice, lamb testicles, liver, bacon, eggs, fresh fish, large wine, and such things. To partial dislocation, there appear movements and sooner fractures occur.
And know that old and brittle bones cannot be well reunited or fused according to their nature for limb support, nor those who are too tender, like the bones of young children.
But do not forget to reset the broken bone with a large bandage that is strong and joins the member together, until it becomes as sturdy as before; and let him not discontinue his efforts entirely, and for this he must nourish himself with hearty meats, as we have said.
le f s.
When a fracture of the head is different from a fracture of the leg or foot, and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures. There are fractures that go to breaking, others by splintering, as the sharpening of a quill for writing.
There are fractures that go to breaking, others by splintering, as the sharpening of a quill for writing. And if there is a fracture with an open wound, and a fracture that's just a small crack.
the n’t
And it is known that bone fractures occur because the joint is twisted and opened widely on one side, and located near the wrist of the hand.
And when there is no twist or touching together, and the patient does not feel much pain, then there is no fracture.
But it can well have a twist, or tear, or small fracture. s noce t2; (C:
And know that the fractures which go into tilt, and are the two parts disconnected, they must now be set evenly, just as abscesses also arise.
and if abscesses occur, leave it for no day until the abscess is soothed. then set it as evenly as you can easily and gently, knowing that the restoration of this is easier than those with missing parts; then strain it if necessary thereafter.
the n's
And place the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken limb are separated, you reset them by all means at their original positions as best you can, and ensure through your work there is no injury or pain for the patient.
And properly join the two bones according to the best forms.
And feel well with your hand if it seems not rightly: then dress it neatly and do not bind or press too tightly as those who often cause abscesses and member constriction through their work; we have seen this many times.
When the limb is at a standstard position, properly instruct the patient not to move it, whether awake or asleep, turning or in any other manner. And ensure that the limb is so secured that it feels no pain. And when it feels no pain except at one spot, make sure to position the limb so that it feels no pain at all.
And when it feels no pain except at one spot, make sure to position the limb so that it feels no pain at all. And ensure it is put back properly, so twistedness does not occur when restored.
And the quality of the broken member depends on what I tell you.
Aches that the broken limbs are of various kinds, small and large, and form.
Because there are small members such as bones and veins: wrap with soft and fine linen cloths.
oun and the sere so que la mort est avir, come les gens they pries.
Then the joint is slightly loosened, three turns or four according to the limb, and grip the hand a bit throughout the ligament, then go above the break and strain less, so the break then move it slightly apart.
and soften the ligament a little bit at a time until you grasp a large part of it in its original position, then take another ligament, and turn around correctly on the broken spot.
then go back to the part below the break and strain moderately, not too hard or too weakly, as we have said in the first section above.
Then place between the intertwined threads of linen or cloth until it is all equal, then bind securely above an armband, and then place well-made supports underneath, if there are no abscesses or swelling.
And if there is an abscess or swelling, then apply something soothing to the abscess warmly and remove the swelling, leaving it thus for a few days.
Then secure your supports and they should be of a moderate width about the size of a hand's breadth or wood for making splints, or palm fronds, following this pattern:
However, it is necessary for the staff inserted through the break to be a bit larger and wider than the others.
and as long as required by the size of the limb, whether small or large;
then tie up with sutures in the same way as you did on the first occasion, and bandage quickly using a thread, just like in the initial setting of the fracture.
When wider it is, then lesser it becomes; and it must be that the thread be of medium size, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of flax.
Because if the thread is too thick, as I have observed in the works of peasants who twist their flax strings into cords for mending, it is a great mistake, because the string cannot be uniform if it is too fine, and it must not have less than two spaces between each stitch.
And if the patient is in pain from the heads of the nails after straightening them into healthy ones, then apply linen patches or rag cloth underneamoors, so that they do not loosen.
When the wound is with a fracture, and the bones are broken, I will describe its treatment hereafter.
And know that it does not matter to extract all fragments from fractured limbs on the first day. For when the limbs are large, it does not matter to insert splints that after 5 or 6 days, or more depending on the likelihood of a hot swelling occurring.
by far le fle lo une;
Another way of making a plaster for healing fractures and dislocations and twists: take pine resin and yarrow and onion, an ounce; myrrh and aloes, two ounces; alum seven ounces; and make it into powder, adding honey with egg whites. If the patient's constitution is hot, use this plaster, as it has good composition and quickly restores broken bones, effective for many people.
Another plaster effective for twists: take mugat and wormwood an cu. Mirri and aloes iiij cu. Acacia vi cu. Balsamic amber x cu., grind well, mix with water or egg whites, apply.
Another plaster for joints and bones coming out of their place, which eases pain felt, and cleans the wound: take fresh lamb's suet, milliard meal and boiled oil, and apply on it. This plaster does not restore but is good to soothe burns from a hot abscess, and properly relieves pains.
Another method for setting broken bones: take dry leaves of fig trees and ground ivy, and grind them together to make a plaster.
Another method for plastering to heal broken bones and reduce swelling from an abscess: take the root of valerian, chamomile, violet flowers, barley flour in equal parts; grind them together, mix with wine, and if the limb is inflamed, apply it with moist coriander water or plain water.
Another more effective method for plastering to heal members with a hard abscess: take the root of valerian, flax seeds, alkanet, mallow seeds, and wormwood; violet flowers and chamomile in equal parts; grind them together and mix with salt water or freshwater or wine, depending on the warmth of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras says in his book that one should not apply anything on a broken limb to restore its strength, but only wax mixed with oil, and nothing else; he states it should be neither too hard nor too soft between two.
And it seems Galen believes one should apply dry and slightly warm substances to a broken limb for restoration, such as myrrh, olive oil, incense, and similar things, as we have mentioned.
Another method for treating wounds and pain: take mugwort and henbane leaves, or bird feathers, and yarrow; grind them equally, and pound into a paste to apply as a poultice.
And then gently relocate them shortly afterward, and be cautious that the patient feels no pain or has moved any bones from their place; if they do not dislocate again on their own.
If pain, itching, feeling of restlessness or swelling comes, hurry and relocate them again, and apply the splint now; take a light cloth, dampen with seawater, soak in clear water, lift up the limb until the itch subsides, and the pain is alleviated. Then let the limb rest for an hour, then bind it with dry linen, softened in clear water or rose oil, and lay under a quilt until you are certain there is no fever.
And rest the inflammation of the limb, and if it is bone causing pain, then begin to reset subtly again, with a little bit of plaster, and do not strain so hard as before; and continue delicately until it is normal.
And if you see that the abscess is red and warmth and pain and swelling indicate bone involvement throughout, and you need plaster and bandages to do so again as before.
And if nothing comes to the limb as we have mentioned, do not dislocate it except after 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 days; and never leave it for more than 20 days, according to what is seen, until the fracture heals, and bring the joint back into alignment.
Then you must reset it more securely than before, and the swelling will subside as I have said earlier; and if you see that the place is drying out too much, know that infections cannot come. arises it must from hot water baths, every time you loosen it, and this should be done daily, and apply a little ointment.
in this treatment, thus prevent the formation of sores on the limb, and hasten what are done by the false healers who return the limb improperly: that is wrong and harmful, and I see nothing else but pain and doing the work correctly.
Of various ways of fractures Many ways of fractures exist, and various shapes, and the causes are distinctive;
Connatured est lesoil be done by the sest of les ossoz à toutes le mieux. ici sont des iste lesmaucaus, car ite de l’est peur et li charpte qui que tu may beque and that are made as d’os en telles tu est ceste ouste, done so est tout du par sgrat;
When the sword cuts through the bone above without piercing it, this manner of "absolute" fracture occurs; and there is a wound from these two great or small breaks.
And if there is an impacted break, or fracture, or stone chip, or falling on a stone, or similar things.
And if there is a hanging fracture, which reaches up to the tissue just below the bone, or it is above the bnose and is this wound great or small.
And if there is a wound that has been sutured into the bone as subtly as with threaded needles, and it is a small tear, thus this breakage is called "hairline."
And if the wound is made or caused by being pierced with an arrow, falling, or similar occurrence, and results in a piece of bone entering inside, it behaves as bellows do when inflated upon themselves; thus between the arrows within.
And this occurs more often with those who have moist skulls, like children's heads;
And it occurs in all these ways of breaking where small parts are displaced, as they should be; and I will speak about them here.
And let us know all ways of fractures through dislocation above them, and examination with probing fingers, and by the corrupt cartilage found thereupon.
The resemblance of hair is known when the bone has been uncovered, and rubbed black above it if there is an open fracture.
by the them (S cijd. So much and, t so far a m
When you do not see an unstable fracture or expect healing, begin treatment.
And when the pain comes first to you, and it is winter, then on the fourteenth day of the moon that you can see, remove the bone in front.
If it is so situated, hurry to remove the bone within seven days, as long as the tissue underneath the bone becomes corrupted, and the accidents we have mentioned occur.
And if the bone fracture reaches the tissue covering the brain, it is necessary that you split the broken part thus: and ensure that you grasp the injured head with a wound, and expose above the bone in all ways that you can, and on the surface of the wound as gently as possible.
And if bleeding progresses to reveal the bone or abscess, use what is appropriate for this purpose, and ensure that you fill the cavity with wool soaked in oil. And let the wound rest until the abscess is soothed and blood flow is certain; then begin around the bone to remove it, and this is done in two ways of operation: one method is that you cut at the narrow opening ahead, and this is its shape.
Then make another incision larger than the first.
And the second method is that you have various cuts of different widths - some narrow and others wide, sharp at one end and flat at another, made of iron wire; and work gently so as not to nick the skull.
And if the bone is out of place and hardened, it must be that you pierce around it, thus fitting in splints with tongs, not too far so they don't penetrate beyond the outer bone; there should be a margin or circle above the tip, which does not allow the point to pass through the bone; thus you will have several, each coming into its place on the edge of the bone, with tongs for all tests. And this is the form of the three ways of tongs:
The quality for piercing around the broken bone is to place one tongs on the beam, and turn it back and forth until you know that the bone has been pierced; then move the tongs a little bit afterward, doing this all around, then measure with incisors the space of the bone between the punctures, making it as finely as possible, lightly, as we have said, to trace out the bone with your hand or any of the instruments you have like pincers; and be sure not to touch the brain or spinal cord.
And when you have pierced the bone and traced it out, so that you remove the readiness which is close to the bone from all other instruments similar to an incision tool, but it must be more sharp and finer than the others.
If it lingers any small bones or scales, then lightly press with fingers to the strains; then treat the wound of stitches and ointments as we have said.
And another method of treatment is this which the Greeks call it, and it is more beneficial; and he holds it very strongly, and that's my opinion. It is necessary first that you expose part of the bone, at which the fracture opens up; and when you have exposed that part, then place on top of the head of this crescent-shaped instrument, of which here is the shape:
And do not cut too deeply on one side, and it is an agitated part in two sides, so that the cutting faces towards the bone; then gently strike with a small mallet from below, ensuring you lightly tap all around the bone without injuring the skin.
If it is loose to the bone and gently strike the bone lightly, for one could cause harm or fear if struck too hard.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate through to the skin and is cut only from above, with small fragments remaining; then address the roughness afterward, and use a subtle file to remove scales at each location, using various quantities for optimal treatment based on the work and nature of the break.
If you encounter large boils, then proceed with more subtle ones, and continue until it is well done.
In the case of any fine hair cutting and delicate fractures, it is necessary to treat according to its specific nature; this is not easily restored in those who have devoted themselves to this art.
And if the sore is uncovered, it is necessary to take a piece of flax linen cloth according to the amount of the wound, and apply oil-soaked cotton on the wound; Then take another bandage folded in double or triple layers, and moisten it with vinegar and oil, rose-scented. Place it on the first bandage, then do this more gently than possible so as not to burden the patient's face, afterwards treat above by using another ligature, and do not tighten it until only the wound itself is covered.
And leave it as such for a day or two until the swelling of the abscess has calmed, then release it, and administer herbs like lily roots, wheat flour, incense powder, aristolochia, etc. Make a dust from these things, apply to the ward, and add medicines without causing numbing;
And ensure that the wound remains clean, do not allow any ointment or bandage to be left on it, as when hair grows beneath a brain cloth, they can stick and cause great harm; because when something irritating is placed upon the face, it causes discomfort above.
Thus take heed, if by any chance something happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
And if blackness comes as a result of the medicine applied, that it has power, then one must take part of honey and three parts rose oil and mix them with a cloth, and apply it to the wound. Then follow the methods of care that are appropriate until he is healthy again.
; a.
And if one of the two parts is broken, it must be that you insert your little finger or thimble into the nose, and align the break within your index finger, and in the nostril as far back as possible, until the fracture returns to its natural shape. And do this gently, so that the patient does not feel pain during your work.
And if the break is on the part above the nose and the thumb cannot be placed at its place, you should slightly enlarge the head of a saw to make room for it.
And if the fracture is of two parts, do similarly, and hurry to restore it by the first day, if you can.
If not, after the seventh or similar day, when the abscesses are soothed, then bind to the neck with tent-cloths of flaxen cloth if the fracture is in one part.
And in similar semblable, ou tres-so est isnt les de. Sime the untie, ith: li cauter que en l'artempe thee of bone est desor, ce tissiez d’elles le se, la cousts and soi ores le chis.
And some restorers say that they must grease the threads with butter and change each day. It does not seem to me that this is good, but it should be done by making a mixture of egg yolk and powdered mill, then leave the thread until the bone has set and the cartilage hardened.
And never use goose feathers in place of threads, and if there is an eggshell fragment nearby, and it causes a breakage, then bring relief to the patient by blowing away. Do what you see fit.
And if an abscess comes while working on the patient, put some greased wool or cotton soaked in rose oil, or a little bit of diacron.
If abscesses do not come out, apply poultice with preference using wheat flour and incense powder mixed with egg white, then place it on lightly soaked swabs, without tying the bandages tight.
If the bone break is small and broken into tiny pieces, remove any fragments that are suitable for extraction, then cut the fissure, treat with care in accordance with poultices and salves appropriate to this.
If there is no bone fracture in the limb, treat with straps and apply splints until it heals.
Of the displacement of the jawbone
When the jawbone is dislocated and there is no resulting wound, the fracture is slight, as it does not involve bones breaking apart easily, if one can feel gaps internally.
If the fracture is in the right part, you should insert your index finger into the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is on the left mandible, put your index finger from the right hand, gently feel inside the fracture, and guide it with the other hand carefully, enscribing them.
After 96. Why they:
If the dislocations of the teeth occur, or jarring, then they are strained with a thread of gold or silver or silk; then put on a fractured mandible cerote, and place over it a double cloth; then place a large well-made stone under the cloth according to the size of the mandible, and measure as much movement that you can allow, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light meats.
And if you see that the shape changes, relocate it by the next day, and then put back what is changing; place a poultice on top, with finely ground flour or wheat bran powder after you have removed the cerote; place a light linen over the poultcuie, and if the poultuce swells, ensure the patient's condition does not change, leave it until it is healed; many times it is healed in three weeks.
And if abscesses come up, treat as we have said many times.
If there is a fracture and wound together, ensure no piece of bone has been extracted; carefully extract the fragment from the surrounding tissues with this instrument.
And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it using a flap according to necessity.
And once you have removed all these pieces of bone, and it does not remain in place, if the wound is wide, then apply on top .i. splints with straps to immobilize it, until it heals properly.
the; O's. The powerful breaks many times before the shoulder, and the breakage occurs in three ways: where it is broken and separated into two, and also has pieces, and is easier to restore; or there is a break with an accompanying wound.
And the procedures are when there is a break with an accompanying wound, so that you have two assistants; one washes the dislocated shoulder where the powerful break occurred; and the other extends the neck toward the affected part; then place the break evenly on both hands, ensuring proper alignment without any bulging or jutting.
And if further extension is needed, place under the shoulder of the patient a round rod made of cloth or linen and thick according to your necessity; stretch and lift the powerful break, holding the rod with one hand, ensuring proper alignment as it should be.
If you cannot draw the head of the dislocation to its proper place because it comes from far away, then have the patient lie on their stomach and insert half an ounce earring under the shoulder blade, pushing the ministers down the back until the bone of the dislocated joint is raised.
And then approach the fracture with your hands, and if you find fragments, it is necessary to cut into them. Carefully remove the pieces of bone, and if they cannot be joined by any means, use one of the instruments you have prepared; but place this instrument under the dislocation for safety.
And it should resemble a spoon and not be pointed, and have the same width as necessary for the size of the bone and strength of your hand. It must have two handles, just like you see, with one being wider and the other narrower, according to the shape of the wound that occurred when you treated the bones.
And when you are sure of the abscess's heat, if it is a small wound, or if you doubt the pus amount, apply the dressing and bandages accordingly to its quantity.
And when abscesses come out, if pus is present, apply linen soaked in rose oil and alcohol and wine, and put on top.
The extraction of bones when the wound is not too large and does not taper, place pounded powder mixed with fresh egg yolk on the bone, and put fine gauze over it, and place a sponge underneath the splint if necessary. Then take a very wide band of one palm in width, then place a double cloth over the stoppage and the splint; then take a subtle pin of three fingers' breadth long and wide, wrap it around that band so that the head of the band is hanging. And place the pin over the breakage, and turn the band around the neck, and beneath both shoulders, one good and one bad. Tie each side securely, and when you see that the fracture is held firmly in place, and it's clear to you that the pin does not move above the broken bone, then check on them every day; if the ligatures loosen, retighten them.
And lay the patient with his bad shoulder on his back, and place a small pillow underneath the shoulder when he sleeps to lift it upwards; this will ease the pain in the fracture by supporting the shoulder properly, so you tie the arm to the neck, making sure that nothing untoward happens.
Then begin the splint again if it is necessary, and restrain and leave it so, until restored; it is usually restored in no more than twenty-eight days, or sooner for some people.
Regarding a shoulder fracture
Sometimes it occurs that the shoulder is fractured or widened and cannot be moved at all, and one should not touch it; then set it according to the shape of the breakage, and bandage it in a natural way in any manner you can; then put powder made from milled wheat with plenty of egg whites, and light gauze; then place over the shoulder an oval patch slightly wider than the fracture, without leaving gaps on the shoulder, and cover that area with linen strips so that the patch cuts evenly; and then secure it tightly with a large bandage so that the patch does not move from its place, and check the suture every day; and each time there is pain, reinforce the dressing, and adjust the oval if it becomes loose, and elevate the limb of the patient. The shoulder will be restored in twenty or twenty-five days
And if a piece of bone protrudes without breaking the skin, treat it gently, as we have discussed in our section on easing abscesses with heat.
Of healing broken legs.
The thigh is rarely broken in the middle part, but it often breaks towards the end. And when it is broken in the middle, it descends downwards, and causes the patient great pain, weakness, numbness, heat, and sometimes vomits blood, with exposed bone ends at the fracture site, which feel quite badly.
The restoration is to have the patient lie on their back, placing a pillow between the shoulders, then pressing the shoulder blades and bringing together the ribs with both hands, carefully ensuring all limbs are positioned equally as necessary until the bone structure appears correctly; next apply splints and padding over the fracture subtly using salt or another light substance, wrapping it in a cloth so that it does not move. Return the ligament to its round shape on the back, stretching gently and releasing every hour as it heals, and continue if it becomes more relaxed; and if it needs to be dislocated due to corrosion or itchiness at the site, pain, or pus, do so quickly, then apply a remedy using various methods of care; afterward, reset the splint and keep it stretched until healthy.
For rib fractures
For if the incisions are often found on the back, and it is severe painful to remove them, and they must be inspected closely like that there may not heal; for infection should be examined carefully by physicians of wounds or other such cases when sus lissoie de la pus.
And the reductions are such that you align the fracture properly, as it should be. Then place a splint, and if needed, secure with a stake.
And if the fracture of the ribs is descending into the interior, causing great pain and numbness to the patient as with pleurisy, for the bone lacks flesh; it has many nicks, and brings up much blood vomitus, which is a serious illness, and the ancients have applied significant remedies.
And from those who say that it is necessary to administer meats that inflate the belly, in order to push the fracture forward.
We do not advise creating wounds when there are pus-filled abscesses present unless they have already occurred. And if they have occurred, then treat them accordingly.
And some say that applying cups on the body to draw out humors is reasonable, although there is doubt that these cups may attract excess fluids due to weakness in the body's positioning.
as many not so that the following them: ichoont read f (and they are all; a certaineckse contley line.
And if the patient feels great pain that cannot be endured due to the bone not holding up, causing doubt in the patient, then one must cut near the broken rib location; and it is necessary to use an instrument for protection against a syphilic condition; then one should cut the bone, gently draw out fragments, and then sew the two edges of the wound if large, and treat with emollient plasters until healed. And if pus arises, put moistened rags in oil rose pattern on it, and place over the location; while tending to the lining where it should be for pus, let it rest loosely against the rib cage or where it should be, until healed.
Of a broken rib
Never comes a fractured bone of the ribcage, and it is possible that it may bend; and also in the spine of the back. When this happens to anyone and you wish to know if they will be well or not, take heed if you see their hands becoming soft, swollen, and lifeless, unable to move or extend them, and when pricked with a needle, do not feel anything. Know that it is fatal in some dispositions; but if they can move and feel well when strained without pain, know that the bone joint is safe, and the patient will be healed if given care.
And if similar things occur in the spine of the back, and you wish to know if they will be well or not, take heed if their feet are softened, and if there is swelling on either side of the back that hinders movement; and when lifted over his belly, defecation occurs without willingness. And when it has been pressed under its stomach and wants to rise, cannot do so. Know that it is fatal: do not exert yourself in its care.
And if this incident does not occur, then the matter is more lightweight.
And the treatment is to apply if there is an abscess heat, then put oil of roses or olive oil on the spine until it is soothed; then place it under one of the comforting and drying plasters, bind with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest; do not sleep on that part where he feels pain, until healed. And if any bone is dislocated, it must be set under the head; then remove the bone, and join the two edges of the wound with a stitch, if they are large, until healed; and if the bone's head is broken, known as "the skull fracture," put your pouch in your left hand, and balance it equal to your right hand, then place the plaster and bandage on top, if needed; then bind it, and if there are any dislocated bones, mend them, remove them, and treat the wound until it is healed.
For a broken hipbone fracture, apply treatment to stabilize the area; use splints or plasters for support if necessary, and provide pain relief using appropriate methods as per medical knowledge of that time.
Often the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it happens, there's not a slight reduction at its head; and they make long cuts, sloping to the sole, coming in pain at the place, and swelling as though broken.
And for the restoration, extend your hand over it until you are above the break; and determine which bone is broken and its shape; and if the break is only at the head, make it even with that break so it can be in natural form.
And if the break is long or slopes to the sole, make the patient lie on their belly until the restoration of that break is complete. When you have set it evenly, place under the plaster, then place on a wooden or metal pillar and strain the breakage so that it does not move; and wrap with linen from below the ribs until it is aligned.
And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side or back.
And if an abscess comes, do not touch it until the abscess has subsided; and then follow what we have previously mentioned; and afterward proceed with restoration, and strain as necessary, unless there is any complication; this is the method.
Of the fracture of the shoulder
The shoulders are those which lie between the collarbone and the top of the shoulder blade, and if they are broken, then one must be repaired according to one of the two ways; that is, take a piece of plain wood as an splint, in this manner.
And tie the two shoulders with two ligaments, and place the patient under one of them; then pour blood over the broken bone on the splint until it reaches halfway, and have a crook made from wood, then rest it under any heavy object or extenders provided by attendants; then set the fracture equally between his hands together, so that the break returns as it should.
the t; and the cont that b
If the extraction is more forceful, restrain a bandage from below the break and along it, and extend each part of the limb. And if the fracture is near the shoulder blade's head, one must place a bandage in the middle under the elbow, and another towards the wrist, beneath the fracture; similarly, if the fracture is towards the wrist, it requires gently applying a lighter pressure without strain until the break is equal on both sides, and along the forearm. Then adjust the alignment correctly as needed, and secure it, unless abscesses develop thereafter.
If abscesses occur, do not restrain them for more than six days and apply a cloth with ease and oil roseate until the abscess is soothed; then secure it, and the manner of securing should be such that you place an embossment over the break, then bring the arm close to the shoulder joint, and put your hand on the shoulder or chest; wrap it up and restrain above the joint as well as the arm until it is steadily aligned, unless anything prevents this or if the bone has not moved.
If you doubt that the bone does not move, use restraints and place a larger and stronger than others, and each pinçaints of which are iii degrees of space entre parts; then secure it so on top, as many espleure .i. Then above the break is more less than aligne de, and after chapter so that ii of which of them up inchement auaint dement, and of chapiste, plus forment to be of:
If you see the setting of fractures and straining, as we have said, when you restore the broken limb, and doubt if the wound is hot, let it be bound until the seventh day, as we have said; then check each four days that swelling or infection does not come to the site because it may become too tight. If so, as we have said.
If no such incidents occur, do not release the binding until after four or more days, and have the patient sleep on their back with hands placed over their stomach; and put an evenly plain cloth of wool under the shoulder, and check every hour during the day or night that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or become soft in the ties; if it is restored by the virtue of medicine, then give him the food as we have mentioned before, ensuring the meat is first. And it is customary for the shoulder and leg to be completely recovered in forty days altogether; and then one should release them and administer a bath and medicines with oil ointments at the site to straighten it. If the straining is unpleasant and bent, delay releeing until after one day or two months.
For a broken arm fracture:
The arm is composed of two bones, called the "ulna" and the "radius," with one being small, which supports the forearm; and the other large, located below it towards the elbow joint; sometimes just the large ulna or radius is broken, or both together at times.
When the small bone (radius) is broken, its repair and healing are easy; but when the large bone (ulna) is broken, its treatment is poorer, and more difficult than if both were broken together. If only the small bone is fractured, it should be gently extended and aligned properly.
And if it is the large bone (ulna), then one must pull more forcefully; extend it with support underneath, and elevate the forearm higher than the other side, while keeping the small arm lower, cross bandages over it at the same level, so that the patient does not endure any pain. Then extend the supporting brace of the arm towards the area below their hand or to a sling, with another support on the opposite side. And then place splints correctly according to its best shape.
And if in the breaking into pieces, place each one back to its proper position; and if any are dislocated that prick at their corners, do not restore them to their original location, but elevate and bind with a splint as we have said before.
And if there is a break accompanied by a wound, I advise the surgeon to take care of it individually.
And if during the beginning of healing pus arises from all wounds, make .i. bandage using a cloth of resin oil and white wax, which should not be too hard or soft; and wrap it up subtly until the wound is calmed. Then remove the dressing, and place the splint with plenty of powdered eggshells, as you do for other fractures; and make sure that this splint must be stronger and wider than the others: there should be at least six or more splints arranged depending on whether the break is in one bone or two. Pull it tighter near the fracture than anywhere else, and every day move it less as I have said at the beginning of the chapter; and ensure that bandages above the fracture are not too hard or rough. Use linen thread for binding, neither too thick nor thin, as we've previously stated. And after a few days, attend to the limb and ligaments again. If any accident occurs to the limb, as itching that comes upon a member, you must soak the limb in warm water until the itch is eased; and let the limb not rest tightly. Then resume straining, and if the bindings are softened and the bone exposed, proceed with treatment likewise.
If the swelling cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, you must soften it a little and let it rest for some days until the swelling subsides, then resume straining.
If none of these things we have said occur to the patient, do not loosen until xx days have passed or sooner; then place his hands on his neck, and make sure they are evenly spaced, and beware of movement and displacement, let him sleep on his back; know that this fracture is restored in xxx days or xxxv., and by chance in xx. days, according to the compositions and the constitutions of the virtues.
Of a hand fracture
It is said that at the back of the hand where the tendons are, fractures occur frequently and not just bending many times.
And when the sole of the hand is fractured or bent, it is necessary for the patient to sit cross-legged in front of him equally; then place his hand on a stretched table, and extend the ministers' bones that are broken, and align them evenly until they are well joined; and apply plaster and stuffing, unless abscesses occur, then he puts a splint according to the quantity thereof; and it should be wrapped in .i. cloth of linen.
And if the fracture is near the forehead within the plant of the abdomen, make a splint from linen cloth and instruct the patient to press it against their broken rib; then strain with a long strip of cloth, ensuring its height is as tall as the palm's length, and continue to apply pressure as needed.
And if the fracture is in the lower part (possibly referring to the jaw), it must be that you place a splint above and below it on either side so the hand remains open and straight, then wrap entirely around the hand, ensuring the ligament between them is securely held.
And if the fracture is in any of your fingers (possibly referring to a finger), if it's a sprain, position them equally as needed; and strain with the palm, and if you see that putting on a small straight splint helps elevate the injury without movement. If the fracture occurs at other joints like the index or another one of the fingers, place them equally, and bind with the healthy finger that is afterward; or bind all together in such way as to allow some movement, or you may put on a splint if needed (possibly referring to padding), as I have instructed. Be mindful in the care for healing wounds and preparing for abscess drainage, and treat any bleeding that occurs as I have said.
Of a broken thigh
The bone of the thigh is often broken, and one can see when it twists forward and backward; and its restoration consists in tying a ligature above the fracture and another below. And the patient lies on his face, then extends each limb equally with its corresponding side; and this is when the fracture is within the bone.
When the fracture is near the root of the thigh, let one ligament be towards the wrist, and the other beneath the fracture. Similarly if it is close to the knee, then make the ligature next to the knee, and provide extension above; then place the mire (splint) on the bone equally with both hands until it conforms to its natural shape, and then apply a bandage, ensuring no abscesses form.
If there is an abscess present, allow it to be soothed and then return to your work and treatment; the lithotomy is done in part fashion. Wrap around the fracture a bandage of durable cloth doubled into two or three layers; leave excess material hanging down, then turn the leg so that the heel reaches to the root of the thigh and sew a long thread from the hip to the leg, just below the knee, let the head of the thread hang above it; then turn up the leg and wrap with bandages around the thigh, placing one pin at the fracture site. Then place another pin on the leg bone; then weave in between the leg and thigh using soft cloth to ensure equal tension, then begin three or four times at the fracture site; as you approach the fracture more it doesn't move from its location; then return to the two threads that you have woven through the leg and thigh, and place three pins above it.
If it occurs and is dislocated as described many times before, if there are pieces of bone that protrude, one should pull them out if possible; and if not, the opening must be cut, and a hook used to extract them; then treat as we have said until healed.
On occasion the thigh is broken as in a shoulder or arm; however, when such restoration is done, it does not deceive the sickly person.
Be aware that the thigh may be restored in one day or less or more, depending on the variations of constitutions.
of the groove under the knee cap
He says that in the groove under the knee cap there is little breakage, but it bends many times. And if it breaks, it's not much more than a tear or piercing, and leads to all kinds of wounds, feeling painful and generally bad.
And the restoration is that you put what was torn back to its place so it can move freely; then apply the cast, and if needed, use a round splint, and strain as necessary, followed by all the arrangements we have mentioned for other types of breaks such as abscesses and similar issues; then address each accident with whatever is appropriate until healed.
les journef:
Said that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called by right 'mustelz', and the other is called 'foscile'; and all fractures occur as they do in the arm, and therefore the restoration is like that of the arm equally, and the treatments are all alike.
And if both bones are broken together, the leg turns from every part.
And if the thin bone is broken, it turns forward.
If the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and swelling can be seen; then turn it back over. Then perform an extension, make it even, and bind the fragments equally; however, if the fracture appears unsightly, with several pieces present, let the extension be minor and lighter; proceed accordingly depending on your skill.
And when you have completed your treatment, take two strips of stiffened wood measuring the length of the leg from one end to the other and wrap them once around above and below, securing in the middle as well, so that the leg may not bend to the right or left, thus it is good; and none administer a long bandage if made of wood, positioning the leg forward to restrict movement, properly applied at the fracture site where there is an injury; each day move the leg to check for bleeding or other incidents, cure until it heals.
Regarding a broken bone of the foot
At the ankle there is no fracture, but at the bones of the foot it comes to a fracture and the small bones, and nothing occurs that causes dislocation or other conditions.
And if there is a fracture at the bones of the foot, and you see these bones protruding on top of each groove, place your feet where the bones are elevated, then press until they return to their original position; then apply an embalmment and dressings over it, and put a small padded bandage with two flat buttons underneath, then bind it firmly for support, after which you have enveloped with cloths around.
And when three or four days have passed, you may loosen the ligament, for you will find the bones equal again, either broken or dislocated.
If there are any broken bones, then repair them as we have said for the hand of a man; then put a splint on the broken bone according to its length and width, then place a table under it as I mentioned earlier, and stretch it immediately; and if there are two or three or more, break each one with a splint according to its size, wrapped in a single linen cloth, and strapped beneath the foot of the table so that they hang below the belly.
And it is important not to forget the other things that I have said about other fractures, as we have mentioned; and treat each injury as necessary.
Regarding the fracture of the finger bone
When the bone of a woman's nature is broken, make her sit upright and lean to the back part, then held from behind; next fill the vagina with cotton and insert it as large as one finger; have her stand up, then lift the buttocks slightly and gradually, until the cotton comes into the entrance of the nature, restoring the bone along with the tampon; when she needs to urinate, remove the cotton, and once she has urinaturit, let it return, thus doing this for seven days or so: the break will be healed, and if you wish, take a pouch of sheep bladder, tie a rag at its mouth, then fill the entire pouch with nature; blow into the rag until the air fills the bladder inside. The nature will return to its place; next fill it with cotton and leave as such for several days until healed.
And when the bone of the arm or hand is broken, or in a woman, restore it as we have said with the hip; and these close fractures are not hidden from those who apply their study and effort, and read my book. For the break signifies various conditions for restoration: therefore understand this.
And so the les apres de l’entement, soit la brissoie les arriere prenemonts est quide qui ie la porte aulees que li maintes. Quant le reste les. Enfors entor, et ce quittre doree oinment puis ne i les. And soi:
Of a fracture with a wound
For those who have a fracture with a wound, particularly if the bone of the hip or shoulder resembles one, they should be made whole again; and let the ligaments that we mentioned testify to their healing.
And if the wound is healthy, then begin healing from lead poisoning at that same hour or day, unless there are other issues; proceed to restore the fracture in the meantam hour or day, if there's no abscess present.
the most of that you noe:t; it a: nd: sockets; do not said c and they what ICE d.
And if the broken bone is visible above the knee, it must be gently aligned with your hands in slight extension.
And if the extension cannot be made to align with your hands, then use this instrument of iron which is .viij. or .vij. long inches, and its width according to the amount of wound; and it is necessary for the barber that he grasps .iii. or iiij., as needed in each bone-setting procedure; and let it be round and slightly thick so that it does not fold when compressing the limb during your operation, with a wider part forward:
And they are called "pallins" so that the barber must place it under the visible part of the head; and it should be evenly aligned on both sides. And if the fracture is subtle, and the tension cannot properly grasp the bone, then you cut off the top of the bune until the tension can hold it.
And if you cannot bring the bone back together as we have said, use the cap of an appropriate instrument for this purpose, either incising or sawing; then remove whatever is lodged within the sharply pointed and small splinters.
And when the bone is brought back together and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it's not in its natural place. Adjust until it is correctly positioned, then moisten a black sticky woolen cloth properly soaked; do not apply any ointment or other substances to the wound which may cause decay; after restoring the bone and leaving the wound exposed, cover the entire area according to the size of the wound, taking care that it is not strained with the fracture; many times this has been done by wise men and led to healing or death once. The tension should be gentler and softer than with other fractures.
And if the wound is severe or large and you suspect that an accidental infection may occur, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, do not apply any dressing; but wrap firmly around it with hard cloth bandages. And when after one day or two days, a sore appears on the wound, remove whatever you applied over everything, and put healing ointment for wounds as an antiseptic ointer tetrafarmacist type and similar ones.
And it is necessary that you loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and evening, until it becomes loose and healthy.
And it is necessary to equip the limb with a splint so that the bowel moves lightly.
And if more than one day passes, and it cannot be made loose again but continues to dislocate like this because there are small bone fragments, so you must dress the wound with gauze, and remove all those unnecessary fragments that cause pain.
the ben; I S; (s s
From bruises that come from the ulceration
They often come after the healing of the ulceration, especially when it is near the joint, and an unsightly thing is to see the deformation of the limb; and sometimes cannot perform its natural functions.
Be careful then if the bone is still fresh: if you administer medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, frankincense, and other similar things, and select none or all of these, and mix them with astringent wine, abundant oil or olive juice; and place it in slices, and press well without loosening daily, then remove and start anew on another piece until the swelling subsides; or bind over a suitably made plank; for its property is that it draws out all excess fluids from the limbs; and if the swelling has turned as hard as stone and needs to be removed, cover with bandages, reduce the surplus flesh; then take it to a barber until it is dried.
When the fracture of the bone is healed and remains weak and delicate afterward due to various causes: one because it was bound too tightly and not loosened as it should be; or because there were too many bindings that prevented normal movement in the limb; or because of excessive bleeding; or because of large movements, not within its time; or because it has little blood in its body, so is weak.
And the cure is to have the patient eat well and keep their body limber until there are multiple veins in them; and administer baths, bringing joy and comfort; then apply plaster to the member so that it draws significant nourishment into it, and often wash with warm water until nourishment returns to the member; and let it return to its natural shape.
After illness, the limb becomes distorted
After illness, the limb becomes twisted again after healing, and bones are severely broken, and the form of the limb is ugly; however, it does not lose its natural function: do not believe those fools who say that a completely new member must be created, and many foolish men have done so in our land; such practices are blameworthy, leading to great harm, and sometimes death. However, if the dislocations and twists are recent, it is fitting to treat them with hot water or mollifying herbs cooked, like valerian leaves, roots, poppy seeds, and similar things; and a one-week poultice, such as well-made diaquilon, and take the musk root of valerian, and mix it with geese fat or oil of sesame, and apply the poultice. Or take fig gums, and grind them with fennel seed, and similar medicines that alleviate stiffness.
And never is the dislocated bone moved by continuous and lengthy rubbing with wet hands. Instead, movements are to be applied to each limb hourly.
And if the twisted and hardened vein is like a stone, it must be removed with a knife, as far down to the bone as needed, using a delicate sharp blade; then apply poultice and pay attention to its treatment.
This book begins with dislocations
Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
When dislocation occurs, now it is necessary to return carefully without force.
Because if you delay, the limb may swell, and perhaps when resetting it is difficult to put back in place; therefore, one must not move it at the time of swelling: many times this causes bruising and other pains.
Also, when this happens, bandage the patient's limb, then let it rest until the inflammaturess is calmed; then bathe the member with warm water and oil, then gently move each part as it heals in its place.
by ous la*
Of jawbones
Sometimes the jawbones become dislocated and remain out of place; there are two ways in which this occurs: either they have moved slightly from their position and softened a bit, or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the chin, causing saliva to escape from the mouth that it cannot contain, preventing them from closing their mouths, and wrapping their tongues with speech.
When a dislocation is minor, it may return to various positions.
by:
The minister should dye the patient's hair, and insert a small mirror from one of its hands into the root of the dislocation at the angle of the jaw within the mouth; if the dislocation is in two parts; the other hand must be free to keep it even; and instruct the patient to soften their mandibles, and move them completely.
The minister places the mirror so that it is level, until it returns to its place.
And if the return is difficult, especially when both mandibles are together, use warm water and oil to gently move them; do not force the movement as we have said.
When they are returned evenly, and the wound in the patient's body heals well and softens sensation, then place a cloth of moistened linen made with rose oil and wax on it, and lightly bind it with fine strips.
and the patient sleeps on their back, with their head between two cushions, so that they do not move left or right nor strain themselves but eat light foods until pains are gone, and jaws are anointed.
and then serve what they want to eat lightly, and do not strain themselves in opening the mouth for eating or drinking, until jaws are well anointed and healed.
If the two lower jaws cannot be returned to their place within an hour and are not properly aligned again, fever and usual colds may occur, and possibly gastrointestinal discharge, or possibly pure bile is vomited.
And when you see this, then declare that it is a fatal condition; and many times death occurs within seven days for those affected by it.
From the spleen
The strength cannot be dislocated within the ribs without also affecting it and its neighbor, and it is never dislocated by chance, as one feels well.
And the restoration is such that the patient lies on his back and extends his arms; then firmly press the dislocation with your palm, and it will return; then place a splint underneath and secure it.
and the head which is towards the neck cannot be dislocated; if not possible, and if it dislocates occasionally, secure it in its place as we have said; then place a splint underneprise of them. It should include:
And similarly, bring back the head of the shoulder when it is dislocated from its place.
Of shoulder dislocation
It is the head and the second part is anguet.
And it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inside for the nerves; and on many occasions, it dislocates underneath towards the hip joint, particularly in those with little flesh, as they move quickly; in those with sufficient flesh, it moves easily, and returns easily.
And sometimes this happens to certain men with knocks or fractures, and the shoulder swells from a hot abscess, believing it is dislocated due to this.
Therefore, you must examine it thoroughly until certain, and then begin the treatment.
And it is known when dislocation occurs towards the shoulder blade, and there is a difference between the affected shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find their diversity evident. and you will find at the top of the shoulder a hollow, just below the shoulder blade as if it were an eye socket; and the patient cannot move his hand towards its side or make any movements.
and similarly, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not concealed because you can clearly observe it at the joint.
And this method of dislocation is not just to reset it when new or if the child is unwell.
The manner is that the minister lifts the patient's hand upward, then places his fingers below the elbow and lifts the joint with force to its proper place; then the minister lifts the hand and extends it upwards, placing it back underneath so swiftly it will return.
And if it does not come as we have said after some days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water; and softened and soothingly rubbed with an ointment, like an infusion of elder and fenugreek and flaxseed in water, and thus treated.
Then let the patient lie on their back, and place a strip of linen under the elbow that is neither too soft nor too hard, then put the physician's thumb under the heel of the foot and lift the shoulder gently, and draw the patient's hand.
And other ministers wash the patient's head downward so it cannot move backward; that shoulder returns at once, and if you see, reset according to this method:
And that you make present a person taller than the patient; and they stand facing the side of the bed, lift the shoulder from under the sickle of the patient's head, raise the shoulder upwards so that the patient hangs in their arm. And other ministers pull the patient's hand downward toward their belly. And if the shoulder is too lightweight, attach it with something heavy, and the dislocation returns now.
And the limb is also reset in another manner: and it is such that you insert a long stick into the ground so that the head of the shoulder is aligned similarly to a stake, and neither too large nor too small. Then it is taken away from the patient, but wrapped with soft cloths underneath, and the limb should be long and firm; then extend its hand on the opposite side formally, and the joint will quickly return to its place.
and if it does not return despite all the things we have said, then do this treatment: take two sticks from two arms of great length and four inches wide, which are bent to enter straight under the saddle, according to this form:
Then lie the head of the forearm wrapped in cloth so it does not hurt the patient, then place under the seat of the affected person; extend out arms above the length of the limb, and tie the shoulder to the forearm, with the arm at the head end, then move the arm onto a wide stool's slat, let hands fall backward, leaving the body hanging on one side: now hold the joint in place.
And when it is done, in any manner, if you must place under the seat a woolen spindle of equal length, then apply the instrument with powdered substance from the mill, including incense and egg's ash, on all around the shoulder, then strain immediately off the seat, turning the joint over the instrument, and wrap the hand at its collar, keeping hands in place like this.
And it is necessary that he fasts so long as the limb is comforted, for then it will cure faster; and after 5 or 6 days thereafter, move it; and if it becomes firm and does not soften, then it is well-healed.
And if the dislocation is severe due to moisture that has occurred, or for another reason, it is necessary to provide three punctures as shown in the treatise on fire cautery.
And if you do all this, and it remains dislocated after six days, and the joint does not hold or can lift either arm forward, then understand that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is torn or stretched or weakened; and understand that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
The dislocation towards the back and hips is caused by impact, and extension of hands, and you provide another remedy; and treat until it is healed.
And if after healing comes stiffness to the limb and delays in movement, it is often used by the patient many times until those stiffnesses are alleviated and returns to its original state.
Of the dislocation of the elbow joint
One should say that the elbow joint is dislocated at two ends and returns to both; if it's completely dislocated in all parts, especially front and back, and the dislocation is not repositioned because one can see it well and feel it; and dislocates according to each figure. When you join the dislocated arm with the sound one, if it appears clearly bent. For the joining is raised, and cannot bend the arm, nor reach its shoulder at all.
It is necessary to reset it as soon as abscesses arise, for if they come about, it would be difficult to reset them; and at times not all can be reset fully, especially when they are in the rear; these are worse than other dislocations, cause more pain, and possibly result in death.
The restoration is such that when it can be reset, extend its hand to your two hands; and spread the arms wide, and the fingers according to the cautery around, above, and below, and position the joints together or at the base of the palm until they return to their place.
When the dislocation is at the front, it returns as it folds its hand onto itself, with the root of the palm's keel that has been dislocated.
And if it does not want to return on its own, give strong extension; and have two ministers extend the arm, holding each end of a long wide cloth. Then turn the arm from both sides, after wrapping them with the cloth.
And when the minister joins the joint to its hand, if anointed with any oil to soften the joint, then press the joint firmly until it returns.
When it is back in place, put on the arm with dry olive oil and firmly stretch it, bend the arm at the elbow of the patient, and leave it for some days, then release it.
If the joint is firmly in place, release the bandage, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, reapply the olive oil and the bandage, leaving it for some days until it is securely fixed; then release it.
If he feels weakness after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, bathe and rub it well until it is soothed; or put on the joint a fat sheep's wool bandage, then leave it for one day and night, then remove it, and let him take another bath. When it subsides, if you rub the joint promptly, then reset and apply a bandage above, and then immerse in baths; do so twice or thrice until it is sound; if you see swelling, place warm cow dung mixed with butter on it and strain; it will return to its position.
The dislocation of the hand
The hand joint dislocates and the return is light compared to other joints; it must be hastily returned to its place at the same hour as it dislocates, so that it swells or becomes hot like a boil.
And the repositioning is such that you place the patient's hand on a table, extend their fingers, and align it evenly so that they put their palm over the joint area, pressing until it returns.
Nevertheless, you must ensure that it is properly in place; then position the patient's back of their hand on a table for extension and repositioning. And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, position the patient's back of their hand on the table and align your hand with the appearance of the joint. If it returns now, that's correct.
If not, with the strain of soothing plasters, treat abscesses until he can begin to feel better.
And if he cannot bear it, and you are unable to put it back in place after any days, the dislocated joint remains crooked.
and that his hands become so dirty, and he cannot grip anything: then you know the nerves or vessels are cut; if there is no other remedy than to strain near the wound with fire cauterization, and sometimes nothing else helps.
When the hand is in place, put on the plaster as we have said, then strain and leave for 5 days, then release and keep so.
And if it cannot move well, and there is no cracking sound, with warm water lather, and rub until clean.
On the displacement of fingers on the hand
line:
Then they are the elbows, and push back the dislocation into place as it returns, then support the head of the arm, and bend towards the part where it is dislocated.
and let it rest for two days, then put it in the same position on another day; and from there bind as we have said, and loosen daily, and make movement again, and unbind at night; do this often until it is tightened.
and do the same if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do as you have done before until it is aligned; and do the same when it is dislocated from another part.
From dysfunction of the spinal column of the back, two disorders arise: one of pain and stiffness.
When the spinal column of the back or neck is dislocated and there are several dislocations, if there is no remedy, it swiftly harms the patient.
And the signs are such that urination flows without control and cannot be held, and many times limbs become weakened or either of the buttocks or both arms or one leg.
c, heal line they should bele Turot not quite the s or : e; the old as it’s (130, and thefe in this:
The treatment is that you must address it if the swelling has come from childhood: there may be no remedy or healing for it entirely.
And those that come from falling or impacts or similar occurrences are said to be treated by old methods through grand words, which may not have much benefit at all.
but I've shortened it according to my intention and formed ointments in various ways.
I say there is no remedy or health for the gangrenes which come to the thigh before it.
and likewise those that arise directly in two sides, which cannot be treated except for those properly which come to the back, as I say;
and it is that the sick ones should be stretched out on their face in one place equally, and have tension from them, that they do not tremble;
J.  in the Oire:
And two ministers know the ligaments, one at the head and the other on the feet, among the two pieces of wood.
And they should be firmly closed, the piece of wood as we have said, and the healer places his palms on the spine's front side until it returns.
And if it does not return with this treatment, take a stick of three long arms' length, and shaken from the backside, and let the patient lie on their side, then put the middle part of the stick under the spine. by the way le sis noting.
And it is that you insert two torches at the top of the patient's arm with great length, and toward the pieces on either side, having between each torch, a handspan distance in width.
And in each torch there is a peg, or the wick may burn, and each torch should be firmly set in the ground so that it does not move; and between each pair of torches, there is another torch turning, on which the ropes turn, and two small torches of one handspan in width to turn the wick.
Then bind the rope that is among the pegs to the wick at the top, and the other rope to the peg on the opposite torch, with each assistant turning their respective wick completely, and the master places the spine even as we have said.
When they are levelled, place a dry bandage with plenty of ointment, then the plugs, then the splint of a tablet three ounces long, to secure the gap in the bone and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a ligament as we have said, and let the patient use subtle nutriment until healed.
And if nothing comes to the end of healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the splint as we have mentioned before; never once should you administer a piece of lead.
And never does the appearance come to the lower spine of the back, and it is believed that these are dislocations; but it's the bone breaking, so there should be no assumption: perhaps it would bring death.
Of hip joint dislocations
It is said that hip and shoulder joints only come from dislocations alone, not as with other joints; the hip joint is dislocated in four parts: above and below, front and back, more internally than externally, less so in front and back.
And the knowledge of its dislocation internally is that when one joins the injured leg with the healthy one, it is longer and more bent than the healthy, and the injured cannot double their knee at the fire. s f; that you's.
And the sign of those who it comes upon soon, is such that this accident is contrary to those before.
And the sign for those who it comes upon before, is that they are well with their leg according to completion; however, not doubling the pain in his back, and if one wants him to walk, he cannot do so yet, and retains his urine, and becomes swoleby, and when it walks, he passes over the ankle.
And the signs of those who experience it later include not being able to expand their scrotum or double it, and that leg is more twisted than the other, and the pain eases, and the shoulder head is in place below the ribs.
The resetting of this type of dislocation is that you should check if the dislocation occurred earlier and it stays depending on its positioning, there is no need for treatment; and one must not have any presumption.
And in those cases where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four types of dislocations, quickly return the joint to its place, extend it forward and backward, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will correct itself, and no further treatment is needed.
If it does not return in this way, one must call upon a strong minister and firmly support the leg with two hands or a bandage under the knee. and have other ministers extend their hands over the limb in such a way that they place their fists above its joints, then gently tie with a soft bandage around the thigh; others lift the head by the bandage.
and they extend it forward and backward all at once until the patient is raised off the ground once, and then let it hang down.
This manner of extension is common to four types, and if the dislocation returns as we have said, it is fine.
If not, you must apply treatment to its corresponding type. When the dislocation is in the paw, it requires that you support the patient on their sound side ribs first, then place a bandage around the pelvic root, and the leg above the groin, and extend the bandage towards the knee joint, and towards the forearm;
Then engage other supports to the arms, and embrace the large affected area of the pelvic side with care, and extend it towards the desired form now; this way of dislocation is easier than others.
If you cannot hold it in the manner we have said, then you must bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong swollen ligament over the two heels and over the two knees, and let the affected leg be extended two fingers more than the other.
Then let it hang from the head of a staff, and be two arms' length off the ground; then instruct one minister to embrace the patient's hips, and have another minister also hanging alongside with the patient, who embraced firmly grips the hips, for now the joint returns quickly.
And when the dislocation is on the underside, if he lies down, as we have said in those with gilbousity, and properly stretch a bandage over the affected leg and above the knee likewise;
Then place two fires, one at the head and one elsewhere on the body, then insert a fire between the buttocks in front of the patient's backside. And place moistened pads around it so that the patient does not move, then extend each minister toward him, and he adjusts evenly with his hand the dislocation.
If it returns, that is good. If not, place on a board and press as we have said in the splinting, and let the patient rest on their healthy side.
When the dislocation is in front, it must be quickly extended with the affected leg, and according to what I have said; place your mirror on the pain of being above the evil limb, then press with the other hand, and extend downward toward the knee.
And if the dislocation is behind, it does not need to be extended downward nor lifted off the ground, but rather as though the leg were dislocated backward as we have said with lying on one's hands and knees. And let it lie face down, and the ligament extended as we have said beforehand, and must be pressed against the joint at the edge of the table.
And it will be straight when the patient extends his legs, and they are even; then bring together the buttocks, and place the yoke, and tie with a bandage so that the hip does not move.
And it rests for three or four days; then remove the yoke, and place the yoke again underneath; and if you see that they are even, tie with a bandage as before, and leave for three days; then remove the yoke, and let the patient walk gently until the limb is strengthened.
Of shoulder joint dislocation
The joint is dislocated in three ways: this includes from within outwards and downwards, but not forwards.
And the signs if you instruct the patient to bend their leg at the hip, and if it does not reach the hip, know that it is dislocated.
and the restoration of all if you have the patient sit upright, stretch their leg as much as possible, and place your back to their face, and put your feet under theirs.
theirs c.
And apply the poultice on it, and elevate the leg to the hip, and tie them together tightly for 3 or 4 days, then release; and do not let the patient move at all until the limb is comforted.
And if the limb cannot be straightened, treat it generously as we have said in the care of the hip until it is sound.
For a dislocated ankle
The heels are sometimes emaciated, and never completely realigned or properly supported.
And the signs are such that the ankle is bent, and you attempt before reaching the part where it has dislocated.
The reductions are light, and the one that needs to be extended should do so gently with its hands once fully awake.
And the dretumbristionement by the hands and in front of lesseulement a laveux estesnee qui s’il se peignons les boulz ou il en lor nent le doit ne li brisez, et quels que tu siet.
Then grasp the foot with your right hand, then twice with your left hand, and extend it upwards, and skillfully place the foot back in position.
And do this twice as we have said, pulling and supporting the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, resume the procedure, for it will return.
And if it cannot return this way, then lay the patient on their back on the ground and firmly insert a stake between their thighs in the earth, and wrap cloth around them so they do not move.
Then wash the minister's thighs, and other ministers extend his feet with hands or a strap so that it wraps around the neck of the foot; Then each minister is extended equally, and the spatulas are placed between the patient's thighs to hold them in place while extending.
Then insert equal mirrors for the dislocation between your hands, and other ministers wash the healthy leg from below; the dislocated joint will promptly return.
. ça t
Then let it be two or three days old, and if the ligaments are weakened, strain it again; then reset on the fourth or fifth day, and prevent the patient from moving for four days. And if it goes beyond this term, do not be assured that it will not dislocate again.
And if abscesses arise, as we have said elsewhere, it is necessary to soothe them until they are healed.
Of the two joints
When both joints are dislocated, they must be stretched carefully, it is a light task.
And if the dislocation is in any part of the back or foot, you should make the patient sit on a flat surface or a table directly, and then place your foot under these joints, and press firmly with your foot until it returns.
it ise and of, and the they come must be te chir lese as farme: that you may;s a p should ce to any l’d d.
Of wound and dislocation together
When a wound comes with dislocation, and it is seen to be restored, many times the patient dies:
If you are not overconfident in the treatment, if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compasserate and merciful and slow to act, do not be reckless:
oughe so the of c. When you see hope, reset the limb to its place immediately, so that abscesses do not form.
When the limb is in place, treat any abscesses with soothing substances and dress the wound as needed with dry ointments.
And if there is a dislocation and bone fragments are present, remove them as needed, and do what we have said in simple diseases.
the Sue c
