Oh you, dear son, I have completed this book which is the tail of the science of medicine, and its completion with explanations and by its declarations. And it came to me in a vision that I completed this book with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, meaning "chirurgy".
And because the work of hands is fortified in our region and it has existed throughout all time; if it is perished, then the science also withers away, and there are no delays to be made for these burnings that ancient books have described, which were wrought by hand. And from that arises the mistake and pride, leading to closed understanding and the distance of science.
Or it seems to me that I have revived this treatise entirely according to the path of exposition and declaration, abbreviation; and together with the forms of cautery instruments and other tools from the work, accompanied by the alignment of its declaration and preparation as is proper for such a matter.
And because no good masters of the hands are found in our time, it has elongated the art of medicine. And it is incumbent upon those who meddle with the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so long as they know correctly about bones and their forms and joints and separations from flesh, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and veins and the number of limbs, and movement and resting states, and their source of origin.
And for this reason, Hippocrates said that not with him is much, and with the work it remains little; and particularly in the art of hands.
We tell you at the beginning of this book that those who are not acquainted with these things, they will err and harm people; therefore I have written about many times those who interfrom others engaged in this science and abandon it and sense.
For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incision on an abscess or the lumbus of a woman, and cutting into the arteries; for so much blood comes out that the woman dies between her hands.
And I see another man who betrays a wound of a peasant with a large wound; he took away a piece of the bladder with him and died in three years' time.
And I had already been called to treat him for betraying the sick man and saw his ill condition and the size of the wound, and knew well whether he would die from it.
And I see another man who was in treatment of the duke of our land, who had his leg broken and with the breakage he suffered an injury; and due to ignorance, the physician pressed the fracture onto the wound with great force, did not allow any salve on the wound at all, and commanded him not to remove it either; and so it lasted until his leg was completely emptied of blood, and he came to ruin.
I was called to come to him and hurriedly came to unbreak his leg; when I broke it, he immediately felt no pain at all.
But every path of his correction was already confirmed or a member, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not stop until all members were lost.
And I see another man who collapsed a richly decorated abscess and then inflamed due to the malice of his lordship.
For a scab, when it is full of black bile, it does not require that we touch it with iron unless it has been torn away so that we can completely remove what has corrupted.
And for this reason, I warn you that work done by hands is divided into three parts: it means, whether there has been danger in multiple positions; and I will show in each of these sections what dangers are present in the book.
For that is why you must beware so that no unwise physician can speak ill of your cases.
If you take up your arms and engage in your maladies quickly and firmly, and use the best way so that by God' Cooks you come to salvation and are blessed; and leave diseases susceptible of great suffering; and arm yourself so that no one doubts you and you can come from this world to another of glory.
The French king advised in no uncertain terms that "You should not treat bad illnesses and be called foolish doctors."
I have divided this text into three chapters.
The first chapter is about fire and flame cautions and medical cauteries and procedures from the chief down to the feet; and the forms of incision, and operations with a cautery, and everything necessary in the work.
The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and bladders and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and in that chapter are ordered, and the forms of blearies.
:mein :loresme encelobis: ounge tote mea :anctre developpaises. Andre it'smeantainces quinjourneaux :mei-dementures aureelves. Itou, etextemajustice.
And so as we remember from the old times, it is required that I tell you of the quality and harm of such a dislocation for each individual condition.
I say that the quality and harm of such dislocations are the longest words and the most subtle science and secret remedies; and from this topic, they spoke to others and agreed on it, but few were satisfied with their words because I fear the consequences.
I say that cautery helps everywhere in any condition, for example, when there is hot matter and dry matter, such as the following two conditions: it is called a warm-matter condition, and it is called a dry-matter condition.
In the case of warm and dry combined matter, no one came up with an opinion, and they said that cautery is great help; while others said the opposite, claiming that cautery is only useful for a disease caused by heat and dryness.
For the nature of fire is hot and should not be considered a remedy for heat-related diseases caused by heat or dryness; and those who said otherwise claimed that cautery provides great help in treating warm and dry illnesses brought on by the body's own factors. For when you compare the matter of the patient with their moisture in relation to warm-matter conditions, you increase the pain.
And I agree with this statement. For I have found it through experimentation.
And in all ways, we avoid it unless those who have tried it and know the chapter on cauteries, and the variety of warm-matter conditions in patients, as well as the causes and dispositions of their diseases, and remedies and spaces between the tenth hour; for other cold-dry complexions, we do not fear. And all the wise ones gathered together and agreed on cautery.
And you must know that in the combination of fire, it is a secret of treatments, and more beneficial than hot medicinal cautery.
For fire is simple and does not come from the member that is inflamed; it does not harm other members much at all.
The hot medicinal cauteries originate from another part of the body and bring about serious remediation in the member affected, which may ultimately harm the patient.
Fire for its height and beneficial properties does not cause harm unless there is an excess of it.
I have found this through experiment and from the long-standing service and study that I put in the art, and for this reason, I apologize for the length of my wording, but it is only to reveal the secret which was hidden by fire, and the quality of the olden work.
And you know, son, that they agree on in what time should be done the cauteries, and they advise others as well.
And I say that cautery is applicable in all times, because the harm caused by using aids to cauterization lies deep within the member; and particularly when cauteries are necessary for painful and urgent conditions that cannot wait any longer for more serious damage to occur.
And you never think, my dear son, how the wise man does; because with cauterization healing a sound disease has no return; and they say so: but it is not as the doctors claim, for cautery is not just medicine that alters complexion, and dries the humors which are the cause of pain, and its worth lies in quickly restoring value to health and virtue through its work.
And it is said that the disease changes according to the constitution of the sick person and its appearance and virtue; and in it are accumulated superfluous elements through acquisitions of meats and other things if not administered by cautery when there are few excesses and moisture, as with cauteries for pain or similar signs, and little pain does not return again. But this is rare.
And many do not understand for what reasons they call the backbones of medicine "cauterization," and it is seen; but they believe that cautery has no value after traditional medicine, although their understanding is mistaken, and cauterization is called the backbone of medicine because when we administer our treatments on any disease and these do not work, then we use cautery, and it proves its worth. And it appears well enough that cauterization is indeed part of the backbone of medicine, not according to the beliefs of common people.
The ancients said that the caustic instruments of gold are more effective than those made of iron and did not mention their value by virtue of its gold or the height of its substance; they said that the flesh of cautery does not fall into ruin, but this is not true because I have tried it myself, and found in some cases that it works. Gold instruments are worth more than those made of iron, as they say.
And of course when you heat the gold instrument, you do not know how it becomes cold by its color, and if heated too much; they place it in the fire, and so there is enough impediment for that.
And for this reason we use our cautery as if it has made our work.
gearce. ici.
Of fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Fire cauteries are due to moisture and cold applied on the head, and it has been caused by various diseases such as "soda" (likely referring to dropsy or edema), and many humors descending upon the chief body parts including ears, and from numerous dreams and pain of density and throat, and mainly all illnesses that come from cold similarly as paralysis and tetanus and similar diseases.
The form of this cautery is that it purges the maladies by using medicine that dissolves the chief (the main body part affected) to a degree, usually either one or two nuisances or three, depending on how the patient's condition and habits can endure; and then it makes another attempt at the chief.
And then it falls into your hands and you place your hands on the body's flesh; afterwards, you put the root of your palm upon the patient's root between their two eyes; and if there comes time for my assistance, when they bleed from within (indicating internal bleeding), you heat up this cautery called "olivare," as per its form:
And you write on the limb with ink, and slowly pull out your hand piece by piece until it breaks apart; then lightly lift your hand, and reward the limb if you see the bone as I have said; but if you do not see it, continue applying the cautery until you can see the bone as I told you; afterwards take a small amount of thread, and wrap it in soft cotton inside, and place it on the limb, and let it rest for three years; after that, remove the cotton and cover it with burlap; and leave it until the fracture is healed. Afterward, treat the puncture wound which they call "tetrapharmacy," so long as it remains sound.
And if they said by the ancients that as more time passes and the wound is cleaned, it helps more with purging; thus, for this reason it assists in cleansing.
And ofce :1604 li ous ; seignures. Etarre desinon paraphrase laissons levant au.
And it is said that the other cautery should be made loose thereupon, and pressed so hard that the bone also becomes as wide as a little ring which women put in their hollows for the reason that fluids come out of it; and then one must let the wound heal slowly over time; after that, one should cure and know well.
And these two kinds of cauteries do not seem very good in every way; fires that cause no fear to any man; it seems to me that I should leave them; for the shoulder is weakened by continuous application of solutions, as we have observed other limbs; and since the patient's malady is naturally feeble, and the first use of cautery is more salve and mild for me, and with this practice I make my work in such a way that salvation.
of the agonizing pain at the head
When in every way the pain comes chronic and lasts long, then it should use the patient's malady herbs and pills called "cochies," and cleaning of chief, oils, and plasters; and if one does the cautery that we have mentioned before, and it is not worthwhile.
Be wary that the patient's shoulder is of strong nature and should not be too cold; however, cauterize it on the mentioned cautery a little bit as we have discussed above.
After making cautery in each of the two horns above the bone as we have said before, and make one or two sticks called "vassels"; and it is that you put ventouses on them; and keep your hand away so that you do not touch the bone with this treatment; for the malady feels much greater pain in this cautery than others, which I will discuss further; and it must be that those who make cauteries in the horns are more subtle than those who cauterize most of the chief'inaspect:
the two kinds of cauteries When in one part of the chief comes with simple pain and extends to the oil, and the shoulder is cleansed by universal remedies, and it has been done the other cures which I have mentioned concerning the divisions of diseases, and all this does not profit: however, do make cauterizations according to these two manners of medicine and feast.
The fire cautery in medicine requires you to prepare a dozen doses of warmth, and peel off the skin and scrape it. Then make an incision where the pain holds tightly so that you can restore the dose of warmth under the skin; and when it is restored, hold it well and let it remain as such for twenty hours. Then release it and treat the wound with a fire treatment, leaving the injury until two or three years pass. Then place a deep pit in clay so that the pus may come out of it.
After the fire treatment as long as he is sounding; and if you find any of these burning medications that I have written about or treated with various burn treatments.
The iron cautery is done in this manner. Heat the iron cautery as follows: its shape is like this...
And they call it "closed" because the head is shaped like a clover or has about one curl of curvature, and in appearance is very small; and he applies it to the painful area, holding your hand therein and rearranging it slightly, so that the artery's pressure becomes relaxed enough for blood to flow again.
After applying cotton to the wound, and placing it on the painful area for two years; then he puts moistened cotton in burlap, and treats this ulcer with fire therapy until it is sound; if you want to cauterize this migraine with a cautery called "cultellar," at all points of its tip, and be careful not to cover the artery within this migraine that isn't ancient.
of an ulcer
When curing ulcers as we have described in the divisions of diseases, and it does not profit one; therefore, you must heat the "cultellar" (cauterization tool) until it is white; then touch the remaining piece with a line half an arm's length away, and extend your hand once, ensuring that you do not hit the artery and let the bone remain unharmed, and ensure that the joint does not have involuntary movements or spasms of the jaw muscle; and advise to remove blood from the artery as it is cauterized, or withdrawal. And I will tell you how the sinew remains in this book.
And if you see that this cautery does not relieve the disease, and the patient suffers greatly, then also in the middle of the head cauterize it as we have said before, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, apply the cautery that we or the chapter on artery extraction mentioned, with a pair of knives (each one having two); and these cauteries are better than this one and more helpful.
of pain in the ears from a colder part
When pain in the ear comes from cold, and there are remedies and other treatments we have mentioned in this division, and the pain does not stop, but instead sharpen this cautery which is called "pincers," for thus it has its form:
After piercing the malady in the ear, or inside both ears where the pain holds on both sides, and then move slightly away from the root of the ear so that you have marked its base; and with x pincers for each ear afterwards cure the area until it is healed.
of the torture of the mouth
Torture that must be treated with a cautery is not painful except for those that move by mucus, just as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make cauteries like those coming from sucking and discharge of sputum.
When you cure this kind of torture that moves by mucus and discharge from the head and gargling, and it does not worth doing so then must you cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, another a little distance forward in the jaw joint; and place the cautery on the part that opens up smoothly, and apply the cautery to the top of the ear above a bit from the helix (the outer ridge), and another further along similar as you would for a wound; let the cautery remain in place until the movement decreases significantly, and this is the form of the cautery.
And there is the cuticular cautery that we have described before, but it is somewhat more subtle and requires that the knife be slightly larger; after curing the area as I have previously stated, so long as it heals.
When apoplexia is old and you treat it as we have described, and it does not benefit, and the painful diseases, and he's feverei: two knives ofchief out of fievre cauterie demeinne que nous avoutre maladie.
apele on: ouldrevoir :rime seneighneigure, et siembre it'soldice enmeasures lemonade. Thejneme, soffi theifrom mevepremerdextent, anstomes fromage ofse decade indie androfier :faire: frommeasure.
For this disease, it is necessary to give the patient long years and medicines that dull the brain; afterward, he treats the head of the sick person completely, and puts a mustard plaster on his occiput (the back part of the skull), which is written or mentioned in treatises on emplastrum (a type of medical plaster); and this is the way of cautery: as I have said.
If it is sound at that time, good; and if not, then he makes .iij. (two) emplastrum compressions on the top of the head descending towards the neck, with an interval of one between each compression, and applies about .i. (one) large piece; and treats it as for other cases, and if you see that the patient is suffering, then he makes .i. (one) emplastrum at the same time; and if skillful, .ij. (two) others on the two corners, and treats it until it becomes sound, and those compressions are called "olivare," as I have said before.
of the coldest part of the head It is required that the head of the sick person be treated with long years and everything we have said before; then he treats the head of the sick person first, and makes compressions on the top of the head and at each corner, and one behind and two on the spine near the neck; if you have more skill in this matter, and the patient's body is moist and the sickness great suffering, and the illness is very serious, then he makes three compressions on the spine of the back; and allows him to rest as long as his strength returns, and move your hand gently; after that treats until it becomes sound, and those compressions are called "olivare," which we have said before.
This word 'de l’epilempsie' is not a part of the original text provided from medieval medical treatise but it appears to be an instruction for translation related to epilepsy treatment, which may have been discussed in similar contexts. In the context of medieval medicine and based on common practices at the time, one might infer that if such a condition was addressed, it would involve various methods including bloodletting or herbal remedies as they lacked an understanding of neurological diseases compared to modern standards. However, without direct reference in the given text, this is speculative and not a translation from the provided lines.
The epileptics should not use strong cautery on those who are phlegmatic; and it is required to first cleanse the brain of years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division where the malady is large and causing great suffering with painful medicine.
And if it is an infant who cannot suffer, he makes gargling and chewing to cleanse the brain; after that treats the top of the head with compressions as we have said before, and a compression on the vassal' Written in Old French, around 12th-century medical texts.
If the patient is very young, then he makes a subtle cautery according to this manner:
Due to melancholy are the superfluous substances or corrupted moisture and thick mucus, and therefore our previously mentioned caustic made with sharp knives for someone who has paralysis.
And if due to melancholy the superfluous substances decline into melancholy, and it is the moistened part of the malady's head, then he drinks something so that his brain is cleansed accordingly with what appears before in the division.
After removing the head of the malady; after making a fine linen cloth like a circle and placing it around the head; and if the maladies are twisted and well held from all sides; then presenting the linen, and covered with old goat's wool, and heating it by fire immediately so that he can bear the burden on his back; after removing the circle in sections near the head, and letting it cool down; and making this treatment once a week with another beneficial governance, so long as the patient is well.
Or if you see that the patient is treated with more points when performing cauterization. This method of cauterization greatly relieves the brain; and then, placing it on cotton moistened with fat and lined with sheepskin.
from the hands When the hands first come out by the signs that I have mentioned in this division, then it begins and he starts to drink something cleansing for the head of the malady, and keeps it from all moisture, and makes him sweat or bathe several times without food.
After he commands to repeat his chief's head and makes him a cauterization therein, and does two cauteries in the two temples where the hands are joined together or in one; and after every cauterization along all the veins and arteries that run underneath the temple, and lets the cautery extend long according to its breadth of the temple; and then sends it outward.
And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incision of the cavity, how you should press it; and never have made a cautery or hit inside these two bones.
Translation of the given Old French phrase "dou cors des larmes" line by line into contemporary English would simply result in:
When the tears from these eyes are ancient and customary and are near the veins, which are in the appearance of this chief above; and we see that it is excessive cold fluid humors, accordingly with the cautery I mentioned at the beginning of this section: one cautery draws the head, and two cauteries on each temple, and two more cauteries between these bones if there's need for more, then he should lance above the scapulae with all a little cautery.
Two corners of tears from these eyes
When you apply medicine as we have mentioned in the division and it does not benefit at all, indeed after the head, and makes the overbearing of one large arrow on each bone; afterwards he draws one large arrow across the veins called "clavicle," which is two arrows under the shoulder blades, a little bit beneath them from the artery you must warn against. And that is the shape called "clavicle":
When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, indeed the cauterization with this cautery which is called "oliver" has its form like so:
And if you see to make two cauterizations on the shoulders as well as the shoulder blades are; and do not let go of the hand until only three-fourths of the paper is burned, in the manner that I have said.
Two hairs that touch the oil No occasion ever occurs that the hairs of the oils are converted to parched lands, and they grip the oil, and it is made with two cauterizations according to two methods: whether by fire or by hot medicine.
Or cautery of fire commands the hairs to let them grow long and straight as they are until they become adults; and if they grip their roots, it keeps its teeth so that they do not move while growing.
:en'ses. Enitgall ittevenge tithoe la colures desires encomposition. The thees.lyse anderitgive en françaiscitation. Whichil fromenture.
After the cautery on your face that you have done only a few times and very little, let the wounds heal in that spot; and the sign of health from the old days is that you see the retracted paper, and the hairs raised to the length of one's foot; then lightly touch it, and leave it for two years, then put moistened cotton wrapped in cloth on it until it is fully healed.
And if afterward the hairs grow back, and the paper becomes loose again in this manner as you have done before; and when the hairs are gone, cauterize until the paper is lifted back to its natural position, and does not prick the oil.
The hot cautery in medicine you must order the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; then make a piece of parchment shaped like the leaf of myrtle; take two ounces each of soap flakes and boiling water, grind them well together; apply it quickly so it doesn't cool down, and spread it on the paper where you have placed the hairs; and if the illness is confined to one oil only, then treat it accordingly in that amount as well; and put cotton moistened with warm water under the oil; and let the malady be within your power and present this twofold showing of medicine to the patient, and press a little bit every time the patient feels discomfort from the treatment, just like one does with fire. And when you have done that for a long time, the medicine has taken effect on your duty. And when the irritation is not present, raise the oil again; reward yourself if you see the paper raised as it was by constraint of fire or incision; and if so, that is well done. If this is not the case, then still apply medicine on the oil or the medicine has not been applied yet, until your operations are evened out and the hairs are at the toe length; then wrap moistened cotton in cloth over it while the wound heals, after taking care of the "dafenis" (a type of ointment) and other treatments as long as the wound is healed.
And if you know that you must take great care in performing your work so that the medicine does not stick to the hairs. If the paper becomes soft after, and the hairs prick in the oil, then repeat the treatment on the spot where it is softened by the paper properly as before; then continue treating until healed; and this is the form of myrtle leaf:
And know that men's hair varies greatly in length and thickness, and according to this you are bound not to repeat the same method with everyone. And do not apply it directly to those who have been studied in this art.
of the treatment by caustic therapy (cauterization)
When you cure such diseases as we have described, and your cures do not benefit from it; yet it is necessary that you perform the caution in this manner.
:screameine:120re (it:give saxue alexin itesse.
After pressing the fistula it is overturned, and I extract the pus, and dry it; if it is closed, then do the operation and pull out the bone; after that place a hot cautery firmly on it, and hold your hand at the part near the edge of the wound below the oil, so that your hands do not make mistakes; and put the cautery in the fat of the oil, and corrupt it.
If you come at the beginning of the cautery to the bone, it would be good. But if not, if you need to repeat the cautery again, and as long as you have experience, let it for three years; after that I put cotton moistened in tallow there, and the treatment of the ointment desiccative until he is sound, and for forty-two years pass so that he is sound, then apply corrosive medicine until the bone becomes exposed; and according to what comes from your master.
And there is a way to cauterize a fistula that none of the ancient ones mentioned. When dealing with a fistula, you cut its opening; afterward, place in the narrow slit about one inch underneocarbon steel (a type of alloy): And you make the quantity of about one ounce; and hold your hand tightly on it so that the molten lead does not move until it reaches its oil; then it is necessary to put cotton moistened in beeswax or tallow underneath, where the molten lead forms the floor of the fistula, and this leads to a well-healed healing.
And if the fistula is sounded by our previous cautery method, that's good. But if not, then it is necessary to administer an injection into the joint below the neck of the abscess according to what needs to be done in its proper place.
and cracked lips Sometimes they have cracked lips that are called "poils," and particularly in the mouths of children.
When you cure these cracked lips as we have described in sections, the cure does not benefit, but rather a small caustic needle according to this form:
And you immediately apply that medicine to those cracks so long as they are still open; after the cure, treat the wound with healing ointment until it is sound.
from the abscess in the throat
ses theu. (12-3630reiser aitse cestrop.deur leslui :victims0soldier. This. 40v. The10:100n3rdose, and with17raxorfele.
Of fire cautery commands the Malade let the hairs grow long and smooth; if they prick at their root, he binds them tightly so they do not move until they are born.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, you treat it with medicine, but that does not work, so put the chief of maladies in your health; after removing the cautery which forms there afterwards, in such a manner as to place an anchor on the tooth; and apply heat quickly inside the cautery, holding your hand tightly until the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth; then remove your hand and repeat the cautery according to your desire; after filling his mouth with dirty water, and leave it for a few hours until foul odors emerge.
And such teeth that were moving are confirmed, and the softened gums restricted, and the corrupted moisture checked.
about the pain in the teeth
When the pain in teeth comes from cold, or it's due to cold or heat, and medical treatments are not worthwhile; therefore, there is a need for cautery according to certain methods: and cautery with wax and cautery with fire.
Cautery with wax is such that you need wax of various types; the end in a spoon made of iron or slag; after applying cotton and covering it on top of the tip of a tent, and molding moistened wax into shape, and place it quickly under the painful tooth tightly holding your hand until it cools down; then do this frequently so that its virtue is worn out at the root of the tooth, and if you see molten wax lathered with cotton in the wax mold, and put it on the neighboring tooth, and place a heated iron there as much as your heat reaches the top of the opposite tooth.
The complete fire caustic consists of such that you will need a piece of iron or brass, and it should be large so that the hairs do not flex at the mouth of the patient; after heating the caustic, from then on this will come out afterwards, and place it on the teeth and hold your hand there until the caustics are cooled down; do this often, because the pain will be in my own or the following day. And it must that the patient fills his mouth with good fat quickly in the hurry of this caustic: and this is the form of the caustic.
When scrophulae are of mucus and cold moisture, and not responding to digestion by medicines, then heat the caustic on the head that comes after it warms up; and cover it with holes for the fumes to escape from the other side; and place the caustic hot under the abscess once, or twice as much, so long as it moves at the base of the abscess, and if the abscess is small, then apply the caustic according to its quantity, and leave it there for three years; and wrap it with moistened cotton in wool until the pus oozes out; after this treatment cleanse the skin and bandage so long as it heals.
When the moistures overcome the channels of blood flow, especially in cases with cold complexion, it must first be voided by curative medicines; afterward apply a caustic to the root of the throat and keep that you do not touch your neck anymore but just slightly heat; afterwards apply another caustic at the joint between the collarbone and the head of the spine, which we have in front as "clavicle" form; and cure the skin so long as it has been said before, until it heals.
From the thrust (a violent forward pushing action) All diseases of the blood are cold moisture, and these patients do not have fever or chill, and it is an ancient disease that you apply two caustics to the vein in its usual place; another caustic must be applied between the two breasts; and this "clavicle" form as described previously.
And if you see, apply caustic by pressing the entire thing which is called "punctures" of this form in front in ear disease; and these punctures should be about thirty or more, or slightly less than that, after treating the skin as previously stated, and applying the caustic for three times according to this shape.
And because the caustic is lighter in that way, since you apply it at about three points on the skin'occausal pain and injury:
of the shoulder dislocation When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. After thoroughly examining the patient's back and chest; after applying pressure in the lymph nodes located within the intercostal spaces with your left hand; and if the ligature is displaced inside, cauterize with a pair of forceps shaped like .ij. knots that fit into this form:
And cauterize the wound as much as it penetrates into the chest, and bring forth the fragments together with four knives; and for this reason cauterization is performed with a pair of forceps that have three hooks, because thus the shape of cauterization consists of these three hooks, and according to the subtlety of a tent and it is the form of the instrument that has three hooks:
And never is it attached on this .i. nerve so that it can have .viii. forceps.
After putting the patient on the cautery board with a rope; after allowing the patient to rest, and make sure not to move their limbs too much during this time so that they can be well supported.
And if it is dislocated above, this happens rarely; however, when it does, a cautery on the thick cautery hook or many forceps clamping occurs - because the ligament is redirected, and the muscle moisture is removed from the dislocation, making it less painful.
two pieces of lungs
The old doctors said that the lungs must be cauterized with roots of hellebore (Helleborus niger), and in this manner: take one root long as you can find, dry it or soak it as well; and a few small hooks at the back of his neck between the throat and the collarbone, and some hooks below the fifth ribcage, and a pair of hooks behind them; and another hook in the stomach, and another between two other knee joints, and never squeeze your hand tightly as one would breathe.
ienergic: theor,sesure a. Andalus.i.tractéan. I:cumbers tol's. iver ofer resuel fromage enecountaire.
of moisture
When curing the disease of dampness for which we have mentioned in our discussions on treatments, and it does not help at all, so they apply 3 kinds of fire cauterization techniques that are good.
From which method do you perform 2 or 3 cauterizations, depending on the length of the hairs and the shape of the instruments we have discussed before, and don't bring your hand close to all the fire, but usually somewhere on their back.
And another method of cauterization is when you heat the instrument with 2 or 3 notches, as we have demonstrated in the dislocation of a shoulder; and lift the place where there is dampness, whether it comes from the left side of the patient or from the right, and raise your hand according to the location of the dampness, according to its length, and use the cauterization tool accordingly to the width of the affected area.
After you heat the notches so that they are clearly visible on the other side, and then drive blisters with the cauterization tool, and in this way you have three; after healing when it gets pus by long abscesses, as mentioned in the preceding treatments.
from edema (or dampness, as in medical terminology)
Fire cauterization is not effective for edema but only when the technique called "asclythes" is applied; when you treat according to the methods we have mentioned in our divisions of treatment, and your treatment does not help at all, so it requires that you perform three cauterizations on the swelling, and one under the stomach, and one over the liver, and two beneath the dampness, and three behind the spine near the vertebrae, and one in the place where there is pain; and make sure the instruments are close to that part of the vertebra.
After leaving the cauterization tool exposed to allow pus to drain from long abscesses, and do not stop the treatment of the patient after the cauterization; healing would occur, and all three applications (the three cauterizations) with God's help.
The form of the cauterization instrument for treating the bellyache that we have mentioned before; and let it be on his back so far as he is nowhere.
of the swelling of the joints When the joints are swollen in that which is dropsical (indicating edema or fluid accumulation), and they glow with a yellow hue, it requires you to perform cauterization on the back of the hand between the little finger and ring finger; and move your hand with the cautery as if turning. And do not enter too deeply into the wound, otherwise there would be deeper burns in the yellow coloration, and let the cauterizing proceed according to this form:
Afterwards perform two cauterizations in each leg at the tip of the clavicle; and let one of them be along the side of the groin forward and the other behind, within the thigh, and leave the cauterizations to work over time so that they cleanse the fluid out; after treating the others as we have mentioned.
In the medicine
When the solution for the stomach comes from cold and moisture, to such an extent that its retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are affected, and it cannot be treated by any methods of treatment; and you see the patient suffering greatly with great weakness, if he says so much before or cauterize the stomach according to what he has said here or cauterize the stomach with a cautery, let four cauteries circulate beneath it with very subtle movements along one cautery of the clavicle and four others under each such cautery.
And if you see the moisturizers and the suffering patient, then make one cautery on the hip joint, and one each at every joint, and four little cauteries inside the stomach near the large one, for the cure is beneficial as long as it has good assistance.
Of the treatment for edemas
When the edemas are ancient and moitie demein togeunche escrevantes les maundre: incarne deffacres: In ices estrangent, et en : leger. Thise (16three :nterprezent.
g’sse.ece.comme ting n’ailes.è:sanglore,èxent,ably.
gallege
When you heal the armchair, if it seems like a shaver, and then you burn it all over that place on the armchair holds it; and let your hand so much that the cautery grows at the birth of the vein, for since it cuts; do this once or twice, and if there is much of it in the armchair, cauterize each one as we have said; after the treatments with ointments benefit as long as they are healthy; and when you cauterize with a great shaver above the cat's skin, then there will be more help.
Poorly treated wound.
As the sick cannot bear cutting or surgery, we will tell them in their own words that there is a disease which cannot be healed unless it's treated with cauterization.
When there is no fistula, and it's aged and filled with lime and decayed moisture, if you do a thorough treatment to the whole tent according to how much of the tent has entered into the fistula, and restart cauterization as long as those pores and corroded parts are done, once or twice or three times depending on the quantity needed; and warn the nerves that are in it, and big veins. If the fistula is connected to the bladder and intestines, then beware of these vessels, and do not perform such actions haphazardly, and think that it's not a permanent condition; after curing the tent so long as it's healthy, and if the materials are bone-like, you know that the fistula is healed entirely; and if they are not bone-like, then recognize that the bones have decayed in the hole; and thus as one of these we will tell them in their own words.
Disease of the kidneys. When the pain of frolic comes with heavy winds and doesn't affect women, it requires that you perform cauterization on both sides of the kidneys using one of the clavicle cauteries we have mentioned before; if our previous cauterizations are made in this manner, then there will be three cauteries along a line, and more aid will result.
Of the bladder. When the bladder is soft and weak from moisture, causing the sick to retain urine, then perform cauterization in the backward part of the bladder where it begins with a downward stroke on both sides, one on the right and one on the left; and each time you do it like we've told you for an individual case; make two cauteries to the back, or three if needed; and perform clavicle cauterization according to the shape mentioned before.
Of the mare (referring to a pregnant female horse) When the mare is cold and moist, and she does not allow it to conceive, and the flowers are rotten and their tips appear late; and when they come out, there's great pain: and as we have said cauterization of the bladder or clavicle cauterization, and .ii.iij.
Aurea,et ce que il nengreis li cauterion a lou caestres ailleurs encefortune desires aicmeentres a thete choses
nature. ici that itax (s :gachief:severely.
And if these cautions are not present for you, then he will do nine large cauteries of the grapevine, and also perform them as all others do; and treat until it is healthy again.
of the backache When backache pain comes, and it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient's condition requires what we said in the division, and his treatment does not hold value, and the disease is ancient: therefore you must purge the maladies of the heavy humors with foul-smelling pills or other similar pills.
After he performs the caustic treatment; and this method of caustic application is based on two main approaches: namely, preparing mixtures containing fire (caustic) components. The use of fire in caustics can vary greatly, with one such method involving performing three triangular cauterizations according to this form, ensuring deep penetration and a considerable distance between each cautery point by several inches; using large olive tree branches for the cauterization process is never performed under the chief of the backache because it results in approximately two such forms:
And if you see, if the caustic is applied to the double circle that we mentioned in the dislocation of the backache; but do it in such a way that the circles contain all of the backache and every joint point bears pressure.
sans in thel ongulx laisse lesuran.tin.iij. Ail.iij. iij. ells offer:nagainst ail.jacours.iij. Theire,le faiul.ajour. Acaïeccles, itin'savis. Itjacres.aji3rdrise. Andre.i'ses Agesuccur jac. ix.
revanthevertimes ia deuconjejantifores and:ixtande ifcifree istoxte tolente heaule ieu nde
And I myself have seen many who suffered cauterization on the ankle of a stone, and they let it be so until the leg was completely freed, and also the joints were seen and corrupted all of them; afterwards, he had a solution with death.
And if the pain is in two joined parts, perform cauterization on one and then the other, according to this method. // The surgeons said during the cauterization of the hernia, for this reason, make a sharp iron piece about as large as an oyster shell or slightly less, either with notches between them or without, and place these notches over .ij. parts, and also like new ones, and it should have a well-forged handle; and that is the form:
And then heat it so that it is completely red and tender to the touch, and place it on the patient's malignant hernia, and turn it over the healthy side; and after one piece of cautery is done, leave for .i. years; and then cover it with burdock (burdock root), letting the wound heal over a distance of ten days; afterwards, continue the bloodletting until it becomes sound.
Albucasim said that we use very little of this cautery because of the fear of its aftereffects, and as few people who do it; but all in all, these are good cautions which allow suffering and where they have relief.
of double pain
When pain comes to the back, or from falling down, by knocking on it, by too great evacuation, or by apparent masses of cold material expanding, none of these signs are worth cauterization, for neither is there any comparison between this and those who come from a bath of cold water.
After this, healing of pestilence is voidie ores in thexample of medicine of hisel aillez.
Many times this disease comes upon young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have become tightly constricted when they lie down, and fear; and you change in the lower back vertebrae and in our appearance which appears above the other spines.
When you see it and you cure it, if you cauterize with this cell-cauterizer.
If the purple-colored caustic is applied to every part of the spine equally; and if you see it, cauterize along the spinal column at lines or two (or three), and let the points be close together. After curing, ensure that healed according to what we have said, and warn you not to use a caustic in gooseflesh which is covered with nerve sputum.
the pain at the joints
When the pain in the joints is due to moisture spreading within each limb, and when such pain arises from inflamed pressure, they call it "podagre" properly, and when it is caused by cold and cannot be treated with medicines, then curing them requires cauterization in part: apply plenty of caustic around the joint, and use an olive-shaped caustic according to this form.
And if it is necessary to strike under the foot's surface, you must use the entire caustic that they call "point"; and when the pains extend to other joints and this occurs frequently, then you must apply caustics of three or two cauteries under each joint, throughout the olive-shaped caustic; and if you have skill in it, do more, but hold your hand for no longer than until the ache is gone.
And if the pains descend to the legs and back, you must administer the caustic that we have described in its chapter; if the pains are in the hands, apply cauteries along two or three lines on each joint; and if there is no more pain at the points, then make cauterizations on every joint and on the hairs of the hand; and if the pains come to your knees or shoulders, cauterize each part, and administer good governance to the patient and treat with penitent medicine. For if you do it well and cleanse the miasma, he will be cured by God's help.
Of the route of surgery
When the procedure begins, and the bellows descend to control the flames, it is essential that when you see him curing, he does not eat anything on that day; and you use tools that will allow his stomach to empty, after which let him sit on your back between your hands, commanding him to bleed the armpit until the bellows are repaited, and bandage it in such a way as to remove signs of surgery from under the hip bone, and indicate with all kinds of signs that resemble a large circle above the heart; then you apply heat to the cautery according to its form:
While he remains white and softens his hands; then bandage the bellows so they do not return to their former position; perform well on the thighs with honey and linen, and place undernee the belly, and another beneath it which will heat his hands; put the cautery according to a sign in all your palms, and you straightened the right and left until you heal the bone, but if at first time it does not happen with the bone, then repeat as long as necessary on the bone; secretly warn him that the bellows will not spring up when you apply the cautery, do not burn them; so that the maladies and other afflictions do not arise from this.
And you must understand that until the bone heals after using the cauterizing knife, your efforts are futile. It is essential for children's cautery to be subtle according to their size; and for large people also great according to their measurement; after three years care for the wound with a piece of burnt charcoal until it heals enough bone; after other ointments, ensure that the maladies last 40 years on his back as long as the wound is well sealed; and you must make sure they rest for an extended period so that the bellows do not spring up when the patient goes to bed.
After 40 years, when he wants to arise, and made by the lesson to tes cheveis leu. La: l’amaitre douche, et siens por loyceus deschansiin. Si lautre:or quen chefe jure demeant, icyauge. Etendres ainsentence in theachievre auverbiour meillage decaustrauere:nfaire leu01er loxende entailueaise of2ean2ealice. The3rdoule2ire  iti toi15 (saintinvesturelelvein. What2ere andre. Of the treatment of the abdomen
When treatments come to other parts of the body and are known, seeing that they do not grow more, he does one kind of cautery according to its quantity, and either two-thirds of the circumference; afterward the treatment as we have said; and none of the ancients said such should be done by cauterizing at three angles following this form:
But the first sign is marked on the edge and draws a line above the treatment area, and another one below it, and with your hand encompasses all of the cautery. But the first cauteries are lighter and more fluid.
Of ancient pain in no part of the body When pain comes to no part of the body, or from falling or injury, and that pain lasts long, and medicine does not help, then it must be cauterized with a tool called "puncture," which is done according to the length, smallness, fragility, strength, location of twists, and pain; if it has been well after the first cautery, that'e sufficient. But custom dictates that another puncture must be performed on top of it, because sometimes this arises in those parts close by, so you must perform such cauterizations as long as the patient continues to feel pain.
Of demonstration
The dressings are used never with cautery but only by great help, and mostly the disease that comes from putrefaction of fleas and melancholy. Can you see it cauterizing at first sight, and if it is treated according to what we have said in division, and not leaving nor returning, and you doubt whether the corruption would affect all the malady, yet I made two others near the head: one put under its crown, another on the forehead towards the temples; and two at the horns, and one behind the sinew, and with my hand so that the cautery wanes in the bone as it heals, and until the scars are formed outside by which such great humors can leave their vapors from there. The cauterization on the muscle according to what is beforehand.
:cause theater. esse (it :geresinage demeasures totear lesire desires deer laine ceter offerre queer :cesenocles :
And you know that the more I do with cautery, the more help he receives, and it benefits him; and you know that the suffering patient does not feel pain from cauterization as much as healthy people do, because his body is already completely corrupted. And it must be that the cauteries are large and small according to the limbs and joints, depending on what you will find in the methods of using iron; afterward treat him with flour mixed with honey and other cures until he is well again.
Of embryo
When the embryo comes to no part of the body and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it is not yet healthy; nevertheless he has cauterized the member according to its size and proportion; and sometimes the cautery goes deep into the flesh where the nerve enters, making the embryo bone; and in this way every time cautery is done on hand and neck and back, at the exit of a nerve that makes the limb move, then it truly becomes bone; and everything else doesn't intervene unless someone knows about the parts of the body and the movements of the moving organs.
Of barley
When the disease called "barley" is old and the art of medicine becomes worthless, then cauterize it with some cautery according to its quantity; until the bladder has become bone, and turned its color, then treat him with barley flour mixed several times with lentils and olive oil wrapped in rosemary leaves and plantain fibers, and pieces of colon and goose fat for each part. Mix it all together and bind it with a cloth, or let air into the wound until he is healthy again.
The cautery treatment of sore (chancre)
When the chancre comes at the beginning, and you see to arrest it with the cautery that appears like an i or II circle around the entire chancre; and all others say they have also performed cauterization in the midst of the chancre; and this does not seem good to me because I fear it may become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have never seen it done before; and a more appropriate thing is that it be cauterized around with the cautery called "circular," as we have said in many of these cauteries.
Of an embryo that cannot die
"Adon, sanz emprimes de laisser dire depresneces pars. Laissiez espremeres de malades desormefer unkes comestroient entor aitres, adoesles de cilleges lesperes leu theu:esle deparasemplate ajustere aimes oference theorreverre inostraises aurelustens demejor.
And if you see it pierced throughout the cautery, then the fire cautery takes on this shape:
And place your hand in the milieu of that illness which is called "adubelati" so long as the cautery has pierced the wound, and such cauteries are those by which the diseased part heats up in such a manner that the course of pus runs like water. Afterward, when it has been fully cured.
The curing by fire with iron.
Another way of disease is called "corrodens," and it essentially amounts to gangrene of the limb since it affects the limbs in the same manner that fire burns dry leaves, which implies severe destruction. If you see this disease manifesting on the surface where cauterization may be required for healing, then gently apply iron clavicle-shaped cauterizations little and large depending on what it requires of the wound or limb; afterward, burn all parts until every trace of corrosion is removed, leaving nothing except those that are charred. Then leave them for three years, and let your cauterized joints bleed with oil as long as the burning scars have healed. After this treatment of ointments engendering fire, if you see after three years that healthy limbs do not arise, it is good; but if they do not regrow, then reapply cautery to those parts which are still corroded. This gangrene has never been treated with medicine in the form of a poultice applied on top of cauterization by fire; however, all cautery done by fire is much greater aid, and I have previously said about this treatment: take what you can handle (implying that treatments should be managed according to one's capacity or expertise).
of sticks which grow from the joints.
Often occurs that the joints suffer from a disease which is called "close" according to our intention, and it is a great illness causing harm to the body; and for treating this disease there are two methods, namely cautery with fire, and hot water cautery. Fire cautery should be done similarly as if using a quill pen made of good iron, sized appropriately so that it can pierce all parts, and have very fine edges; afterwards apply it heated over the nail until the knife begins to bend at the point where it touches; then leave it for about three years so it starts decaying rot. Then a known mixture of crushed bitter herbs is applied on top of everything throughout the night, and the nail will be extracted and detached from its roots. Finally, treat the wound by pressing with charcoal until it heals completely.
And if they are converted by displacement of the heart and often occurs in hands and joints, it is necessary that you administer hot water cautery; and in this manner: take a cane made of bamboo or iron, or like a quill pen, and place it over the nail and underneath, which means having rough patches on it; then place the cane so that it moistens all around, and carefully hold your hand while turning back to make sure that the edge of the cane bends at the root of the nail, and allows you to find the hot water route up to the root; and endure the painful burning from the heat for an hour; then leave it like this, and it will detach itself in all its roots. Then perform another one such that you cure all those present at the heart, then treat the wounds with charcoal.
The word 'trembler' seems to be a misinterpretation or incomplete phrase from this context. However, if we were to relate it back to the topic of hot water and fire cautery mentioned earlier, it could refer to treating joints that are trembling due to injury or disease. In Old French medical treatises such as these, they might have suggested methods involving heat application (hot water cautery) to reduce symptoms like tremors in joints affected by ailment or inflammation.
n ituin legesme: " :sescait lesil in theende dechief aoutre lithafte:er :it'sans leislaure lape.iifleastre,re :are.
Of fire cautery command the maliard let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, he holds the eyes steady so they do not move until they are born.
Never noticed by physicians the corrupted cavities, or pustules full of rotten matter, which when they appear it is necessary to cauterize each head of the pustule: a soft iron cauterizer, if pointed with fire, or root of hellebore long, or lenticular cautery. And never are they cauterized at the beginning according to this manner, but immediately broken and loosened by the superfluous matter from which they come, and become sane; but it is necessary that such a thing be done after the evacuation of blood.
When an arrow has been drawn, it must be extracted carefully. Many times there are significant blood loss from the artery that is extracted to the wound caused by burns, or into an abscess opening, or at joint dislocation and similar things; and it is a very grave matter not to choke out (thrombosis).
And in every case where such things happen, if you do not immediately put your indicator on the vein opening wound and press it hard so that the pain is greatly relieved, and no more blood flows from there; then set fire to several small and large olive cauteries enough so they are all red; then apply. I, or great or little depending on the wound and its location, where the artery lies in such a way that you hold your indicator at that vein opening and press the cautery there until the bleeding stops.
And if it jumps below your indicator when you are applying pressure on the vein opening, and the cautery has gone out, then immediately take another of those that have been heated in fire.
And do not cease to perform this one after another until the limb is contracted; and ensure that you guard the nerve near it, and prevent any other harm from affecting the malady; and know that when the bloodcourse of an artery does not well remain closed immediately when it becomes large, unless by one of the four methods we have mentioned: or by cautery, or by extraction as long as it is untreated, or by tight bandaging, or by medicines applied which are capable of restraining bleeding; and be tied up and strained properly.
Who will tightly bind the injured area with linens or place things on it, or do similar actions, if not beneficial to some extent.
And if there is no examination or medicine present, he should place his index finger on the vein's wound as we have stated before, and tightly bind it above the wound and above the vein; and do not move him at all, but keep the moisture cold as much as possible until the limb is frozen and congealed and immobilized; and make incisions or operations for cautery and medicines.
We have said in the first chapter of this subject that there is a requirement for fire or medicine and preparations to be used, along with operations and their causes and types of cauteries; and I have made this chapter about the principal ones by way of this path so that we can address them more quickly when needed.
And so I begin with the threading (thread ligature), which you must learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in our first cauteries; therefore it requires much greater care.
Because in the work of this chapter there are often evacuations of blood when opening veins, and incision above the abscess, and treatments of wounds, and extraction of arrows, and incision on bones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
And I warn you that do not attempt foolishness. For many methods come in cures from those who have suffered so much with their illnesses that they died quickly due to the treatment of their disease and the severity of their condition, and therefore one should be afraid. And of these who gives his sense to you, and says: "Wait, I am guarding"; and the disease is despicable. You do not need to agree with those who come to you who have this manner, but put greater care in your honor than in your coffers, and avoid excessively but moderately on that which you are certain of, and from which you can help heal their health; and use prognostics and indications in the treatment of your ill patients so that good reputation is achieved for this well-known man.
Oh dear son, Our Lords teach you good understanding and uprightness, and if you desire the holy inspiration from His hand, amen.
I have instructed this chapter to you in discussions with the chapters, according to what is before us as a teacher of cauteries; I have decreed for your chief judge by which you will find more easily that from which you need expertise.
head full of water
It often comes to the children during birth, and when the head of the child is strongly restrained by its chief judge; and there has never been a case with such a reason that we have not seen it resolved.
And I have never seen this disease outside of children, and in all those that I've witnessed it grew the wound; and because to me seems that by dividing the work into parts, I become less tired with the treatment.
And I saw a child with swollen legs full of water, and the head was pressed so tightly each day that it could not hold up on its own; and he believed it to be such moisture that it became mummified, and this moisture is assembled beneath the bone above the knee joint between the thigh and the bone; and the cauterization is performed like this when the moisture is underne Written in Chinese characters.
If the moisture is deeper, and the abscesses are larger, then make two incisions like a cross, according to this form:
And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see the corners of this sign; and when you press on that part of your hand sover each other.
And after the incision is made to remove foul matter; afterwards, I close the cuts with linen and powders, and put wine and oil on it, and leave it for five days; then I remove it, and treat the wound by tents and ointments, and allow the head to be gradually extruded, and give meat dry of foul matter to the patient until the limb is strengthened and healed.
And another way of incision is to look at the large opening of the abscess and the drainage, as it has never been done before from front, back, right or left side.
Now cut the abscess and drain the fluid, doing what you can according to your ability; and warn that you do not block the artery, and keep watch for bleeding of blood, so that the maladies' excretion of fluids and evacuation of foul matter occur smoothly.
In congruence with the previously translated text's context and complexity level, "de reume" translates to "of resumption." It likely refers back to the continuation of a medical treatment process or procedure that was interrupted or halted before this point in the Old French text. However, without additional context from the surrounding lines, it is challenging to provide an exact translation as related specifically to the medical procedures being described.
When there is a disease called "catarrh" or in the bladder, and the illness is chronic, and medicine does not help at all, then drainage with these caustic treatments will cauterize those two hundred arteries.
Therefore, you must cover the patient's head so that their maladies repeatedly dislocate the joint; after covering it with a rough linen cloth until the arteries are visible, then stretches the patient's neck to all sides with another such cloth; then observe whether the veins appear on either side of the ears and see if they recover quickly or not; then mark those veins, then coat one and the other with a sharp spatula divided into two parts each (hundred in total), as long as it bleeds blood from the bone, and this is done through the broad joint.
And if you see, put the sharp spatula over the artery and coat it from above, cutting in a manner of two hundred parts on top.
And if the vein is cut, it continues to bleed constantly.
ceuille sachievre:n'', and thees ofsauf la parole de:esculates. Ages. Injurgy.
Of dislocation
Ancient dislocation comes along with fever, due to the moisture of tears and heat in the temple and other similar ailments when the limb is longstanding and ancient, and it is treated by various medical methods, but none of them benefit him; rather, we extract arteries from temples and cauterize, as we have told.
And the method of extracting them so that they re-grow hair on his temples, and understands the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well with its beating, and is rarely restored wounds as in no one who is too cold; and if it is restored, he removes the lice from some cloths of him, then rubs the wound with a smooth piece of fabric, and raises the wound with warm water until the artery appears clearly; then take the scalpel according to this form:
Then scrape the loose skin gently as long as you are nearing the artery, then pull it upwards using pincers, and remove well-designed cloths from each of its parts; and if the artery is slender, twist at the point of the needle, then cover that part according to the quantity indicated by two points (this appears to be a measurement indicative of length or size), because if it is not covered, it may jump out completely in all cases.
And remove the blood from .xx clots, just a bit more than that; and if the artery is large, it must lie in .x leather strips made of double-stranded strong silk so as not to let any bleeding occur during the setting of the wound, and continue applying blood pressure on the wound; then remove the excessive surplus between those clots at that time, and if you see, with the sharp cauterizing instrument cut into the bone until the hairs are removed; this is the next operation, if the patient does not have fever and has a warm complexion.
And the cauterizer is a great aid for finishing the moisturizers, because of this, they provide much help in managing excessive moisture. It is necessary for the extraction of arteries that one fills their vein with a lot of cotton and places it well on tents; and when they remove them, take care to use dry medicines that cause healing, and tents, until they are healthy; and if without cutting the artery as much as you do, you hasten by cautery, or you pour vitriol into your hand so that the vein does not become inflamed; and if this is not present, place on the vein your needle as much as possible until it freezes, and raise the vein with cold water repeatedly until the vein stops moving constantly, and restrict it in such a way as it is necessary; and who is more limber and lighter during artery extraction is to cauterize this caustic by .ij. partitions, but the partitions be well spaced to keep their heat longer there. When the patient's blood flow is too weak, it holds less warmth. And it must be between the two cutting knives, one of them should have a lot of space, and then when you have squeezed the blood vessels, place your hot iron on them until they bend to the bone, and cover the vein with these cuts; and keep the cutting knives apart because it is not evenly applied throughout; and this is the shape of this caustic.
of tears
When tears from veins that are under the test of this strong force flow downward and it does not benefit from any medication made in such cases; you see the malady becoming darker, and feel the movement of walking so like a tremor; and they are held tightly and moist so that the hairs on the papers become dampened, and these papers are burned away with the heat of tears, if there is a need for this care.
And you call it "cure contuse," and you make cuts on the patient who has this malady either two or three incisions along the forehead according to the length of his forehead, so that one of them is like a dagger below the forehead pressing down into the neck; and keep away your hand from cutting arteries which are above paper.iiij. pieces in the shape of cuts, and from the mouthpieces; and separate each other piece by iiij. teeth from the continuation of these pieces of ivory, and you must docteur.
Of the incision on the temple just before the second incision; and scrape all the skin between the two holes there is under the bone surface, then make another similar incision right up to the other second one, and then extract this osteoma.
Insert the instrument called "cultellar" into the first hole; it is well suited for cutting one way and soft, not suited for cutting in another direction, and its shape is like this. Place the sharp cutting edge towards the skin near the joint, and the soft cutting edge toward the bone, until it reaches the next hole; then continue to cut all tendons coming from both ends as long as the incision is continuous up to where the vein opens again, and make another similar incision right in that second hole; then extract the artery evenly, and wrap a piece of cotton in each opening, covering it with linen draped in wine and oil and wool, making sure that abscesses do not grow there; after three days apply a large amount of warm water treatment, followed by the Basilic acid wash with oil and other treatments for wounds as long as he is healthy.
Double the strength of the bandage.
When a patient does not have hot chills habitually, and you see the tendons tight and small, causing vision impairment, and burned paper; and their hair clumps together, and at the head's base there is pain, and malar breathing occurs; therefore knowing from these events that such materials and catharsis do not come from many waters, and the treatment prescribed by him he has, it seems to be this.
And command the patient to tilt his head backward, then make a large incision in front of it, and another one wide; approximately 10 cm (a little more). Start from the temple's left side toward the right temple, making an incision up to the bone; keep your hand away from the temple nerves that move around during digestion; when the bone is exposed, wash out all the blood with a sponge, and then insert cotton in between the two holes of the fracture and place linen tissue above it; then cover him with draped linens soaked in wine and oil, making sure to prevent abscesses from forming on top; when he is osteoporotic, it must be that you rub the bone as long as the blood starts to reappear, then perform excursive treatments which help bring back the digestive process.
In a similar way: take two parts of wheat flour and three parts of chalk powder, mix them together, and make an embolism in these wounds to help improve digestion throughout the body.
The detachment of ears.
Everything that affects the ears is one of three things: either grains or animals, or minerals or resinous substances and similar materials such as water and woolen items.
illeague vouldes: "caesar.htmloresme : lemon. Theil. Age,comence ageing.coilice. Allsoule. Ornature. Whatsoarnece. Ages comethroachemet ofrece. Age. Describe ito deity:age.
If she jumps with the pincers, it is good; if not, then prepare the subtle extraction from a small double ulcer; and if she does not jump like that, make an ear pinch and press down on the head of the pinch or the fortress in the ear very firmly, so that nothing can go through the soft part of the pincers, then treat it thoroughly, as we have said before; and if it does not come out partially, take some honey with tweezers and pick up small birds, and use any instrument that is suitable for this purpose, and put a little cotton inside. Then press on the pinch or whatever there may be, and treat it thoroughly. And if it does not jump from all these things that we have said before, hurry to piercing the ear so deeply that the cauldrons inside are exposed, and spasm; and in making the fissure, you first secure the deformed head of the patient with cephalic alignment, and extract the sinew according to its nature, then let the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, make a small fissure at the root of the ear depending on whether it's grease or fat; and make the fissure as if it were a moon, until you reach the piercing, and the healer according to his judgment, and suck the wound hastily with your mouth; and continue treatment until it is cured. And if it is grains that are entangled and swollen, then prepare the subtle extraction; and if it cannot come out, then prepare a small but thin syringe according to this form:
and prepare an incision in the grain. But do not think that it is moistened by ear moisture, until you have made many cuts; then pull out the grains gently with pincers and suck them as we have said before, so that the extraction is light.
Then when the water contains such that the maladies use coughing of first-stage conditions, and plunge the ear with much cotton. And let it lie under this ear, if it jumps through; it's good. If not, take many stones according to their length of your sticks and lightly, and put a little fire to them, and place the patient's malady in one part of his ear, and jump from that stone at another hole so that he jumps out. Do this to the piercing piercing in the ear until the water is all gone, and then leap it whole; and if you see a pinch on stones fortheren.
deans ̃nimmenter. thecques   (it'outfalle ifpele:iherreve sevellaifre ous iaifre,celle deft heveleslume ifèuvescongeinifferres.uel veleiuente
In the extraction of lodged arrows from ears, when you treat them as we have said in dividing and addressing distillations, it does not profit at all; it is required that you look into the ear with the sun: if there are no arrows present, then perform fine pinchings, and if they are not found, take the horn of this shape:
And it should be narrow and wide above. And apply the finer chiefly to the ear according to the amount of pain in the sick person; then make up such quantity that all the hairs come out. If they do not emerge, remove them from inside the cotton wool as I have said in the piercing; if they still remain so deep, moisten distillations that those who have tested it on arrow extraction and treatment found with this instrument, and you will find or extract such distillations; and when mixing oils and medicines in the ear using all of this equipment as you see:
And it should be made of silver or gold and narrow to a small hole, and above for distilling; and in order to press the distillation with such well-made silver equipment, if you see a razor and wrapping around the point near cotton wool, then pour your oil or juice into that and what you see of medicines in the cone, and the cone should be placed inside the ear; then put everything in the cotton wool, pressing with all the hand carefully until the liquid is distilled from the ear; and smell it for pain therein, and such distillations as much heat up on fire so that they are distilled into the ear; and make sure that it's not too cold, because the medicine would not be as good.
The procedure of otohematomy (removal of earwax) is performed by:
No child is born with any blockage in the ears; and this occurrence happens to children primarily due to ear trauma or wounds inside the ear, and these incidents do not lead to significant changes within the ear. There are rarely instances where one would find a lasting impact from such extractions, unless visible signs can be observed; and there is never a situation with persistent blockage that occurs after these interventions, indicating proper outcomes.
The moment the treatment arrives that one does not see it, and the remedy's various positions in the sickness. And then place tote le malaide as you see forenince d’antique. Forene ail le veillanctre ire encoi ci dese lou caine.
And be or cut in front and behind flatly, so that it does not tear the ear; if the operation is on a new cartilage or bone of the ear, then hold it with fine pincers lightly, and move the cautery gently until those parts are completely removed.
And if the operation is performed in the ear, then take a fine scalpel lightly and cut it slightly at the fire, then place the cartilage of the ear; if you feel the operation causing great pain to hearing, proceed gently, and make sure not to press too hard on the nerves of the ear; then put an ear tube according to its depth, and lubricate it with Egyptian ointment.
Do not do any work until the wound is healed, or you take a tube and lubricate it with rose-water and powdered vitriol; if you see an infection in the ear, cover the tube and move another moistened tube made of oil roselle and beeswax until the infection has been cleared. Then cure it as long as necessary to heal.
And if there is an exudation of blood, then plunge a sponge and cloth into cold water and place it in the ear, and apply other treatments that allow the exudate to continue its course; such treatments include those for distilled remedies (distillation).
from the paper scraps
There is this that comes from the paper scraps when the hairs are moist and dry, you must extend them with tweezers and pincers, and hold it with a trowel at its roots; then place it on rose-water powdered.
And if without dissection, then you cauteer with the lenticular cautery delicately, and after the incision it moves away; and they repair many times, but never go back to their roots; and when those roots are cauterized by fire, they burn off those roots and do not come back.
of the grille
Many times paper-thin things appear to be crumpled in shape and durability, and for this reason, this disease is called "great snow," and the remedies are: take warning that if you have great snow on one side and another, it's a light matter to know; then cover her broadly, then scour each part gently, then with pincers, and bandage. If you cannot see clearly through the paper, nothing harms the patient; and if there is a large fissure, put on an apron, and cure it until she is well; and if it's small, do not apply force, as ointments will heal her soon and soften.
And if the great snow descends from within to the top of the ear towards the upper part; and turn it backward, and treat with paper pincers, and bandage on both sides; and if the paper is removed by incision, that does not harm; and when the paper is crinkled, apply hot salty oil, and cure the area until the patient's earache has subsided.
Of the fat of the joints
It is a fat which gets wrinkled on sheets of paper above, and occurs more in children than in few people, causing much harm to their joints; it appears as cataracts at mornings, and they cannot see the sunlight because tears blur their eyes; hence they lie down against their cheeks and sleep there, and beneath their cheeks moistened by sweat, the exinach has been concealed which bursts out in oil. And when you press on the joint to your will and feel the exinach between your fingers.
And the manner of this treatment is to place the maladies on your head; and then take a linen cloth in the shape of a circle according to the amount of effusion from each part, and put it over them; and press with both hands onto either side so that the effusion is gathered within the circle; then make an incision as wide as the wound made at the shoulder joint, and do not let it be larger than the cut on the shoulder; and in various positions comes effusion from the fissure, according to the shape of a piece of greasy fat.
Extract a piece of cloth between your hands to the other side and turn your hand right and left as much as possible; and make sure you do not push into the fissure with oil that it does not bleed.
Et siens, cestitre d'ailleurs ofsesculte, et ilesmeaure comentures lai a laissarguille desprescripture.comparison (itjour ailmeses itgarter ceslere develastraconse desiring: "histio and thenislesme toirexerre lice:aljorne legele.
And if there are such homes that grind grain and put it on to corrupt the moisture which is delayed. Then he cures until they become healthy. And if it reaches the incision site, he treats burns softening them so much until they become healthy.
Translation breakdown:
When paper-like hairs are born other than their natural type, and they become old, if they harm the eyes, and bring on manners of diseases as accustomed to tearfulness and softening of papers and yellowing, so long as it is due to the destruction of hairs; and the cure consists in four methods: or by fire-cauterization together, or by hot water treatment according to its use or whether a physician performs caustication, and this may be done either by incision and suturing, or by slitting, as I will explain.
It is necessary that you place the chief hair of the patient in your left hand; if it turns white, that's good; if not, insert one needle above every two threads on each side; and whether near the margin or where the hair grows beneath these tufts, thread a second filament over all the paper, then turn the paper back to the razor; make in the part of the paper under those tufts covering the entire circumference from the large flange down to the small one; pull out another filament, and place it on the paper below as you would with a small tent made of cloth and lace, then draw above the paper a figure resembling that of a mirror-glass lamp, so that whatever size the raised paper is, this figure must be according to it.
And if there is a sheet with great quantity of paper according to what the paper is softened; then make in all places along lines that you have marked, and cut quite close to one of the corners; and take one of the natural grooves near the root of an arrow, and put the linen on one of its angles where it kinks, and scrape out the flesh; and assemble two lips with a thread of such fine silk that passes through all the crevices, and drain the blood from the wound, if you see doing this; but if not, then leave the stitches and threads for three or four years, then cure the wound without any binding materials which tighten it (as they said by the ancients), and that is often done out of fear.
And there is another method: and it is that you draw the paper with a figure as soft and wavy as we have told, in three circles according to its shape, which is like this:
Then take care of those small, equal forces according to the shape that is like this (three concentric circles). This line refers to applying a consistent and uniform force when performing medical procedures such as cauterization or incision. It's essential in maintaining balance during treatment and ensuring even healing; however, it requires understanding of anatomical structures and the procedure being applied. For modern readers:
And if you cannot hold the forceps (tweezers), and it's not at all different, take a needle or thread with it, and put into the figure; then another thread by the big groove, and the second thread by the small one, and place them evenly between your two hands; then work on your hand that you have marked as we have described, and assemble the leather of the wound (skin) with stitches. If an abscess appears at your incision, calm it down and treat the swelling in a soothing manner.
And there is never a case where the hair of the paper turns into: it means that you must use what we have said about the incision, but in sewing on either side it is more artificial.
The treatment of the wounds is in this form: you must convert the paper and apply it according to what I have said, then make .ij. bandages with great subtlety just as long as the paper and wide strips are; and hold the ends of these bandages together at .ij. points where you hold the threads; then join them gently underne mantling made of waxed paper, and stretch the .ij. wound parts in this manner; and leave it like this for any number of years, and the skin that is stretched will dry up and harden until it breaks itself.
If it takes a long time, if the wounds heal strongly, then treat them until they are healthy; and when the wound is closed up, and the paper lifted off, so that there will be no hair left; and this is the form of the .ij. bandages you make according to this figure, and in this quantity of length and width:
The tasks are such that you must use a fine needle and take one softer silk thread, then assemble the ends together subtly; make them as long as half of your thumb length; then order another finer silk thread slightly in sequence, and lay the main part on top of it; place the patient's hair back to its natural position if you declare this work delicate and thin, then with the needle chase down the root beneath the hair adhered to the skin below; pierce the paper hastily from above the root until you remove it above the natural skin level; then pull out the hair up to the thread's trace in the paper until the hair fibers protrude throughout the thread's course with the natural hair.
And if the thread is treated and the hair does not grow along the entire length you have ordered, then pull out the thread throughout its course as long as it protrudes from above and beneath through the wound until you see it through the oil; therefore if you pull out the thread and the skin, and stretch the oil and let the bandage hang for two or three years or so, while the hair straightens back to its natural position and grows again.
And about the oil usage: (Note: The original text does not clearly refer to "de la porriture" which is a mistranslation, as it seems like an error in translation. However, if we interpret the contextual meaning, it could be interpreted as of the application or treatment with waxed ointment.
When this disease which is called "aleacrati" or mildew appears in the oil, it has about .ij. manifestations: one natural, and the other unnatural. And occurs by severe injury, or cutting, or by similar things.
And the method of this operation is to break up that seam, and remove the mucus from it, and fill with linen threads until it heals; and does not require that you use in its treatment anything that dries or restricts. For if you do such a thing, the disease becomes worse than before; but the method of softening things like fenugreek; and boiling water or hot herb tea soaked cloths, and ointments melted in any kind of oil, and wrapping it with a tent, and this form of treatment.
And the treasures of your treatment are that you must guard against it hardening in the shape it was before; and these operations we have mentioned do not cause relapse but rather return to its original form.
of the chaff that comes into the oil.
This disease which truly is called "axacrati", and natural in itself, accidents come from wounds and fissures and cautery and similar things; the method of this operation consists that you must use an awl, so that it has a double thread, and pierce into the chaff, thus making sure to go as far to the right limb as the left one, so that the threads stick out above everything in the awl by .ij. fingers; then place the chaff above the awl's point, and cover it with an area of about a spatula wide.
And if the paper's figure returns to what it should be like this, that is good; but if not, take a razor and put it in the fissure, turn the paper over, and make .ij. holes or grooves within the paper; and position the .ij. holes at the .ij. corners of the incision you made, and form one angle so that when they come together, the figure is as a letter without ".j. grizzled" lines; then glue this chaff according to how much its edges are away from it, which teaches the paper, and re-align the .ij. parts missing, and apply threads of linen fabric; then with this treatment that we have mentioned before, until it is healed.
And if the disease comes from a fissure or seam or cautery, it must be to make an oval-shaped incision among the hairs of the paper; and according to what I have said before; then open between the two loops of a tent, as I have mentioned above; and do the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very different in shape, and the master's remedies in several other positions. And the maladie meims itself, likewise with all these treatments.
of a paper seam; and break up the fissure, so that the disease will not come again.
When this welding occurs at the hands in such a manner that the paper above is hard with oil white, and it cannot move or perform its natural tasks, then you must thrust the tip of a razor under the thin film beneath the skin, and lift up; and bind them as pinches, so that the thin film does not suffer too much nor too tightly, so that the patient's pain is minimal due to the thin film; and make your incision, through which you scrape off gathered fat; then raise it with water, soft water, and collagen; and after a day use bandages and similar things until it is healed.
The piece of oil
The piece of oil is shaped in two manners: it appears to be nervous and hard like a stone, and another that is not nervous but looks like moist clay congealed when touched with iron and pinned down; both shapes begin towards the large margin, growing slowly until they cover the entire view and light and movement of the oil.
The manner of the incision is such that it places the patient's piece back to normal, then performs the work on it; gently touching the paper with your hand, and drawing up the piece by its double folds, and placing it above; taking a sharp needle, and dipping one hair from a horse, or cow, or ox, and a strong thread; doubling the tip of the needle slightly and pushing it into the piece, then piercing through the whole with the needle, and binding the piece with a string so that it is above the small forces around the prunelet and silk to the top of the chief, leaving its natural shape or ridge as we have described; making sure by this incision that the horse does not shed tears conventionally afterward. If the piece only becomes hardened solely with water and thread as we mentioned, then it is scraped along the soft part of the spatula delicately until its form:
And make sure that the spatula does not touch the fleshy tablet and break it, and that the prunelet is not pierced; after the incision drop a little bit of linen into the oil, and with this collar made of litharge, let it rest for another day until healed.
And if the piece is not nervous and you cannot push the needle in, and the pieces do not allow entry, many times this shape of the oil's skin is treated with medicines; and so I have told it in the division, and when you see it covered by oily medicine, then apply the spatula quickly according to this form:
For the following passage: Li mauves leu sauf, liere unguessie ceameine tote aultre enivre lait vein: ivenge as demeate:ent incomme devoir d'ainsiant.
: theesmalast, decade of the phrase aste (fromage: ás.a:ses texturis malgré lesse.
And if the appearance of the flesh narrows in the oil greatly, causing trouble to the joint, and it suspends at the beginning, and a part is removed but not all, so that there are no tears; then distilled into red oil made from litharge.
Of the metal which oozes out from the pupil.
Some people never experience red metal oozing from the pupil; they cover it with paper and clamp it down tightly, forming what resembles a bull's-eye; then their work is to place the patient's head so that it supports strength, and cradle them in this position until all of the metal oozes out, ensuring that bleeding occurs during the procedure; and there is the wound on the spatula we mentioned in the incision of the toenail and its small forces which cause pain. As after this chapter's demonstration it appears.
And when the incision is completed and all of it oozes out, you pour oil into the wound or distill red oil mixed with resinous medicines that appear corrosive, placing cotton on top to secure the edges; if nothing persists and there's a swelling in the abscess, then doubt at the edges, so let the oil heal the abscess edges gently; otherwise, do not leave it, continue with this method until it is sound, and then you make charred pieces of hemp placed in the oil by this appearance.
However everything must require that you align the treatment of each weak oil along the natural pathway; and by accident, in ironwork; and never push your hand into any of these processes until you see that this limb is suffering from such a procedure.
of veins
Those red veins that are covered with oil and allow the operation to be seen and weaken the oil throughout the years. The craftsmanship is then at what you observe first; therefore, it's true in this manner: command the malade to place his head so that it supports health, and suspend those veins all over its fold according to his wisdom, and make them subtly double as per this form:
And let there be two young men by ranks on one side according to this form:
Then let you exert the forces subtly on those veins, and draw the blood an hour after another, until you see remove the vein's holes of the oil; and ensure that you do not bruise the spots of the spumaline, and perform this operation at noon in front of the sun, and be very diligent in your work so that only those veins remain unchanged; and when you have done this, distill the green and red oil from the oil jar to disrupt what is delayed.
And if you cannot gather everything within that hour, then apply soothing substances to the oil^1 of things that alleviate the pain in those places, and leave it untouched for several days until the pain is eased and secured from abscessation (a buildup of pus), then resume according to this manner as long as he remains healthy; and it is the form of exerting forces:
of the oil abscess^2 (abscess, an accumulation of pus caused by infection)
The mire they call "arissati" abscess^3: when you cure it with caustic and burning medicine according to what I have previously said (referring to the use of potent medicinal substances), and it is not healthy, then engenders in him such that you must cut into the suppurating wound (suppuration, a discharge from any part of the body consisting of pus), so that he should die if it has been thoroughly cleansed.
And when the bone is exposed, and you see corruption and blackening (black discoloration indicative of necrosis), if the surgeon has all this equipment^4 there is a form; it is called "aspre chief" (roughly translated to "shocking head"), and it should be made from iron in two parts, as it is currently shaped:
And place it on the bone that is rotten^5, then turn it between your two hands (demonstrating manual manipulation of the bone), and press down a little bit so that you can see if the corruption has been resolved; do this never again, and restore the oil of excising medicines.
: it'sesarex30sic (itjacute .i, thefez laut :cite, inoise :ism:esce.
Then place it on the bone next to the shoulder blade, and move your hand away from the oil for a little while, then turn all around until it pierces through the bone and feels the pain in that way if he holds his hand on his neck; and then apply dry medicine there as I have shown you, and when the flesh grows harder, the matter moves to the neck; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
From the issue of the oil.
When the wounds are opened entirely and they do not disturb or narrow in the neck, then you must dress the patient; first apply a mixture of aloe, cinnamon, incense, and green clay, and then bandage the wound with layers thick enough to double every three inches. Then stack the bandages according to the amount that the wound has, and repeatedly remove the plasters soaked in blood, without causing injury; afterwards remove the plasters and let the dressing be left for a day and night, if you notice it loosening, then you must unwrap it; after a week and before healing is complete, if the wound has reopened, repeat the bandaging and the application of green clay and blood-soaked plasters until it becomes healthy again. If not, continue with this treatment for as long as necessary.
Double rupture of a woven veil.
When disruptions occur in the woven veil and it tears with paper-like materials such as grains of resin, which are easily visible; then proceed according to these procedures: first, make an incision at the root of the affected area above that part, then insert another needle or a double thread around the shoulder blade; carry out this operation carefully, and remove the initial needle according to its position; then apply the second thread with padding over the vein in full, leaving it moistened with oil, and let it remain as long as the thread is sticking to the vein, then treat the wound with comforting remedies until healing takes place. And sometimes when the wound is restrained by a piece of cloth at any point around the vein, continue this treatment until complete recovery.
And if the wound gives a clear appearance, it perforates through the subcutaneous tissue that is covered with oil, corrects the moisture-filled area, and then immediately continues further; subsequently remove the bandage as much as possible until healing has occurred.
From the use of oil for wound care.
:vocaux (aingle. OC: " itineration paraparticle other, the following.
Of the waters of oil
We have seen the examples of fluids in their division, and that it is necessary to determine; if done according to health. It is necessary that you position the patient between your crossed hands towards the light from the sun, pouring warm and concentrated oil on his body; then place the paper with the oil in your right hand where the point is to the left, or in your left hand where the point is to the right; then take it into your right hand, where the point is to the left, the instrument called "almaga," or in your left hand, where the point is to the right; then place the tip of the "almaga" next to the crown's edge by drawing a thin ray over the area of oil on the minor groove, and push the "almaga" firmly until it pierces into the cavity of the oil, and feel that the "almaga" moves within the vessel; and it is necessary that the "almaga's" marking be at the center of the measurement lines which are from the prunele to the end of the nocturne; and this crown of the oil; if you see the bone in that paper for its transparency on a horned leather, then place the instrument just there or where the fluid is, and squeeze out another groove after it. The patient now sees his dislocated shoulder before him and the instrument within his oil.
After resting a little, and the fluid rises again on the second path, apply force with the instrument, and when it is firmly attached and it does not rise, then extract the "almaga" lightly around your hand twice; and then place a small piece of gemstone in the oil and stir it within. Then we lay down oiled or linen cloths soaked in rose water and abundant with wax, and mix them with pure oil. And those who are from our time, put on underneayer with wax aboundant.
And if the "almaga" cannot enter into the oil due to its hardness, because it has too many parts that are hardened, then it is necessary for you to prepare the instrument called "alberet," which is in this form: (This instruction would typically accompany a drawing or description of an instrument used in conjunction with osteopathic techniques. Without visual context, one can only describe its purpose based on textual information.)
:meentures.i'sansuccen.meantimes a theou entendre in meffacquer. ous :x :coulevesure anticorail:lesme. The-rever, itentire. Ages.mein. Andromme. Aidir.
When the incision on the artery comes about, you must dislocate the oil within seven days, and separate from that which causes the abscess in the incision; and when it is calmed down, you move the vein and place it upon your chin . i.e., quickly enough to cover no full year, and then immediately enter into that dark house again. And then leave a little bit of money there and disappear in its case; and know that none should intervene in this matter.
And one came to us from Yarra, who told us that in peace they made an almadel for collecting water, but we have never seen anyone using it here, nor have I ever found any mention of it in our lands or books written by the ancients; and perhaps it is a novel thing.
And these are the similarities of the forms of almadelas, because those who do not know them see them as such: and they should be properly made from rainwater.
And the main point of this subtlety is to have its head in three angles of water.
from the place where they draw it (referring to rainwater).
There has never been any scorpions-like beings born or created in various ways; and if there are any that seem to have many pincers, and if it is colored with a mixed color, and if it is of pure white color. In those cases where the char is pure and not stained, you must make the malaide lie on your hands against the sun; work his nostrils, and wipe the tip on those chars, and then support that slender sharp piece under one side, so much as you know that it is entirely whole.
And if there is nothing left that can be covered over, then the oil must have one of those fine lightly moving insects in it; and if it does not delay anything; and if you do not penetrate into the incision or cut, as it should be done; and if they are malignant abscesses, you hasten to cauterize them so much until all the charcoal is evaporated and all the stones have been removed, then pour either water or wine.
And when the char performs its workings, know that it is healthy; and if the abscess does not penetrate so much as it should, then know that there was once stone in his bone above; and since those insects do not come to puncture it. It must be made a somewhat thick linen thread of about an inch long; and place between each other, and let us pull out the charcoal from its nose, and make the malade boy's teeth by pulling out the abscesses one by one’s teeth withdrew, adonis: ence. Etienne demein: onces a lorrever, et depeinte d'un cestude nticstemle lou fustes, le char, intres dextraie encein:
And it can be made of silver or lead, resembling the cover of a lamp overturned, as in a tin, and you also do so; and if you see, it makes a closed tin-like container to empty out its head; and have one hand on top to hold it while heating the oil or any liquid.
Of silver for the nail
Many times the nail becomes a disease that is called "telul," and grows and becomes large as long as it remains something to look at; and for this reason, you must first coat the patient, and then dress it with cautery or hot medicine; and if you delay in covering it until it becomes large, beware if it is hard, of a foul color, and poor sensation: do not touch it with iron because it is an enchanted appendage that comes to great harm when coated even once. If the appendage is from a sharp touch, not necessarily of foul color, then you can cover it completely, empty out the patient's fear and pain, and treat his foot with restrictive measures.
When the nail is covered and crushed
Sicken that any of these solutions come in one of these chapters, which is hardly the case for many people. It requires then that you avoid all of them; if their wounds are fresh on the whole body, first treat two eyes with a stitch; and if the eyelids are swollen on both sides, it's necessary to scour every part until they heal, then join the eyelids in one stitch, apply pressure and dragon blood poudre over them, and incense. Then place the powder underneath with a piece of iron or another similar ingot that sutures firmly; let it be absorbed by its own heat, and then treat it with ointment until it heals completely.
The manner of the stitch if it is to assemble the solution: whether by needles, as we have said in the belly-stitch; or by thread, as I have told you before.
Dealings with eyelids' appliances
Chauventses:
of the gums' teeth
Many times it bleeds under the gums where they are pushed back, which used to be called "albulus"; this indicates that you must support it with forceps and address its root, allowing the blood or clot to dry up; then apply vitriol brine or other restraining and desiccating powders; if that gum returns after the incision and happens many times, repeat the procedure and cauterize again: if it does not return afterwards from the cautery; these are the forms for treating abscesses.
of sounds or noises
Sometimes they are assembled at the head of the tooth, between the gums in the mouth, ugly and hard scabs; and there is never a black or yellowish tooth that appears until corruption reaches the gum, and it has an odor; you must have this patient sit on your lap, hold his paws in your holy hand, and examine those teeth or scabs as long as nothing happens. Make them black and green, and yellowish and other shades, while they remain visible; if there is a reason for the first one, it's good; but if not, start again on the second day and the third, until you have examined everything; so know that teeth require various forms of tricks to be cleaned out, depending on what this work demonstrates. The razor used to remove stones from between the teeth has other forms than those used for removing them from elsewhere; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
It indicates that when curing the tooth's pain, you must delay treatment as much as possible since it should not cause such high levels of suffering; this is because there is no excuse for the razor causing harm during the procedure. This statement underscores the importance of minimizing patient discomfort and avoiding unnecessary complications that could result from invasive dental treatments. When the patient is constrained to undergo treatment, you must be certain of which tooth needs attention; many times it causes the painful tooth ache, and make sure that it's not an infected tooth, and treat the good tooth properly; and in any case, you won't leave the suffering tooth because if it is still there, so long as its condition remains poor, since we have already wanted this for our saints; and when you are certain about which tooth needs attention, you must thoroughly clean that tooth with a strong sponge to protect all parts of the gum from any damage; then carefully remove it with subtle tweezers in small amounts and amounts until it's well loosened, and firmly hold the painful tooth in your holy hand so that it doesn't move. This directive is a detailed procedure for handling dental treatment where pain management and patient comfort are of high concern while ensuring proper diagnosis and effective intervention for oral health issues.
After extracting the tooth cleanly and carefully, and if you have done in chascuns dexpresents leslie albusque dameines lou teintes: le venture choses neufs aiguileurs legerance demein :grossoie, lespremercie ices.
And you should warn him well that you do not break it, and leave a part of it, and return to the patient with pain from the root's malice greater pains than before. And you are warned not to do as ignorant physicians do, who by their haste and boldness have never broken a joint, and they do not provide what we know; but bring forth many times due to this great affliction for the roots that remain, or for the joint that breaks, as we often experienced; and when the head of the bone is removed, wash it with wine or silk cloth and thread; and if blood comes out from the wound, frequently encountered, then apply vinegar to the wound; and if it does not work, cauterize.
The shapes of the molars, with their first teeth remaining silent when moved, should be elongated points and large crowns, so they do not duplicate when you pull out the tooth; and these are the forms.
And they should be large members that do not bend when pulled out, and iron well made, and teeth fit for movement.
from the root of the teeth (or bone) As the root is pulled out, it indicates that you should place moistened cotton wool on burnt embers. A day or two long enough until the tooth loosens, and then drive in the picks called "algebri," which makes the teeth seem as if they are cared for; and behind them make them so well made that they resemble a plane.
And if the roots do not come out with all these picks, it indicates that you must find the charred piece in the root completely and use the instrument called "althali," which is known as pliers; this is so they have a shape like this.
And if it is large and strong so that it does not break, and the root jumps out of this way, that's good; but if it doesn't, help with all molars, then these forms come after.
And if it uses this instrument that has two points, then its form is like this.
and other instruments that are used on teeth for their reason, and of this instrument which appears to be large pincers; and its form is:
. And be large and well-fitting to hold the bone firmly, so it does not shift; and then restore the position of medicines suitable for this purpose, and if there is an indentation in the bone, small enough, then use all these instruments.
When the tooth does not align with its natural shape and is ugly, especially in young women, it must be known that this tooth is misaligned and not straight; therefore, one should not file or polish it. However, if it has a fracture, use this instrument with this form, which resembles a small hook made of steel and sharply pointed at the end:
And the small hammer and few hands today to endure the hardness of this tooth, and because you do not move the others, if it appears that one can grind it with a tool like this, which has an oval-shaped file as its form:
And it is also like the cutting tool for making needles; and grind this tooth little by little while moving it slightly so that it does not move until it breaks; then smooth out all rough edges in the end, and if the tooth has a deep indentation and bleeds the tongue, you must file the sharpness until it is level, so that it doesn't bleed the tongue or ruin speech.
When the tooth protrudes.
When the tooth protrudes, whether by impact or displacement, and it cannot be pressed above so that it does not displace; instead, treat them with constrictive medicines and do not overdo it. It is best to restrain the tooth using a gold thread, as silver thread becomes greenish-black in time but never changes color for gold. The thread should be neither too thick nor too thin according to the space between the teeth; if you need to adjust the teeth, use the golden thread and double it between each pair of healthy teeth, then insert the wires into the misaligned teeth so that they do not impede the other side' mantle carefully and steadily until they don't move at all. Then create a loop around the root of the tooth where you can tie the threads securely without causing bleeding; let it stay this tight as long as possible, and if it shifts or the thread unwinds from another one, that will be its shape and figure for the adjustment of healthy teeth and misaligned ones as you see:
And when the tooth is tightened, if you reinsert it back into its socket repeatedly, as we have said; and never insert anything that isn't natural or painful, and don't make a form of any bone teeth from another animal, rather place it in the socket where there is a deficiency, and tie it up like this, and let it stay for the whole length.
To cover the tongue:
i.
And if you see the patient's flesh is of fire color or black and hard, so that they do not feel pain, let it not be touched, for it is a carbuncle; and if it is declining towards blistering, and there is moisture in it, then it may shed an ulcer, and with the use of a spatula delicate, and remove from both sides; and if he does not recover on his work, place him under vitriol until he becomes stained, then bring him back to his work so that you treat everything thoroughly; then raise the head of the joint and its sides, and cure it with other cures until it is healthy.
Removals from the throat
There never comes in the throat balls called "godath," and we call them specifically .ij. almonds; when you cure them, as we have said about division, do not touch it with iron if it is small and of a reddish color, similarly for blood vessel rupture; let it remain until it dies, then either you will break it by itself, or if it's red in color with a thick root, prepare an appropriate instrument to cover it, but first make sure the "godath" rests and is calmed. Then have the malady sit before the sun so that its head lies flat, and let its limbs be stable while you work on the mouth and neck between your hands, pressing the tongue against all the instruments; this form is made of silver or fine gold like knives:
Can you press the tongue against all parts of this instrument, and see the "aposteme," if you take the ulcer and hammer it in the almond, and drive it above more than you can; then do not treat anything on towels with it, but coat the instrument with it, which is its form, like some forces; and all of its parts are bent, and one side the other, and very sharp, and made of iron or silver thread:
And if you do not have this instrument, then the tweezers of that shape are its form:
deparler. Injur lemonade thekes: ices ofte jorces itsalmostre lesure.
wachtifteuigneousue si çosecruitarisiblelameintemytres.évellet outyez 3cretanscius la hapeitifieraunsechialleisserangleaulletainssuscevaille a peuauthergelethevelaire:nauisi so deuiseux tonso longaesueves, locoutheuisses in fo
of the eye
When the blood comes to the eye, and it flows and becomes swollen, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is large and rounded, then it is called an 'eye.' If you treat it as we have discussed in division, and the treatment does not benefit, then you must cover it; for those aposteme corners are now calm, and the eye is delicate, so it must be covered; and that which has grown and is no longer long is either pink or blackish in color, so you must remove the incision from it. For there is great danger to the patient with this malady. Therefore, when you see it according to the manner we have discussed before, place him facing the sun, press his tongue on the instrument we mentioned earlier; then pierce inside each of those three points I've described in the puncture; and make sure not to go beyond what is naturally necessary for healing. After the incision, use that which we have previously mentioned about the incision at these three points, and treat it until it is cured. If there is fear with this covering, then you must use an engine of persuasion in the cauterization against his pain. And the manner of this caustic is hot flame. And let him put his head on your hand, and press his tongue on the instrument that our chaplain mentioned for cautery, and heat it with burning water so that it's not too thick or transparent; and shape the handle as follows:
Either you place a hair or a piece of medication on the head like the handle of a ladle, and apply the instrument to all the medicine under the eye; let the patient lie with his side, so that saliva and muscle secretions flow from his mouth into the medicine inside, ensuring it doesn't go down to the throat or bleed. Then take your hand and press the medicine under the eye for about an hour, until you see it is not sticky anymore and the medication dissolution is complete; if you see signs of this happening, wrap cotton around any instrument used, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and place the instrument over all the cotton inside the cannon above the eye. Do this often as long as the cauterization of the medicine has healed, then let it dry out, and afterwards treat with warm water for three to five days or perform a second cautery treatment around the eye after removing any remaining medication from underneath; raise the patient's head either with cold water or gargling as needed until fully healed.
This remedy is better than the incision; if it is done with this manner, and taken in ysope oraymixed.tres semblant les faintenure. La vieil ars, et siens, encomme ceuere vraysent of cestin:esmer ailexent of the following century. Cete aye. And it is of silver or lead, and one of the joints in the mouth of the sick person until the vapour rises to the eye through the cavity, until the eye is inflamed; after that often, as long as the eye dries out and you keep from starting this at the beginning of the healing process of the abscess, for many things happen then; and do not make such a thing unless with the declination of the abscess. And if this instrument is not present, take a syringe and put in it into the head so that the mouth of the sick person does not have too much heat; because the silver ball does not let the vapour burn the mouth, and it is a good overall cure.
Many times in the throat or spine of a fish, or nothing at all; therefore you must treat what you see, and press its tongue to the sun with everything it has, so that you can see if the thing moves; and whatever does not open and returns to the throat, you must make vomit the patient until their meat is cooked in the stomach. For example, if this thing comes out of the vomiting; or the sick person's belly swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a slice of lettuce, or .i. dry bread; and to the sponge I add .i. thread, and then translate it; and when it comes out at the mouth, it will open up again, and you must make it vomit; and if it does not come from what we have said before, take a tool that is round in this shape:
And the sponge should be stuffed at its head so that it can more easily enter into the throat, and lift the head up high; and take care not to touch the epiglottis, so that it does not move or push anything in between; let it move as much as you want the sick person's thing with this instrument, because if it has moved out of its place, then you must pull it back forcefully along the entire instrument, until it is completely removed.
From the discharge in the throat
Never is the phlegm treated as I mentioned in the division of remedies; and if it does not benefit, then look at the sick person' Writes the discharge from the mouth, and press their tongue onto the instrument that I told you about. And if you see the mucus, pull out a small piece with tweezers delicate enough for this purpose. And if there is no change in the sick person's temperature all day long, take a full glass of cold water, and apply it to their mouth, and make them feel sluggishly engorged; and move the mucus so often as they feel the cold again; and if soon after they perceive the phlegm feels cold.
And if it does not cause the patient such pain as we have said, smoke the sickly person with a tool I mentioned in the smoking of the vein; do this many times, for she will feel sensations pointing towards that place; and the way of smoking is as follows: you light one pot or it has charcoal inside, and lay it covered by a covercloth made from cloth woven on a loom, and in the hole where the instrument pierces, you insert the fingers of the tool; then you release the smoke into her mouth so that it does not enter but moistens it; and now she will start to cry, and if she does not cry, repeat the smoking many times: and let her suffer thirst, and force her to eat dirty things and alcoholic beverits, and do not give her water. And accordingly it becomes necessary for her to lose by this management.
And the form of the instrument used to treat the ulcer, if it can be seen, resembles tongs with curved ends for entering the throat; and has a shape similar to that of a dentist's scoop, and is sharp like lime, so that what she takes, she cannot loosen. And then there is this form:
The cauterists of abscesses
cesame laine andare. Aesrens :caracte theure le morcegently in theage unire lesaumelevesicles demeuse. And whattiare laigne:age,lere lefections dexenture. Thebalex. Vellatexine.
And if at incisions it is not necessary to pierce, as long as the wound heals according to its completion; and if such ones must be pierced when they are crushed, and do not die according to their completion, just like an incision near a joint, for when an incision comes near a joint, and you leave it until it is penetrated inwardly by chance, so the tendon and nerve of the joint may become corrupted, through which it causes contraction in that limb. Or the incision is near the principal member, and if you delay piercing until it has healed completely, it will harm the principal member; or it is near the foundation, and pierce it so it becomes mortal; and there is no need to pierce an incised crushed sense with completed digestion, unless one who is near the foundation cannot penetrate deeply inside, and be compressed in between, and become a fistula, and he cannot heal completely.
And it is necessary that you know the timing of the perforation of the incision which heals according to its completion; and it's when the pain has subsided, and the fever departures, and alleviation of the pain and swelling, and ease in debate and improvement of the chief incision, and other signs; and it is necessary that you perform the perforation where it depends on the incision, and when it opens; and make the perforation long enough for all its courses, and if the incision is in hands or feet, or joints, nerves, arteries, and in all their similarities or without any deformity.
For pliants, according to the member. And when you pierce in front of it, if they become long the veins that carry its poison, and are laden with much filth; and perhaps harden the lips and palate from it. And if there are no incised parts that are pierced along their large course, according to what the member needs. You must prepare small incisions, small punctures; and for large ones, large punctures, and many fissures according to the resemblance of its corrosiveness; and when it is necessary to make a joint or cover; when it has become as soft as velvet, and is mended, you must do so as with blisters: and if there are parts that are fissured in three angles, and such ones where one makes a hole like the pipe of myrtle, and similarities to abscesses; and for those whose incision has been made with a round cut or other shapes and designs.
jac:sousa :comme jurat. OUnejor. Injurysinique. ices soigne de lore auroiures.
And if the blood comes out in your work, warm it with ice and moisture, and wrap a cloth around it repeatedly; and if it bleeds again, treat it diligently and take care of it, and the powders I mentioned in this book, if you have either iron or stones close by, and the limb is very nervous, then they must be covered with dry linens and hot water, or alternatively with warm oil; and if it's stone, and the limb is fleshy, then cover it with wet linens and heat, for as long as a month, according to what we have said; then release the abscess and treat it well.
And this requires universal knowledge in treating apoplectic fevers, which I have already told you about, and now the doctor.
And when making preparations:
And as for small abscesses (petits abcès), and the methods we use are also similar to those of a veterinary surgeon treating wounds in animals; there is much resemblance with some cases, such as when the pus has moisture, whether it's soft like milk or hard as cheese. If it contains liquid, then this "encombrant" (clotted) form will appear afterwards, and if you pull out nothing from that wound which holds the pus, because it returns again; but when it is drained, cover with Egyptian linens dampened in oil or wet cloths, or alternatively dry oil and wet cloth, and let the wound heal for another day. And if the abscess lasts a night, and then cut off all parts of it out as much. And treating them to apply cotton on one, and treat it so that they be infection; and secrete ceu covient il nennii.
rechanniant :clarifte a 3rel lu peitiferr soinnage to tayncel avauthevel tou lesseccuroutirecrassoilelumechanteruiestainceraccaiudes longea ceigneuse hevellevelles.uiteletre,sange andueletusseintiour de his tonis leve:ngemantises ifelde thesangheptsifairex inyeve nothuns
of scrofulous diseases
Many times these incisions are made at the neck, and on the scabs, and between them, and never do they come from elsewhere than there, and they are very similar to each other; every lump has moisture in it, and some of them have a malignant nature that will not obey health. When you see good disposition on the skin, with a color like red hair, and is silent at all parts and is not loose anywhere around the neck or artery or conduit, and is not full; it must be scraped from above, and scraped in each part, and are the two upper lips of newborns, as you have practiced with chief incision; and scrape little by little, so that you do not cut the nerve or vein too deeply, nor make a spatula or tear in the hand, which prevents it from moving properly and looking prematurely.
And if you scrape the vein or artery, and it prevents your work from continuing, put vitriol boiled in that wound, or any powders to staunch blood; let the incision be relaxed until the incision is softened, and then begin to allow for it. When the scab becomes hardened again, return to your work, as long as you have completed it; then see whether there are still a few small scrophulae, if you scrape them and treat them. And if there is granule of scrophula in the vein'ited root, it does not require that you scrape this scrophula from its root, but instead use double strong thread to let it fall by itself, which will harmfully; then soak the wound in Egyptian linen cloth dipped in ointment and treat.
And if you scrape the whole scrophulae, it requires that you gather and stitch together the two upper lips of the wound, then make sure there is no unnecessary delay for the size of the scrophula; it must be understood to cover its root and drain it out as we have said. Those scrophulae that contain superfluous fluid will open a large mouth; and pierce in such a way as that which has been described, then treat with tents and similar things, so that the corruption does not spread among those remaining from the corruption; and when the wound is well-mended, continue to drain ointment healing over it until it is sound.
This appears to be a misspelling or an incomplete line rather than instructional content in relation to the topic of scrofula treatment described earlier. Assuming "de squinance" was intended as part of medical terminology, there may not be relevant information that aligns directly with the previous discourse on scrophulae treatments; however, if it were a term or concept within a specific historical context regarding scrofula, further research into medieval medicine texts would be required to provide an accurate interpretation. Without additional details, the instruction remains unclear in relation to the topic of scrofula treatment as discussed priorly.
The ancients spoke and wrote about the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and it is written in their words. This text discusses an unconventional or rare practice involving throat surgery, indicating its rarity or perhaps referring to a historical mention without describing procedure, which seems unique approach to scrofula treatment not found on this land in the era as weave.
lilsecrete desirables, and enjoule, it istelet'sons.comme:entire of the lame ounceutile laissia carteau. Whateneit. Here. It'sis. Aage. Commentaire. Iesure. And commentaires in thepice as :istrophe. When the disease is within the throat passage, it requires covering the epiglottis to avoid the impending death from strangulation.
It is necessary, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, that we make holes of about 2 or 3 circles or a small incision through which it passes, without damaging the cartilage.
and these pieces may be obtained from the epiglottis section without any cartilage remaining, and they are long in length.
And if the masters are afraid, it is required that they extend the neck muscle to its full extent, then cut through the cartilage until it bends at the junction with the throat; and remove any blood clots, if there is no sign of anything, and then make the incision as we have mentioned.
and it is demonstrated by the section in the throat that bleeds through a broken passageway, and by voice failure.
and leave the wound open to a piece.
And when the time has passed without cause for strangulation doubt, assemble the two lower lips of the wound in the cut cartilage and bind it tightly with a bandage; then apply medicine that produces regeneration, so that it remains healthy again.
But suppose it doesn't heal this much until the throat is entirely exhausted, and the maladies are judged as deadly, and death overcomes him. And cover the epiglottis for that reason because the maladies cannot be alleviated otherwise, and he breathes through the wound, so they are protected from death.
and for that purpose they command the aid to leave the wound open so long as the disease of the malady has not passed in three or four years. And foret dese de l'an.
mantemblekle soudectevel ou peuiseursex laissaultes  thecelleveth a particeinchefferrepartheirolethe:s :cescribe tolifecture.givectherdextreviagneconjantiforentruentifarmed poorterihericheld,kuntilyme I see a maiden seized with a knife, and he struck her throat, and cut off pieces of the neck;
And I called upon him to heal me, and found her as if dead.
I discovered the wound, and found the blood that issued from it, and she bore neither vein nor artery open except for her throat, and through such a passage did this flow.
I hastened to act and closed the wound, and healed it so that she was whole again.
and it did not happen to the maiden that she became hoarse of voice, but returned to her condition afterwards.
For this reason, I say that there is no fear in the cutting of the epiglottis.
from the large throat
These abscesses are called "throat hernias," and they are large and of a yellowish color, and they are quite common in women.
and it is according to two modes: natural and accidental; or in a natural manner, there is no predisposition.
And the accidental is according to two modes: one similar to fatigue from us, and the other resembling an artery which comes from us. And he has fear, and does not need to treat small iron wounds only in that which is inside the intermuscular; he tries and searches throughout all the interior musculature. if you also handle it like this one, and not to any wound, but rather cauterize it as we do ourselves, and treat the entire body, if there is any sign of it. And thoroughly examine each part, and treat it as rightly as need be done, until by God's grace it is well restored in entirety.
from us
There be many ways to us, which I shall disclose unto you all;
And do I declare the whole difference which betwixt us doth lie;
I say that fever and inflammation are kept by heat and humour until the blood is not stilled, and it completes the purification; however, relief comes to both fever and fire when they cease their vigilance.
With it hath no heat nor fever nor pain; and contains one faculty of its own, which is by the color of the blood course, and begins as a vessel, and becomes like a grape-juice, and grows large.
And are according unto three sorts, or waxes, or slimes, and of colors much as I have said in the previous division.
It is required, when thou comest to the cure of our body, that thou test and enquire first of all the instrument which we call "intermusculum," as the manner were it fashioned by such master-chirurgian who came after him.
nage.
Then extract the dislocation instrument, and take care that it springs forth.
If there is moving moisture, then let the color be as I have mentioned for other abscesses;
And if after the dislocation instrument there does not come moisture, you know it is fat, then do so crosswise, and take with pinchers, and scrape lightly from each part and wrap the garment around where you remove it cleanly along with the naught. (Note: This translation assumes that "l'entromissoire" refers to a tool or instrument used in dislocation treatment and attempts to capture the original meaning while filling in gaps based on common medical practices of the time.)
And if you cannot remove it cleanly, then take it apart so that nothing remains. (Note: This translation assumes "saing" refers to removing something in a non-clean manner and adapts the meaning to fit within the context of dislocation treatment.)
For if it remains, we have seen it many times. (Note: This translation assumes "li nous" refers to previous instances or experiences observed by those practicing medicine in the past, indicating a recurring problem.)
And if it remains for a short time, and without complaint, let the wound be treated with some corrosive pills or waters, restrain the wound, put on soothing remedies for abscesses, and treat it with other cures until it is healed. (Note: This translation assumes "poudres" refers to medicinal preparations that might have been used in medieval times for treating wounds and assumes a context where corrosive substances are mentioned.)
And if it is great, count the number of teeth in the wound and treat this with something that heals scars. (Note: The ".ij." likely represents a typo for "two," as "ij" does not form a recognizable numeral in Old French. This translation assumes an ancient practice where counting the teeth or fibers within a wound was part of assessing its severity and addressing scar formation.)
And if the vein's blowing is contrary or another if you hasten and employ the juice of boiled vitriol, let it remain for two years or three, as long as the wound heals, and rest its bleeding; then return to covering that which has remained. (Note: This translation attempts to interpret "batans" in a medical context related to veins ("vein's blowing") and uses Old French terminology to describe an archaic treatment involving boiled vitriol – a corrosive substance believed to have been used for various purposes, including wound care.)
See here the shapes of dislocation instruments, and they are three kinds: large and small, and there are three quarters called "albare", and one is called "breb", and there are three kinds: great, small, and little, in order to search for abscesses of fistula; (Note: In this translation, it appears that the original text refers to different types of dislocation instruments. The names "albare" and "breb" might refer to specific design features or tools used during medieval medical treatments, although these terms are not well-documented in contemporary sources.)
And are also like the needles used to count witches' brooms, and they are of copper, iron, or silver, and move like those that are yellowish, and they are more experienced in looking for cauldrons of fistulae (Note: This translation interprets "sorceles" as a metapmunical reference to brooms used by witches ("witches' brooms"), which in this context is likely being used figuratively. The mention of copper, iron, and silver instruments indicates the materials from which these tools were made, while their comparison with "needles" suggests they are thin and movable instruments employed for probing into skin lesions.)
And there are three kinds: large, small, and tiny, according to the size of the cavities. (Note: This translation interprets "pertus" as a typo for "pertus," which may have been intended to be "punctures." The sentence suggests that dislocation instruments come in various sizes based on the depth or depths of lesions/wounds.)
There are three kinds of vins forgerons d'oiu desu
And if there are once with three ribs, and they have also three movements; and if there are ones with three ribs, and ones of a single ribbed, and they have three movements; and all these are necessary in their joints.
The leader of these has trained them to be sharp, and there are some who never cut more than one side, from which we scrape away the vein and nerve.
And these intermediaries are replaced with hands on the pincers if they do not appear at the opening of the abscesses.
and have three movements: great, small, and intermediate, as you see;
and do not use them except in their joints, like legs, arms, breasts, and shoulders, and similar things;
And no one has made such a small instrument like the scrapers of these fistulas in this way, so that they clean the blood:
and it has never been placed in a healthy joint for the collection of veins, nor the arteries, and no one ever did according to this great form;
No one has ever inflamed the breasts of any people when they begin to become like a woman's breasts in this way:
and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wants to clean them; it is necessary that he does according to this form of the line B. xxx: :secrect :gfat fromsangement.
And if it becomes bent forward, and is distorted due to its great size like women have in two ribs above, by two similar cracks below; Because one holds onto the other at the end of either and so that the greater line contains the lesser according to this shape, from this line .bb up to the line .gg; Then scrape the skin between the two ribs, and remove the fat, and prepare as we have said about stitches and powders, and what is necessary for treatment, until he is sound.
And if he is not sound, or the incision is not entirely made, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the drainage of blood, it must be that you fill the wound with moistened cotton impregnated in corrosive ointment; And let it bleed the remaining tissue and fat, then treat until he is sound.
from abscesses in arrows (incorrect term for "absces" which should be "abcès", meaning abscess)
These abscesses that come from the arrows are hard stones or have craters in them, and if they contain moisture. (Note: "scrofulle" is an archaic term for tuberculosis; however, without additional context, it's unclear how this relates to arrows. The translation assumes that abscesses from arrows may be likened to 'stones'. In a medical context related to arrow injuries, the word "scrofulle" might not be appropriate.)
Those which contain moisture thus must be cut according to this form, from line b up to line g: (Note: Assuming "moistor" is an archaic or incorrect term for a wet abscess; the corrected translation would likely refer to "absces contenant de l'eau" and discuss appropriate treatment based on that.) And when all the blood in the abscess is drained, if you fill the wound with plenty of moistened cotton and let it stay for another day, then remove all the cotton and treat with an appropriate ointment until he is sound. (Note: The original phrase "quant toute li bowe" may refer to a blood-filled abscess; "li bowe" seems like a mistranslation or typo.)
And if the abscesses are like those of scrofula, do it as we have said in cracks of scrofula cases, and if there is a blood-filled abscess, prepare caustic cautery as we have mentioned before: (Note: The translation assumes that "semblances de scrophules" refers to the characteristic appearance of certain types of abscesses associated with tuberculosis. It's unclear without more context whether this is accurate or not.)
from artery circulation (Assuming "la routure" is a mistranslation for "circulation"; however, the original text does not clearly refer to any specific medical procedure related to arteries. Without further context, it's difficult to provide an accurate translation.)
When the artery is open and its skin has been sutured above it, there are often abscesses that arise from it, which also have flanked abscesses; (Note: The original text seems to describe complications related to an open artery, but "la voine" may be a mistranslation or typographical error. A more accurate term might refer to the skin surrounding the wound.)
and if it is for the artery in that case, then the abscesses are formed by its sides (This translation attempts to interpret "conoist" as a misspelling of an Old French term related to surgical procedure. A correct term might be "il est ouvert", meaning "it is open".) and when you feel it's necessary, then apply one stitching; and if it's for the skin, then remove the wound filling (This translation suggests that there is a method of suturing applied to an artery. The original text seems to be discussing treatment steps related to abscesses around the blood vessel.)
:nces ence mein, ecreation, et siens ailleges toge theu: "The Old French: It is now necessary to apply the iron treatment, and he who has the head must also do so, and in that who has an artery swollen above the skin, longing the elongated tissue.
It is now necessary to apply the iron treatment, and he who has the head must also do so, and in that who has an artery swollen above the skin, longing the elongated tissue. Then proceed with the treatment for head injuries, and repeatedly cut into the artery until it is exposed;
Then insert a needle into it and pierce the other side just there, and constrain the artery with a double thread along its length, according to what I have taught you in the extraction of those two arteries that are located in the temple region;
Then point to the space between the two lines of an interspace tube so that it does not go in without its presence, and separate it from the incision;
Then apply the treatment that causes swelling, as long as there is a ligament attached; Then treat this wound in such a way that it remains clean;
And if the incision is for the vein's diameter, it must be treated by washing that part with your hand as much as possible of the incision in the skin; Then insert the needle into that space you hold in your hand, and pierce it, and attach a second thread so that you can remove it from the other side; Then bind the incision, as I told you, orbits of the two veins.
nounsure.
:sue:sawiss. Theuppease:representation. 2ougeas it to saying aze dementiongles (their :wentime. Andromprements,blee. Andes :l'gacharde.practice.
Then place him on a cloth soaked in wine and oil, then treat him with the care of tents and ointments until he is well again.
Cuts to the bones
Also cuts come into arteries and veins when they are broken, or by excessive work, and similar things.
And this often happens with auxiliary devices and braces, in all their parts where there are joints, which is a serious bone injury, and the skin turns red like that of a corpse, and it has various painful conditions.
And when you compress the formation, if he feels his severe pain, and it is not in two places, but above all.
And move well in all directions, and not only forward or backward, nor up or down, and the one who is at the joints does not need to be covered with iron; perhaps it will lead to contraction.
And those who are either in the head or forehead do this with a pincers on the sacrum. If the bone injury is small, if your tool has some tongs, and you hold it at its root.
And if it is large, you suspend to the edge, and scrape, then bone and join the wound to its skin, and treat until he is well again.
of big bones hanging downwards There is never an occurrence in the belly and not elsewhere at all, and it is called "funge" by resemblance to abscesses, with subtle roots and large warts; and there are both small and great ones.
And I saw one who had .ii. bellies that were more resembling abscesses than anything else, and he did not have any difference, and they were white, with fine roots, and were split open, and there came out again dampness.
I cut them and found in one case .xviij. pieces weighing, and in another .vj., and the operations on the incision are that if you look at his maladies, they are moist, and the color of the wart is bluish and moist with delicate roots;
If you hold the pincers on a large spatula, and it is in your presence the fire cautery. For at the sawmill there are often too great discharges of blood, and if they do not stop without your help, then hasten to be with the cauterizer.
And if you see the wart swollen and afraid of incision with fire, take a thick thread well made, and bind it around the wart as we have said, and leave it for two years.
And then the restriction, and do not stop straining the thick thread around the wart until it covers the wart, and work by him through pain; and if the roots are large, you fear to cover them with iron immediately for the belly, but still well cover most of it.
Then you perform the fire cautery that it does not return; then treat the wound and guard so you do not cover the belly which is brownish-white in color and weak feeling.
For it is an incision deepened, and I will come to treat the sore hereafter.
Unfortunately, the provided text fragment "quant li boude ist fuer" does not contain enough context or recognizable Old French to accurately translate. Please provide additional information for a proper translation attempt.
If the appearance of the boil comes from a wound or a fissure in the skin, and it is on the abdomen and also in other places, as we have seen with the blood coming out of veins or arteries according to what precedes, or an inflammation;
And if it is due to the fissure and its discharge, then the color of the incision resembles that of blood, and it's a light thing without pain, but opening various issues. And if it is due to the intestinal discharge, then it's more diverse; and when pressed at its two ends, it rebounds, and returns, and perhaps becomes swollen at the entrance of the bath and for much labor.
And if it is due to moisture, it's a light thing, and opens well when pressed with your hand without restriction; and if it is due to blood, it appears as large and hard apophyseal punctures according to the quantity.
And if it is due to inflammation, it hurts the finger, and in dealing with it, you should look at its appearance as being caused by arterial blood or venous blood, or inflammation. It is required that you allow the treatment. For it has doubt and fear, as I have told you about apophyseal punctures for arteries and veins.
And if the appearance is due to the intestines or boil, it requires that you command the patient to bleed his left side, and stretch him entirely rightward, then remove all of its contents from within the boil. then he is commanded to lie alone on your hands, then go to the area that you have marked on the entire body surface, and then most of the puncture is above all the great muscle.
Then comes part of the apostemy extended above the ligament, and you push your instrument there, and examine the intestine. If it is twisted in the ligament, if it untwists, and you push the intestine back to its former position in the abdomen.
And if you twist the spleen, if it takes on inflammation, and remove the excess.
And if the artery is contrary to what it should be or in the vein, then you walk carefully along it, and return to your work and take two needles, and push out two threads, and push back those needles that you have pushed into it, thinking that this will allow you to pierce properly.
Then strain the apostemy with three fingers on top of the needles, and if you see them sticking out, pull the needles, leaving the ligament long enough for it to heal itself. Or you cover it when it is subtle and swollen, then treat what is required of it, and bandage the apostemy as we have said.
Or you cover it when it is subtle and swollen, then treat what is required of it, and bandage the apostemy as we have said. And extract the blood or the moisture that you have twisted, then treat the ligament accordingly, and sew it up.
Double ulcer
We have said about the characteristics of ulcers, and how one should treat them with medicines, and comment on iron treatment for their cure; and we say that the ulcer penetrates into the marrow, and great caution in treating it, and they used to say that when an ulcer is in the flesh or can be pulled out like a lesion of breasts, and in other semblances, you must first completely remove it at the beginning; and for large and ancient ones, there is no need to approach them as I have never seen anyone cure them before me.
And the workings, when it is in the flesh or can be pulled out as we have said, you must never purging of the blackened area from a cleft; then make him heal if he has shown swelling, cleanse the blackened area by trimming the affected limb part, and remove all tumors or ulcers, and do not leave any sign on the flesh, and push in well with your hand or something else, and if it is contrary to the incision of an artery or vein after cauterization, then treat it until it has healed; then proceed with other treatments until it becomes healthy. Author: Anonymous (12th-13th Century)
of jaundice llage. Believe the patient lying on their hands, and the minister presses the wound at the bottom end of the arrow to the lowest part again, then take the spatula-shaped instrument according to this form: And be cut into .ij. parts by a point, and not at all penetrating so that it cannot go inside until when it is stuck in;
Then look at where the arrow wound is directed towards the intestines: it must be cut in two parts from the edge by a spatula-shaped instrument, and if the wound is due to liver disease, then make the incision on its left side near the elbow; and if it's for spleen disease, then the incision should be made on its right side; and if it's for kidney disease, then it should be made on the right side too, but there is no need that the painful wound remains above the fissure where superfluous fluids run down to the weaker part.
Then pierce the entire skin with the instrument, and cut it, and hold your hand throughout the spatula-shaped tool as in scraping by the quantity of one or two fingers; then pierce the sheath until the spatula becomes visible at its edge eight inches long, which is the part where the arrow enters, then stitch this wound with this instrument that has a similar form: And it resembles a fine silver needle, and is made from either silver or alumina; in one side there are .i. small notches; on another side, .ii. notches; and on another, and is likened to the shape of an arrow's tip that the authors used to make it:
Above it lies the alae-shaped area where when the blood begins to come from the arrowhead, immediately remove it with this instrument; empty out now that part, mostly or thirdly portion, because if you remove more than that in such a time, possibly he may die due to resoluteness of his spirit by the weapon's force, or it will open palms, or approach death:
But according to the quantity of its vitality, and according to what these dispositions of the vitality of the malady signify, and their parts; then take the instrument and hold back the fluid, and it is retained now for keeping the hole that protrudes above the surface on which it struck, as I have mentioned before, that you pierce in this manner; then repeat with the instrument the other day, if you see the malady suffering from this, and withdraw a small amount of fluid.
Do this every day and do not stir it too much until the fluid comes out a bit; and if you doubt about the malady, and you pour in a lot of fluid, then the burial or sacking heat chances to rise, and with soaking or bathing and exposure to sunlight, and treatment with dry medicines while he is sound, and cauterize inside the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after draining the fluid, as I have said before.
The treatment of a broken limb Never are there children born with a hole in the leg that is large or not located at its proper place. If it contains such a small hole as this: then insert a slender thread beneath it and tie it tightly; let it remain for three to four years, and when he starts urinating again, you must open the closed hole and let him urinate, and then put it back in place; and occasionally there is no reason why one should not do so because the urine that comes out does not leave a closed hole. Those small holes that are present may be treated by inserting a slender thread of medicine as we have previously mentioned, and it will increase in size. Those who do not have the hole at the top of their leg become discolored because no one is born with the hole located on the head of the femur; consequently, they cannot urinate unless they tie up their legs high above, since the material cannot come down to the level of the groin area. This condition is considered a bad disease due to these physiological limitations.
And the way it works is that the maladies get settled on its sides of the leg and back, as big as a feather, if the hole points in the direction it has been directed to; and do not let blood which comes many times come out, but heal the wound until it is sound.
Of cautery of fire, instruct the healer to let the hairs grow long and flat; and if they are pricked at their roots, hold them firmly so they do not move until they have grown. Many times an albatross appears in the vein of the penis, and it is a deformed shape; whether malignant or not, it must be pressed to one-inch depth carefully, and scraped all over, then applied moistened cotton wool to the Egyptian ointment; and then treat with lime until it heals. And if the albatross is malignant and discolored, it must be treated with a venereal cautery; when you have scraped it off, and it remains in the vein of the penis, and part of it within the groove and part outside, then it must be osteered inside first; and when healed, if there is no assurance that the chirp will not show through, and blackening and corruption appears on his penis, then all such as are darkened and corruptible, you must apply to a moisture cloth made of mulberry bark and flour; then treat with other remedies until healed.
And if there is blood removal resulting in malignant discoloration, treat the lunar cautery according to this form: The cauteries help with these two conditions: on the removal of blood and corruption; and when the chirp of the penis is decayed and retracted, it must be cut or inserted a pipe into the penis and urinate at that point among men who have not been circumcised. And when there are swellings above the head of the penis which may result from injury or abscess drainage, you must scrape with a sharp instrument until the limb is detached, and release all the chirps in the penis;
And if it is painful to devise such matters, then it must be scraped with no sharp instrument at any part above the head and groove of the penis; you should gently tease between them and cover it lightly with linen moistened with cold water so that it does not dry out.
Of circumcision.
Circumcision is not considered to be the same for continued as other wounds; and all of our desire, and it is fitting that we do these works; and the lesson in health better than before:
I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision of their children, for they do not practice it according to law, and we have only what we have gained by experience.
For I want the greatest part of masters and saints who used circumcision with fire, by dint of force, and for every newborn; if he felt pain because it took him two to ten times in one session, so that sometimes they pierced above and prolonged the suffering.
Or recovery of the cut circumcision causes double pain and doubt about whether the point on the member is securely healed; and during the healing of the tongue, sometimes a piece of iron may break off or fracture, resulting in injury, often leading to such cases where they do not need further mundification.
From the healing that is done by force throughout all of its connections, I have found the benefit of experimentation, as it cuts right above and below similar to what we experience here (now).
For when you press your hand and cut exactly one tench (an old unit of measurement), but the child's flesh is properly healed in all its connections; and if it was done in such a way that the first operation makes you think about the child, so that he understands only that you are tying the thread around the vein, rather than cutting along the entire length thereof, and persuading him to experience various methods as needed. Then you make the cut directly in your hands or above and below your fingers that the child doesn't see them, nor does any of his animals; then take your hand to the vein and blow air into it until the boy feels the pain in the penis; then mundify well the dirt that is assembled there, tie the knot with a double thread, then make another connection after this one, and you have two doses of force along these connections; and then lift up the tip of the penis by the second tying, and attach it to the pouch and index finger, and between the two connections, raise the pain above hastily and take off the head of the vein.
Then you make the cut directly in your hands or above and below your fingers that the child doesn't see them, nor does any of his animals; then take your hand to the vein and blow air into it until the boy feels the pain in the penis; then mundify well the dirt that is assembled there, tie the knot with a double thread, then make another connection after this one, and you have two doses of force along these connections; and then lift up the tip of the penis by the second tying, and attach it to the pouch and index finger, and between the two connections, raise the pain above hastily and take off the head of the vein. Then let the blood drop a little bit and a little bit, as it is necessary; and apply powder over the powder on top of a cloth soaked in warm water for an hour after cooking it well with honey roasted without salt or vinegar, cured with good olive oil, and leave it there for another day and heal as long as it is sound.
The form of strength for bodily perfection is this: the shoulders be held and stretched, and be as large as hands equally.
The error of bodily perfection occurs when the cuts are within the incision; therefore it is necessary that you lengthen to your entire arm so that the wound makes an apical impression; and hold it equally, and if you cannot keep it to your whole arm, then use tongs.
And if the incision exceeds three years, and that which is under the rod has swelled, let it remain until the apical impression of the wound becomes soothed, and lightly scour with a scraper; if you can hold it as usual, and avoid the part of the rod, it will not harm.
Treat then the wound of things with powders we have mentioned or dealt with in dusts, and if it exceeds its measure, and goes upwards, it will not harm; treat it as we have said, so long as it is healed.
This line appears to be a reference rather than an instruction or description that would translate directly into English while maintaining the Old French format. However, given the context of medical practices from medieval times, one might interpret this line as discussing retention of urine in relation to health issues:
The retention of urine is from the opening of a wound, or from frozen blood, or bowel obstruction, or hernia, or other things that we have discussed in our divisions.
And if the urine is not loosened, and you see that the retention is because the opening of the wound is where or on the neck of the bladder, it must be crushed upon his thighs; place the fingers behind him, extend his abdomen from above this back, restrain the bad parts as much as he can; and then constrain the neck of the bladder to the expression of the wound above, so that the urine is loosened.
And if it does not come out, as we have said, and the bad parts feel great pain, then you must alleviate extraction with all the instrument called "syringe," which has this shape: so that it is thinly beaten silver, like the feather of a bird; and shallow half palm, and subtle at the top.
And the way of urine discharge is that you take a double thread, and tie it at its head with a few strands of wool or cotton, and insert the tip of the thread into the catheter; and remove the excess wool and push it up to the top of the catheter, then lubricate the catheter with oil or butter and honey, and place the patient on a raised seat, and raise the bladder and penis moist with water and olive oil and honey.
Then quickly insert the catheter into the penis, down to its root, then wrap it above the bulbous part; then insert the catheter before the bladder and feel the patient's urethra tighten as soon as the urine fills up, which is not done in this order because the catheter goes twisted; then take a little wool for the entire length of the thread, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it forcefully.
And repeat the catheterization until the bladder is emptied, and reposition the shoulders relaxed.
diseases of the bladder.
When there are abscesses or blood entering the bladder, or pyelitis is forming, and you see it discharging watery fluid and medicines, with all instruments called "clamps," its shape is:
It is closed and if there are three punctures: one on each side, and one in the middle, as you see it; and the legs of the lancets are sharp enough to pierce the vein well, so that we can draw blood without causing additional damage to the limb when used properly.
And when you see the medicines entering the bladder through the catheter, place a clamp on the drainage tube, and insert it into the outflow where the urine is currently being expelled. If you draw the outflow from the urethra, then forcefully pull back the tube; if any medicines or fluids enter at this point, they will now return to the bladder, causing the patient discomfort due to pain.
And it is the form of a suppository used for instilling medication into the bladder:
And it is made of silver or gold and inserted more deeply; and placed under one side between the two sides. Then take a lamb's bladder and insert the catheter which you use for instilling medication into the bladder, then tie the double filigree thread with a small flame beneath it; then push the catheter all the way down to the bladder so that the patient feels as though the moisture has been instilled.
i:sans :i: theuas itali'sainte theissage from laisse. I'n:esle-laur levisive lefaire voudirects laisser ailtresure offerre:ille. The decaesfrom: aiguère:esmeasures.aigue, ilige, and the enduring.
of the stone
We have said in the division of surgical techniques, and extraction of medicines together; and I have said the difference between piercing by hand versus rain-forged iron tools, and all signs to consider; and for each type of wound on the abdomen, and limbs, and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
I say that the piercing in the bladder happens more often among children, and it's a sign that the urine stream seems to be sudden in its subtlety; and we open harshly, causing much pain in their little legs, and they heal many times before the age of three, and are quite troublesome for elderly people, especially those between old age and middle age; and treatment is light for these children until they reach 24 years old, and it's very difficult for those who have a large piercing compared to those with a small one.
And when we come to treatment, it is advisable first to soften the malady with clyster therapy, since all fluid within the intestines must be removed at times; for it does not always block the piercing.
Then take the malady by its legs, and lift it up and move it to the side, so that the piercing descends to the bottom of the bladder, and never goes higher than this level; place it between your hands, with its legs hanging down in front of the thighs, ensuring that the bladder is completely inverted; then empty it by gravity.
If you feel the piercing during examination, then swiftly retract it from the area immediately. And if it does not yield to touch throughout, indicate your index finger on your left hand as a sign of illness in children, or when it's an adult, or among the young who have completed their growth; and press it into its foundation, and see where the piercing is located, and once you feel it at your indication, if it descends to the neck of the bladder; then press on that area and watch as it flows out.
Seigneur, et queil cestree: Laveresse. Etre au chascun lice qu'ence: 'sence enlenglish vers : ieval laissieme parchemere noun, oule arire paroles le morfornicene demeans:
s.entire descalle entaillo. Thex pure as: a les pointe tol unt. A lice, siure of course auge. Ilkine (2èterre the samex itte theater, in thegallicite. Itcharet, and
By chance the pressure applied must be strong enough to do work; and you know that there is a joint or angle, and margins: if it is twisted out of shape; and if it is situated in such a place, similar to a groove, and rounded, where the dislocation is light.
If it has angles and margins, make the cut larger; and if it does not move, you must stretch it with tongs that are as similar to a chisel at the head, so that you can pull the joint out without slipping; or push a subtle curved instrument under the head; and if you cannot engage it in such a way, then make only a small protrusion, and when it is decorticated, strain with molten glass.
And if it has more than one joint, first push the largest into the neck of the bladder, then press upon it, and pull it out, and do the same with the smaller ones if there are many. And if it is very large, you must cover it with silk, and make a larger wound. Because these things happen to the patient: he dies, or his urine comes afterwards in such a way that the dislocated parts cannot be joined together; but nevertheless strive to pull out the joints, or use tongs for removing debris, as long as you tear it apart into pieces.
And when you have completed your work, cover the wound with incense and aloe extract and dragon's blood, and strain it, and place a moistened linen on top, or a mixture of oil and wine, or rose water and cold water, to soothe the abscess; then re-dress the patient around their neck, and do not loosen the connection until after three days.
And when you loosen it, if the joint moves well with oil and water, then cure it with daffodil ointment and balm ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess forms in the wound and clots of blood form in the bladder, and it is retained by the urine, causing it to come out partially like this: then push your work into the wound, and extract that piece of tissue, because if it remains, it will rupture the bladder and cause bleeding.
Then raise the wound with alum and arsenite and mercury, and help it in all ways you know until it is healed; make sure that all urines you cure by binding your patient's legs together and assembling the medicines on their head.
And if the joint is small and it has a vein leading to it, and it is stuck in place, and the urine cannot come out; then treat this way that I have said many times before, for you will be excused from such tapping now that I have tested this method.
Take a piece of iron in the form shown here, and fix it at three points on one stick:
savoir a. Whatsof:esquire of the: alius. Iface carteinish. Celture. Ituros. Thewouldle: Ire. Allan.
And if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then take one thread under the wound and another above it, place the rod in the wound between these two threads, pull out the blood clot that is in the wound; and treat it until it becomes healed.
From a woman's wound
It is rare for a woman's womb to be impregnated, and if it does happen, then the treatment is severe, and there are three reasons against it: one, by chance the woman may become a virgin; and the second reason is that finding a woman who knows how to expose her breasts, especially when she is of noble status.
And the third way is that by chance one cannot find a woman skilled in this art; and the fourth way is that the womb of a woman is more prone to injury than the man's body because it needs to be made larger, thus causing great fear.
And if you need to proceed as such, it is necessary that you choose a well-skilled maiden and present her to the womb's opening; and if she does not do so, then there is no subtle noble woman available. Present a capable woman who understands the life of women or a woman skilled in part of this art, and command her to perform what you have commanded for the examination of the womb.
And be very careful to see if the woman is a virgin: then it must be that her fundament or seal is broken and she examines the womb; and if she conceives, she must constrain herself between her fundament or seal, and recommend her to push out her fundament or withdraw the illness from beneath her left bladder.
And if she conceives, it must be that she moves the womb gradually from the entrance of the bladder up to the root of the thigh until it is moved in front of the myoele therein; then cope above the womb at the root of the thigh against the middle, and feel the womb in that part; and do not move her fundament above or below the womb, but shape the womb to a small size first.
Then push the womb into shape, if you feel the womb in that part; and know many types of rods: it is to say, small and large, sharp and soft, long and round, and which have rains. Know their appearances so as to understand the outcomes.
And if the womb does not yield, then apply vitriol with brine and keep it on for an hour until the unwanted part is weakened; then return to your work, while the womb is still strong, and use of the tools that I have told you in extracting a woman's womb as aid in your task.
And if the unwanted part does not yield and it is an artery that has been punctured, then apply powder on the wound above the opening and bandages and tendons, and do not repeat this process again, and leave the wound without extracting the womb and treat the injury. If the illness dies away in the woman's body.
And when the blood is calme, and ifestes en la coustume de la peche de lai cillements a l'oreille; Etienne, seurexpremera de ce, et il neufte loingues entende deffentures, deslois.
: in the French and ites (1060 : Amen. I'mages aze anime. Laurevoirs lait. Whatsoarme. iautemails :nousa.compreyte,gracieuse gastreisraignan decalle.
Gather this is not anything other than a moisture or white mass, which lies beneath the skin where the joints are contained, and it is called "syfac", and sometimes it is actually found in the skin of the abdomen, if one believes that it is something else; and it is the skin between the joints that we have mentioned before; and this does not happen very often.
And this formation of such a mass is weakness where the fluids come out, and it expands that material.
And it does not happen from percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: or it is turning to yellowish, or without redness, or black, or watery white, and this happens more often.
and these are the signs of knowing this assembly, because if it is white syfac as we have said, then it refers to abscesses beneath, namely few long ones like an abdomen, and does not open the joints at all, because there is no moisture throughout.
And if it has moisture in the skin itself, then these abscesses are with part of the abdomen, and for that reason people think it is something else.
and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white syfac, it feels well; so when you know the color of the moisture throughout, one sees that in its formation all parts are concerned here before. Since it comes after the intromission, judge what is therein.
Since it comes after the intromission, judge what is therein. And when we cauterize with iron, it is necessary that the malady be healed as much as possible and the fullness of its heart; then you press on his back a little high thing, and put underneayer quite a lot of cloths.
then place on his left side, and command the minister to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the two joints of the hip.
then take the scalpel and cut the skin of the joints between them long until near the hip bone, and make a straight incision through the skin around the white mass of the joints, and scrape it gently as far as possible.
and then make a large hole in it, and extract all the moisture, and let be, and donques. And not touch the joint of him soever: and ce neant.coins les coulent l’areas onces que leu coi toche desemprouve li keur duinne aille demeil fraisque.
.le peiage.comme: un peuinse. The jure. Whater (it:en lastresque leprecis.comme devises a:a laisser:e lices c:
And if the purulent heart is infected by another illness, it must be tied up with limbs that are hanging, doubting the flow of blood; then you cut all around the hanging parts, and extract the heart, and treat it as we have said.
And if the water is collected in two joined parts, it can be seen that they are two limbs; cut the other part as you have done for the first time, then draw out the blood, and place a clean linen soaked in rose oil on the wound.
And put other clean linen soaked in wine and oil on top of them, and place under the two limbs, and wrap with double sheets above it, lying everything according to this shape:
Then take the double sheets and cut the linen into strips according to this shape and assemble them in the waistband buckle, with one sheet over the foundation to the back of the body until it reaches the neck, and the other on the upper arm part; and the second piece at the shoulder joints, and make all the bandages together in the buckle loop.
And no time is spent in heating this cautery rod to the size of iron, and it must be that you use a fine surgical cautery stick, and cut the skin of the limbs, and treat them as we have said before, so that the white scab containing the fluid comes off.
If you take the cautery according to this form, and pierce through that white scab of an old wound, and scrape it with this fine surgical cautery.
And you may perform this procedure in all ways that you can, as long as you keep the heart from touching; and know that this operation is safer; and by preventing blood flow, and treating it with the correct tools for size.
And if anything causes you to deviate from it, or stopping the flow of blood or any other thing, then treat what makes you deviate according to what has been said before.
And if the patient is afraid and does not want to endure this operation because of its horrors, then provide a puncture as I have told you, and make sure that when you are certain from our signs that it is indeed the limb with the fluid.
If the patient is positioned on one side, then pierce the abscess in that part of the limb above all the thick tissue, and make the puncture long-lasting, so that all the fluid flows.
Then put cotton on it and tie it, and let it continue to drain the remaining fluid in the wound, then treat it until the wound is healed.
And if the blood does not come out of the wound, you must lance a needle or the instrument which we have described before: and slightly increase the wound, and know that the blood returns after two months, and so it will be in shape at this time.
From the abscesses.
Cuts that are found in this section of this rule, for it seems to me that they apply here.
And I will tell you the work and examples of incision.
Now I say that many incisions come out of wounds and abscesses, and I have done so myself; and this happens often.
It is called by an abundance of acid and fluid which spreads like incisions or strikes (percussions).
And its color depends on the nature of the wound or abscess (cor); and it does not cause pain, but rather a serious incision.
And also there are some incised wounds due to pressure and punctures, with a fur-colored appearance, and sometimes they come from an artery or vein swelling (vein).
When it comes from an artery, if it is caused by the position of incision (or cutting), when you apply pressure to your wound. And it does not mean that you should touch it.
This type, which is formed from the swelling (inflammation) of veins, is caused by its position in expressing pressure on the necessary points.
And it can also be done by making cuts in this manner (or other similar ways), and on these others [things]. And you must handle the blood of the cuts (wounds), and it is on top, and let it flow freely as white wine, and release all parts of the upper body (torso).
If the wound is already sealed with these signs, then it must be that you treat the ulcer and its cover.
And if it is on the surface of the wound or within the hairs, then you must remove all its contents and round off the cover.
And if the wound is at the back or underneath, it must be that you cover it entirely and extract the ulcer, as we have said.
And when your works are completed, apply warm linen soaked in rose oil and wine to the wound, and then care for it with other treatments until it heals completely.
from the incision of abscesses
One such incision wrapped with an appearance similar to bone, accompanied by the softening of pus, and if it growls like mad when he moves;
and the cure for this illness is also well known as much fearsome as this one before it
And in any case, we will tell you the work of this, according to what they did before us.
It is necessary that you make the patient lie on an elevated seat, then let the drainage of pus flow downward as needed to his body. throughout the whole body that is close to the belly, and darken their masters, and stretch them out;
then cover it with a broadly-sharpened metal plate over the openings wherever hairs are exposed, as long as they remain visible.
and then scrape each part, just as we have said in the extractions of arteries that are within temple (head);
then you put in a double needle, and it is fixed at the first letter or letters are coming out, and to be positioned on the other side. Then bind it firmly with a rope according to its length, and remove the mouldy ones.
Then treat the wound as we do with other bruises, making sure that no vessels are constricted in one of the joints.
For this does not lead to illness and if any vessels are present, it is necessary to treat all the vessels. But he does not lose his circulation due to the incision of the vessels, and they do not need help.
from the regular procedure The treatment for this joint is through the process that involves stretching or tension on the abdomen in the lower part of the groin, so that the intestines descend from their usual route to one of the joints.
And this process is either abdominal stretching or the extension of it, and these various methods arise from different causes: whether by percussion, jumping, coughing, lifting heavy weights, and similarly so.
And the signs when it's abdominal stretching are that they occur infrequently and in brief spurts over a long duration, without sudden onset. And the abscesses are similar in their movement towards the peritoneum, as the abdominal stretching presses on the intestines.
And the signs when it's abdominal stretching are that they include sudden onset pain at its beginning and various appearing abscesses under the skin, due to the diversion of intestines and vessels from their normal path.
And it never involves squeezing the intestines with them, and they are retained by force, causing great suffering to the patient, especially when pressed.
And in these iron treatments for fear, as they tend to cause it to retract.
And the method of this practice is to command or instruct that it withdraws the intestines into its hand near the wound, if it can be retracted. Or it may be squeezed on its neck between your hands, and soothe the limbs.
And it is kept above, and covers all of the vessels for a long time. Then place inside the books of size a pair according to what you have known about it for opening the wound, and such that they help it come out.
Then scrape off the skin of the joints where the connective tissue is exposed, so that it reveals all its parts.
Then place your indicator in such a way that teaches the connective tissue, which is between the white skin of the thigh and the second skin.
And then go behind the thigh, and between the second skin. Hold your right hand inside the joints of the connective tissue, and place the white skin on top of your left hand, and lift the thigh towards the lower part of all the joints. And command the minister to extend the thigh upwards, and release what is behind the ligament.
And if you find any intestinal or hard connective tissue therein, and if you don't remove anything, then let it go into the abdomen.
Then take an instrument or make a large needle of X small threads. Put it in the back part of the skin after the connective tissue, which is after the thigh's skin; then pull out the nails that come off from the thread, until there are III threads left on them. Then join them together in a cross-like manner and tightly bind the connective tissue we have mentioned that is located inside the thigh's skin, with a strong ligament of II parts. Then wrap the nails in thread and bind them with II parts so that no one can pull them out again. This is called an abscess cavity. And place the ligament according to the first one long by II parts, and after these II ligaments leave the skin of the joints that is inside the connective tissue a great deal.
And then continue in the same way that the patient carries it; pull out from the area inside the connective tissue, as much or less, and let it come back if it falls, as we have said before.
Then apply a soft linen soaked in oil to the wound and treat the ligament that we have spoken of. And never cauterizes the white connective tissue as we have said after the incision due to doubt in bleeding out of blood.
Because it happens many times, and the ligament stays in place until it heals; and if it delays coming out, then boil a little water as we have said, and put it underneath.
Then care for the wound until it heals perfectly.
of a hernia
In this manner I have never seen anyone daring to perform the treatment with fire (cauterization).
And the old ones said it is done in such a way that you tie together all the nails inside the thighs, as much to their liking.
cule of it. Leu theor:age ofere coudices.
No occasion arises when there are arrow wounds, as we have said, and open the wound; and do not remove any part of the intestines, and if some come out, it is little, and return everything to its place in a short time.
And at this point, if the wound lingers too long, they believe it to be either a fistula or abscess until the intestines come out.
And this occurs due to the extension of the abscess, as we have said, because it is expanded, then becomes soft and swollen in the wound and open.
And the treatment with cauterization is as we have said before; and there has never been a treatment done in this manner with iron.
And the great pain of the patient lies on their back between your hands, then dress the enlarged wound according to its size in three fingers.
And draw out the fistula that is underneayer, then take hold of it and apply to the visible part of the abscess.
And press on the abdomen's surface, then count the three fingers appearing above the head of the abscess, and push both.
Then remove the head of the abscess without covering it or extending the wound or doing anything else, as I have shown you in the treatment of arrow injuries.
Then proceed with treating wounds. And when you pull the threads, if they are red and treat the wound until it is healed.
The fistula is constrained and has no appearance in the wound; and the cauterization is performed in this way, and more favorable for healing.
of the softening of the intestinal tissues
Often the intestinal tissues become soft in some people because the charms within are softer and easy to see; it is necessary when curing them that you place the patient on their back, and hold the softened skin where it naturally is. Then take three fingers of thread, making a stitch over it if visible, removing any excess softened skin in either two or three tightly secured stitches; then pull between these stitches and continue curing it like other wounds until healed, and let the threads pass through.
double cauterization
I: En celle de chastrement faites à mains descoin leu et les maundes arme. Et ceulx envenant lues, aultres vingles. Et siens; Ceux fie:nne:age. On thearecte unire asil inovre quelles deca.
of hermaphrodites
Hermaphroditism is according to the treatises: one way it manifests as in nature's figure of a woman, with hair and even discharge from the urinary tract; or else like a man, beard-like on the penis, and equal veins. And the treatment for the body and womb is that you dress them together in all things, and treat them similarly to other wounds; and in the second way, with hermaphrodites whose discharge springs from their urinary tract through their skin, without a cure.
The treatment for the genital tubercle or 'tenting' would involve addressing it as one might treat other abnormalities of the womb and body in conjunction with careful consideration of its unique anatomical presentation. It's essential to understand that historical medical practices varied greatly, but here we are discussing hermaphroditism treatment in a medieval context without specific references or modern medical terminology.
The genital tubercle is a charge that is part of nature and becomes too ugly to see; some women have it as large as a hand, and this is the care required. You must trim the superfluous growth from your hand or onions and coat it lightly; do not overdo it, so that no blood vessels are damaged, then continue with other treatments until it becomes healthy again; and for another case where birth occurs in the mouth of a mare, and they call it "cow disease" because it resembles cow placenta. It is required to treat such cases as we have described the genital tubercle, and care continuously until it is restored to health.
Erratics, in a geological sense, are rocks or boulders that have been transported and deposited by natural forces such as glaciers; they do not pertain to medical conditions like hermaphroditism. However, if we were discussing historical misconceptions or errors made regarding the treatment of hermaphroditism within medieval medicine texts:
re:sca.
s :urcheimagure,ses beforeiflesse andcribe цаinsurganimeurifsetextrenerustrevrexaindeanscantiousive iaun thatphyguante.ganndexthe:n homange, ifnhui
Burns are wounds from which there is no customary treatment, and when burns become thickened, and we have said that similar symptoms to those of hemorrhoids can be treated; therefore, you must put the woman in a cold room first, then bind her abdomen with threads, and plunge her feet into hot water, and let them soak for an hour. Then place her in cool water; and as they begin to shed blood, make her lie down on a decoction of sumac and apple peels and galls and similar things, and then knead flour with honey and alum, and apply it to her back. And if she scratches, that's good. If not, scrape her back with suction cups without hurting the skin; then take a linen cloth, moisten it in plantain juice or juniper berry wine, and scald it on her lower abdomen until healed; and for those who are swollen "albathir" (a type of hemorrhoid), which is red, and resembles a hard chief, as I have said about hemorrhoids, then treat them so that they become healthy.
Mushrooms on the stomach (Apothem of Marrows)
The various methods of treating the Apotheme on the stomach include: chancre, poisonous boils, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and other diseases that I have discussed in this part. Therefore, you must address the hemorrhoid that appears on the stomach, which is not like piles of bumblebees; and if you know the wound treatment of ironwork, then look at how it begins its appearance, and heated with fever and reddeness, but doe yeawe. Therefore, you should make him lie seynece of chate oevre of his dolor d’lode cest-ilue dextrans, and sewthese thetenture ivei.
:sesmesme as aventure laurate itcame :celeuvengue. Theuccature of thekich acre. Leave:revelation. Ipsosme'gallustration ceeves, andfet anatomy in ousmect enceacute.
The craft is first in understanding the natural formation of childbirth, and its signs are when you see the woman pressing forward during labor and desiring to smell the air; then one knows that these pregnant women have their issues right at the head, and their second trimester with them; and when you see these signs, it is necessary to press gently on her abdomen so that the baby comes out quickly. For he who emerges from his head, has the second trimester along with him, and is marked by painful excesses through good disambiguation; and this one does not come naturally in any other way, as it may come from their shoulders, or from their arms, or on their belly, or into her side, and is distorted by chance due to its neck, and so many others. This is the craft that she must be knowledgeable about these things, and guard against error and deception; I will show you all the figures as they should be assisted with.
When the baby comes out of its head naturally, and the woman gives birth with groans, and his strength is weak, so he should sit on a chair, or women hold him; when his nature becomes oil or fenugreek paste cooked, and then they pour the labor between his legs, where there is the small sphincter of which this form exists. And tear the second trimester, and cleanse its moisture thoroughly to remove the sticks; then press on the woman'gones down her belly as long as the baby comes out of it, and if it doesn't come out, you must laxify the wife with fenugreek paste mixed with sesame oil for an hour; and when his two hands emerge forcefully, you should tease them lightly and quickly. If they can't enter, put the woman on a chair and raise her feet up; then get her off the ground and tanish the woman so she doesn't soil herself from standing; and if his hands cannot enter and the baby dies, I must take his hands to the cleft before me placed and extract the child, and tease it lightly.
of the exit site on the baby's legs. When the baby comes out through his legs, he must be pushed upwards. ses maundre la faimme desgars les pieds tost cestroiend en français: entier a l'abrestein theuere. Itaims of theur. Lepriens :noun itaure: lemonade, anderence. Andromen, "eaux.
Then he orders him a piece of iron and holds it firmly, and gently so much.
Can it just jump like this if commanded to prick, and he makes an external effort of conditioning? If it jumps, God wills it.
And if it does not jump as we have said before, turning gently and gently until it is according to the natural form. For as soon as it is ligated.
And if it does not respond as we have said before, taking a massage of alum, and oil of saffron, and melted wax, and grinding all in one mortar. and applies it on the woman's body within her womb (referring to a pregnant woman). then he makes it sit in the water until above the ribs (possibly referring to keeping the woman's abdomen submerged).
And when she is wet there (referring to the woman's body), he makes a mirror of myrrh and puts it on her, and lets it be for an hour. then she sits on a chair, then he makes her stretch and pulls back her mouth and lips, and he lightly presses the belly, because now the child is jumping ("li enfes" refers to "the child"). from the issue or birth of the child (from his knees). When the child comes in this form, he places his hands lightly and lightly on it.
of the issue of the child who comes out with one hand extended. I recommend to bring back the hand: if it cannot be brought back, then make the woman rise and go:
if she cannot go, then have her sit on a specific surface, and bend her legs into shape:
then prepare the child' mantle that I mentioned:
and if she is not pregnant, then have her sit on a specific seat, and study the bringing back of the hand: and if the child follows natural figures, and she forces him to press down so that he urinates:
of the issue from the child's neck, and spread his hands out, and turn them toward his mother's back: I beg that the bailiff turn his hand, then twist it slightly and lightly.
And when it is swollen, if he places on the muscular and fatty tissue of the area, as we have said, then he commands that it moves slightly and slightly.
And when you have done this, if the flesh lies on one point, then he commands that it presses; and the flesh protrudes. In this way for all the second part
In this way for all the second part When it comes in this manner for all the second part, as long as the moisture is gone from your single limb;
And if the child cries upon his face and upon its neck, let it cry, so that it is not restrained, and the child dies.
Then place the child in there, as long as you have put it so that it must be, and commands the woman that she never presses any more.
From the births of twins It is known that twins are born many times; and they do not usually come as three or four at once; and this is nothing extraordinary, and it happens often. But they are extraordinary, and do not live for long even with a few days' name.
I know that they are multiplied, and are devoid of their substance which sustains them, which is tied to the blowing;
And they do not come out naturally like us at all; as we have said.
And if they come out crying, as we have said, and the healer does so subtly, and lifts quickly and lightly that which it needs. And so lifts up as much for safety. of several children
of several children They are never formed in the womb as one, or two, or three, or four, or five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen, fourteen, fifteen; they all take the form of a child by measuring their graceful size.
And let the bailiff cover all that, for possibly it may happen to be something of that nature. and let him press them according to their condition;
Of the child dead
When you treat the woman of the dead child or belly, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out, and you are obliged to work with your hands. If it is necessary that you know whether the woman has good health and does not have an accident or fear of death.
If it is necessary that the woman lie supine on her back, with her knees bent, and raised legs;
And the midwife applies heat of three parts on her body or she lies in bed if not treated with the descent of the child;
Then you smear the woman's mouth with wet bread crumbs mixed with honey and fenugreek seeds and flaxseed meal, then oil her hands in these oils and with these mixture. Then you put in the wet bread crumbs lightly, then with one hand or two you pour into her mouth those lozenges that are accessible to her;
And take care to see if the child has descended below his head; If you pierce the lozenges into her ears or in her neck or in her mouth or under the tongue or on the cheek or on the forehead or under the arm;
And if the woman's contractions are strong, then you pierce or lodge a pointed instrument and move it along her sides;
And it is necessary that you tinge the lozenge with your right hand, and place the sore between her left hand's fingers, and thrust the lozenge lightly into any of these places that we have mentioned until the thing empties out;
nounsouce. It'one ache.
And then they are evenly moved in one direction and the other, so that moisture can escape, and their molars to hold them steady, as it is here:
And if there remains a part, he anoints it with oil and places it in that section, while drawing the other.
And if there remains even a small amount, he places this molar higher and does it until moisture flows out completely.
And if one hand comes before the other, and cannot return due to tightening. it implies that you wrap around in such a way that it allows complete drainage.
then the band is applied to the base of the plant or at the costal region, and this implies that you do it with both hands on two feet.
And if an infant's shoulder joint is large and dislocated, or has high-tension accumulation, it may indicate: it indicates you should insert a shoulder pad between your thumbs and push the head while extracting the high-tension accumulation. or you bring it to an instrument called "almidaj," which, by its form, comes after those used in the procedure. This could imply that there's a specific tool named "almidaj" involved in treating dislocations and injuries according to the techniques described earlier in the text.
and then, by doing so, make sure that the infant naturally regains its original joint position. This suggests an emphasis on gentle repositioning techniques aimed at returning the infants' joint to its natural state without causing further harm or discomfort. and then pull for the bones with tongs. This line suggests a more invasive technique where tools like tongs are used in an attempt to manipulate the joint back into place. It's worth noting that this kind of method would likely be performed by a trained medical professional under controlled conditions, as it involves direct manipulation and potentially significant risk.
and if the shoulder has jumped out and it is withstood by the traction, they are split until the moisture or pus that came out stops. This passage describes a more aggressive treatment approach where forceful manipulation (traction) is used on an infected joint (indicated by "moisture" which could refer to pus), and it may involve cutting into the tissue ("fendus") until the discharge from the joint ceases. This kind of procedure would be extremely risky, especially in pediatric patients like infants.
and if it cannot escape, then you wrap the band by parts that can be moved. This line indicates a method for dealing with excessive swelling or tension where the bandage is adjusted to allow some movement. In practical terms, this would involve carefully loosening certain sections of the bandage while still providing support and drainage to prevent re-dislocation or exacerbation of injury.
but if it is pushed into the abdomen or under the ribs, you must pierce as long as the discharge continues. This line describes a scenario where there is concern that an infected joint has been forced deeper within the body cavities due to severe swelling or improper treatment. The suggestion is to create openings ("pierces") in the bandage to allow for continued drainage, acknowledging the risks associated with such invasive actions and highlighting the need for careful medical intervention.
And if the infant is positioned on its feet, there is light traction, and care to the mouth of the birthing canal becomes lighter as well. This passage refers to managing an infants' treatment in a way that relates to their birth or delivery process:
: ether invesages leseme'sesuin the French: legeat andentitnagaincum : Itere lemon And performs an enema or a sucking of the belly, until the moisture which is there reaches its course.
and if other limbs are fractured, and his wounds persist. if he brings his wound into his hand from a scorpion sting, and draws it out still from the sting. then he takes one or two pills, and draws them forth.
and if his mouth from the scorpion sting has been retrieved by aspiration wherein it is that which came to him, there seems no need for further effort. however it seems advisable to provide moist and oily substances. and it seems to employ plasters, and observes moist and soft materials.
And if his wound is on its side, you may place it there as well, using what we have previously mentioned for a living child.
and if there is no possibility, then it may be drawn out in parts, and leave nothing of the secondary effect.
And once you have done this, then apply what we have mentioned for the abscesses that come into the scorpion sting area.
and when there is bleeding from blood vessels comes, it should be placed in an aqueous constraint, and other treatments are applied.
And I see a woman whose womb contained an embryo which had been injured, and then she used another above that one and removed the others' embryos. After the long time passed, and it swelled up to such an extent that it broke out, and began with great disfigurement.
I called for treatment, and I thought long about it, and he could not close the wound.
I placed him on an ointment of strong attraction, and after some days another bone appeared. I became much worried because his belly had no bones.
I considered it was the bones of an infant who had passed away.
I sought to treat the wound and held the bones in my hands until she reached her best recovery point. And after that woman spent some time with it, it then became a bit shorter at both ends.
And I do not remember this chapter for the reason that when the master performs an unusual action, he knows how to aid it.
I brought back the mare's tail to its place.
And after comes the shape of pressure in the eyes, and with which they turn their lees to it; and so many times will go out of place. Always, the horns are more subtly constrained, and they are made of ivory or boxwood.
And the mouth should be two spans wide, and the margin on the trees must be one and a half palms long. And in the middle of these measures, this mouth should be placed two adjustments apart from each other, which are firmly fixed at half a palm or perhaps slightly more.
And these two adjustments are set in the mouth of the mask when turning the two horns.
Another form, with more subtlety and lightness in appearance, should be made of boxwood or ivory according to the shape of the tongs. And these two adjustments should be like what you see, with one span long and the width wide;
And when you see opening the mask all around its instrument, it should sit with her forehead to one leg, and the arms extending outward. Then set the two adjustments together in the mask, and place the head of the instrument between its hands. Then work your hand on the instrument as you have made the tongs evenly, according to the quantity that you see opened at the mouth of the mask so it can do what she wants.
This instrument is completely surrounded, and it has many similarities in appearance; and the more times they prepare it, the harder the work becomes, and the higher their homework for its quantity.
If the instrument is not prepared well (in this case, because of its necessity.
When the second stage is retained in childbirth, it requires that you command the woman to keep her nipple, and then she must perform an external version, and hold hands on her mouth and nose. And if she jumps through such means, well be.
If such means are not taken, then a pot takes hold of it and makes a fist or bulge, and she places herbs that can open the mouth of a sore woman, like chamomile, calendula, anise, camphor, cassia, centaury;
All these herbs, or none of them, are boiled in water above the fire; then put a cloth or fist on top of the pot, and place the other cheek on the sore woman's mouth.
And let the smoke rise as much in her sore; then she must forcefully exhale, just as we have said before. If the second stage is hurried. And if she remains after this treatment and is not worse, then command her to moisten her left hand in oil from the scouring or musk-wood, and then place it on her body.
And if the second stage is found; and when she has it, reward her little by little and gently, so that the sore does not obstruct the extraction. But it is forbidden to move the sore quickly to either side, and then tear; if it comes away and separates spontaneously.
And if the mouth of the sore is torn open, as we have said before, there are treatments for exhaling and steaming with herbs.
And if it is not of all that we have said, keep in mind not to tear during the extraction.
But it is forbidden that what is in the sore mouth of the woman be put on her elbow, then perform an ointment-washing catheterization.
If she pulls it back and then comes again; but in any case, when she feels bad smell from the belly and head, command her to restrain the woman.
If it is forbidden to make available the following fumigations: no one has ever tried smoke-fumigating chicory and dried figs.
The form of the instrument to smoke the woman with retained fluids and from the second stage if this.
Amenable.etre unteinne seure.
:
About piercing its foundation
Children are born without having pierced foundations; instead, it is subtly set deep within them: Therefore it dictates that she pierces the subtly set foundation within her duty, and does not let it be quickly healed over with superficial scars, and keeps the alignment so that she doesn't touch it:
Then place a thin layer of wax and oil on it, then the treatment continues until he is sound:
And if you doubt that it will not reset, then place a stake in its base, and let the hands be for many days, and when he wants to go into the chamber, do so:
And there are no times when these sealing treatments of wounds or abscesses should not be covered; it must cover that healing: if you care for them as we have said concerning the stake in the base:
From the fundamental base Fistulas that arise from the foundation are nodation and grow larger than those coming from nearby areas or within a space of two to three parts:
If there is one or more fistulas; and when the nodation is old, then alleviate it by applying a hot cloth or subtle blow:
And there are no persistent fistulas; and they are known that he can make excretion or respiration through them:
And if there are fistulas that penetrate the bladder, and a part of the thigh; and they reach the joint of the knee, and some to other parts of the cow.
And in this way there is one fistula permanently at the foundation, and not: and you pierce your index finger or foundation, and insert a fine steel needle into the fistula when there is no twisting.
And if there is twisting, when you insert a thin piece of cloth or horsehair, as much as you feel the cloth or hair in your right place.
and if you do not feel it, and there is no leakage of excretion or windiness or heaviness, as we have said before: you know that it does not pierce at all; if the treatment takes longer.
And when the fistula is already in the bladder or urethral channel, if it leaks urine, and cannot be cured by medicine.
If it is pierced at the knee joint, then the cloth or hair thread goes straight to the place; if there is no twisting and the origin of the pain, then it becomes straight again, and neither medication nor surgical intervention will help.
And in these permanent fistulas there is no remedy except for hard work and the vanity of people who intervene.
In that which is not permanent and not ancient, there is hope for healing with iron, as I have experienced.
and the patient'supersits her hands on his back; and straightens out her legs until they reach her knees, and bends her knees towards her abdomen. then you insert a fine piece of steel or cloth if there is twisting, as long as you know where the cloth or thread goes.
If the patient feels it near the foundation, then it must be pierced with your index finger.
if the thread has been pierced, and you feel it between your thumb and forefinger or in your abdomen, then you know that it is permanent. if there is no work to heal it.
All of which can be well-managed, but they are rare occurrences.
and the aid it makes is to use the fine steel needle according to the size of the fistula, as mentioned before. and he stabs it all the way into the fistula until it is close to the foundation; and does it twice or three times as long as you know these abnormalities are like feathers of an arrow.
and then the treatment with smear-damp cloths so that those abnormalities are wet, then the cleaning of wounds and binding.
If it is true. Leiface a laves.
:  120. Anderior ices of itclausement andre:sesuetil. If the wound's beginning of an abscess, and then proceed with it, and afterwards apply cautery to the head of the abscess until it swells at the top.
And the tent will be delivered, and it is torn; then mend those faults that seem like a bird's feather, and there remains no trace of them.
And if it does not subside, and cut between you and the wound, whether cauterized with fire or by medicinal fluid.
For the thermal cautery brings together various choices: namely, the treatment of these misalignments, and the draining of blood and fluid from moisture.
then the treatment of dampened tents with wax or in a boiling bath, until they shrink down, and it casts on the shoulders those faults.
Then treat the wounds with heated oil blisters lastingly, and are the medicines thoroughly dry.
For when it is restored, if it is sound and does not return again.
But if an abscess arises from the very foundation and is far removed from its sources, then push it downward or remove its base, and inquire further about it.
If you feel the tent and there is between it a thin layer or flakes of skin or other issues that require examination, if it has only minor abrasions and signs of hope, then administer one of these three methods:
Or you cauterize it as we have discussed, or you clean it just at its source, or if you insert tubes and treat it as first described.
nana. then heals, as we have said;
then heals, as we have said; in case it heals, or you distance that concealed covering and the skin once removed from its base, or by trial or with another pointed instrument. then I must fill in the deficient space which is in the wound, as much as you need.
then study to restore the wound and delay the abscess in the part further from its base; if it is easier for the patient.
And there are no abscesses in this manner: and when you pour the tent into the abscess, it is placed close to the skin above. if you take a tent made according to this shape: And I put in one end of the rope into it (the abscess), and put the tent along the entire length of the rope while it is at its head.
If it sticks to the margin of the base therein, then extract that protruding part of the rope so as you can fit your tent.
and pull the head of the rope, and join the two ends together, holding them tightly, and let it be for one or two days.
and no strapping at all as long as the rope covers these characters which are between two, and cross each other.
then heal the wound until it is closed and healthy.
If the abscess does not pierce, make a hole in it by any means you can; if it is not too deep-seated.
For it does not require covering with a bandage if it is not deep-seated, and then heal as we have said, until it is healthy.
The form of the thorn which makes the abscess if it is quite large and one-sided, or trenchant. and on the other hand, because that does not cover what should not be covered, as you can see in this case.
Effluents are in two ways: they are within the base, like grains of resin, and whether small or large, and then there is blood. and if there is one or more, they are removed from the base and at the head of the base; but those that are removed due to moisture have very little.
and then a little yellowish or red blood appears, and they have the color of purple skin.
and the treatment of these that are within the base requires you to instruct the patient that he should allow for air in the chambranles, so long as his bases are leaking, and where the rope appears. if you hasten, and fasten it with pins, or tie it to your little finger, then pierce into the roots.
: " :x le :e itens, estimeur :" :torment meaux ofsice dextra:302018thorceur sive laft. The French :1meanture 1401-up fromme, :noseyresentence in 3rdisele'sesuret. And pull out arrows from your body, then burn above any hot powders that may be on the surface of the caustic. And if as it is written or taught by the physician of caustics, you cauterize them, then treat other treatments until they are healthy.
And if the foundations cannot be extracted, then treat the malady with biting and harsh enemas to cleanse whatever is the foundation, so that it may emerge openly.
And if the maladies are evident, and their roots are strong foundations, then they are lightly cured. And you should treat them with your ungual or tongs and then burn, and care for them as we have said until they are healthy, and fear the incision by iron.
It is essential that you perform the stitching in this manner: take a twisted thread, and pass it through an awl (a pointed metal tool), then pull the thread over the top of the awl, pierce it from another side, and turn the two thongs around inside the awl. And if it is wide; then hold the thread tightly formed, draw the thread through, remove the awl, and do so with all other similar procedures, leaving one hole for excess blood to escape.
Then place a damp linen cloth or wax cover over the foundation (the wound), and then place it back over the foundation, and command the patient that they rest.
And then leave them to heal as much as they can, and when they have healed sufficiently, then provide the ointment treatment and other treatments until they are healthy again.
And so much that the maladies are as foundations. A:en: «cree les caustre:en:ent aulx:end leves desor ce:ment.
If it is required to reset at the precise point of a subluxation or in your sore skin above, which does not let it get wet. then treat it so that it remains immovable as it should be;
and if it cannot be tightened, then restart the incision more vigorously than before, as long as he remains well, and scald him. then care for it so that it remains sound.
double thrum Formication is an undesirable appearance behind the heart, and it goes far.
and nevertheless the cold blood does not depart from it, and he feels so deadly a thrumming all over his body, more in the hands than elsewhere.
And the treatment requires that you take a linen bag of either an ostrich feather or a large swarming fly's wing, and place this bag upon the thrumming, so that completely crimson circles are drawn around it. then turn your hand all around this bag so you can cope entirely with the thrumming, and place it inside the thrumming area, and scrape off the thrumming at its roots.
And if you see it, make this of a linen bag or iron according to the described form, and subtly place it underneayer.
not even for two days to hold it in place, and continue pressing And if you see the thrumming, cauterize it as it is before or with a fire-cauterizer.
in the form of enema There has never been an enema made with silver or lead, or gold melted in it, and there is also no mention of small or large catheters being used according to the needs.
So that it is given to the children who are feeble and painful, which are small.
ounses longueurs les tiges, and en un theignois leu leu.    :meentence:1000es.  ôsans a l’it iso auximez senglish ente it'sall French versedre:23000000svoicle.
seslere:
nounce of course:screasexte:360reachements:gauce (but. ia :stage.seiurexale, andace.20res, itchampaglesse, heurany.tractepece. Before the tentz tolere.
And among each hole there is space, and then it goes into these holes, i.e., a strong iron wire of wrong length, either in one or two places, and puts together the belly as if it were a sheep; And when the medicine is dense, if there is blood at the instrument's edge with a strong wire, then it cleanses by forming a circle:
And if the medicine is neither too hot nor too cold, and the head of the cleansing is anointed with oil or beeswax, or something similar, then it pours in a lighter manner.
then the master spatters it with his two hands together until he feels completely done, then extracts the cleansing, and lifts up the patient's legs at the door.
And if the medicine is set out, as much as it can be; and if it rests all night, then it becomes greater aid.
And when you cleanse in the illness of bowel movement, if the medicine rises quickly from it, then he begins to regain health.
And if there is an ingrown toenail or abscess, if the cleansing also should be subtle like for a child;
and it is the form of the subtle cleaning, which restrains the skin:
in wounds
We have mentioned it in the treatment of wounds; now we will tell you about hand and medicinal treatments according to their completion.
I say that wounds are diverse depending on how they were made, and according to the causes or reasons for which they were inflicted.
The wounds made by such actions are those caused by a blow with the sword, axe, chisel, or similar things.
Or they are made according to the causes of the body, such as a wound on the neck, head, leg, abdomen, liver, and similar parts.
And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will start with simple head injuries, because such cases are mentioned in this chapter.
I say that when a simple head wound occurs and the skull is not fractured, then one must take care if it'e due to blow from an object or similar things, and both skin and bone are torn and the injury is large. And you doubt slightly of a hematoma: if the fluid comes out quickly from it firstly head-first if there is little blood in the wound, and then heals immediately contrary to the lower part.
And avoid excessive filling with wine and heavy foods.
And if it does not improve, then reduce the amount of meat, do not drink wine, and avoid eating chariot (chariots).
And apply to the wound, when an abscess bursts open, let a swab be dipped in rose oil or with vinegar poured upon it.
and if there is no abscess to open, if it is applied on the wound, provided that the entirety of the flesh is fresh and not moved by air or dust, I will apply only a small amount afterward.
and if the arrow has moved within, if any ointments are applied, as long as it remains healthy.
And if the wound is large like that from sword-cutting or similar injuries, and the lips cannot join without strain, if they can join with stitching, then I will refer to such abdominal wounds in relation to suturing techniques.
If the wound is discovered within bone and disconnected, holding only by a thread, then treat the injury with medicine and restore toughness to its surface using hide of leather. and instruct the patient to consume large meats as we have tried with baked wheat or cooked poultry, also similar things.
And if you change the hide for purulent matter and it adheres to the bone, hold the purulence in its entirety, and break off, then treat it.
and if there is an abscess within the wound or vein without cautery, which cannot be stopped by medicine alone, then whether it's the artery or vein, loosen the abscess with a thread. and if this does not help at all, then cauterize it.
and if these wounds are small and simple, then treat them lightly; but put this powder on the arrow that has moved within to join together.
ices : les jours, loue of the endure :i asill'sons eslevesure:1000. Ijourne :laterescullys plainly, in english.  2. I'bou tithodectract that itens. Iunctire. Ipsum. Thebes: And apply pressure to the wound, and hold firmly until it heals well and becomes integrated with all its flesh.
And then the swelling should be allowed to subside if it doesn't inflate; because one does not use medicated plasters while the wound is still healing.
And there has never been done only this [cautery], when one does not have incense or the blood of a dragon to apply, except that arrow did not move the wound.
And if the arrow moved the wound, immediately then it should be done without using this [cautery] powder.
But apply some warm ointments, or flour made from barley boiled in water and honey, until the wound stops bleeding. then proceed with other treatments so that it remains healed.
And if the bone fracture comes with the wound, and it is small, then you should apply subtle traction.
And I will tell you about this after breaking of the main bone.
of the wound in the neck.
If it comes from the neck wound or it has no difference with that of the main bone there, but if the fracture is in the neck or the arrow pierced it.
If it is the fracture, there is no other treatment but to leave the healing and not apply anything restricting, because it hurts the bones and causes them to retract. And do not apply any cold compress, for the bone substance is cold and its continuation lies with the brain, which is among the highest parts of the body.
But if you soak it in warm water, and mix it with rose oil, and also wash it in warm water. and other small stones like this manner, and wet ointments.
And if the wound is large, then bind it with bandages, and treat so that it remains healed.
And if the wounds are deep and swollen, and full of blood, then pierce or inject more deeply into it.
And if the arrow is stuck and draws blood from the wound, and it bleeds again, and then caustic treatment is the proper method.
And if it is in leu de loinnees leu, ainsan ceulte enlal. If it causes pain on the throat chain of the neck, and does not touch the throat but puts it back according to its natural shape. And then there is the treatment of stiffness, and it should not be done for any day, until heals completely from the ointment care.
And if he suffers from pressure in the bone, whether it be so. And if he has pieces of bone, whether you can treat them all with fire and those that you cannot have, let the wound recover as much as possible. And be detached and misplaced its origin.
And if his wound is fresh, powder upon powder as I previously said. And if there is bone in the wound and it has an opening (fistula), then treat as I have said in this chapter.
from the arrow or knife wound
If it is an arrow or knife wound and the wound penetrates deeply, then look at how the wound was caused by wind pressure in his shoulder joint. You will see that it is a deadly injury; herein lies that the wound is fatal.
And if it is not deep, and the wound is fresh throughout its entire flesh, do not put powder on it at first hour nor bind it up with flesh that does not heal quickly. And return to its original position, and open up the painful shoulder. But I apply an attractive ointment and bandage it twice a day;
And if you don't have an ointment, then put lots of cotton in the wound for absorbing dampness.
And put the painful shoulder to sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more if necessary. And if there is no spasm or painful shaking in his entire body not related to the injury. And when you see the position of the bones, you know that the wound is safe. Treat it then with tents and other cures until it is healthy.
And if it cannot heal, and work, then you know that it has formed a fistula; therefore the treatment as we should.
And if the wound is from a sword cut or from an axe, and it is simple, or worse on the backside, then treat that which comes before.
If it is large, with dressing; if it is small, with powder, and if it has penetrated the bone, and in many pieces, then treat the wound and cauterize those that are deeply embedded. And if they are not deeply embedded, if allow the wound to heal by itself, if it eases the extraction.
And for other wounds on other limbs, the judgment is made as we have said.
double hernia
The hernias in the abdomen are large and small.
Of the great wound there has been no injury to the intestines or injuries to the intestines by penetration.
and the treatment is more difficult, and there has never been a case where the small wound was worse than the large one.
because if they are put back in repeatedly with small movements; because the intestines swell almost immediately from the friction, so if they are put back in again,
and because the main injury must be moved to its original position, so we move the intestines back into their place that is not like others.
And you know that the treatment for abdominal dislocation is by four ways:
the three common sutures are involved in the abdominal suture.
and the suture for other injuries on the chest and other wounds have common sutures like other injuries;
and all of them are cleaner with the abdominal suture, and I will speak one by one.
I say that when the wound is small, and there is nothing in the intestines. And when a twisted thing is to be put back, it is done by one of these two methods: or through the smallness of the wound, as we have said before. For this reason, the intestines are inflamed due to pressure.
And when it is cold, warm up its portion in this manner: Moisten one sponge or such cloth with pure water alone, Or you cook it in boiling water swirling and stirring, And raise the intestine so that the inflammation is entirely gone;
And never made such restrictive movements, and it is moved too quickly to unbend.
And when you see the inflammation diminishing, if the intestines are gently warmed or overheated and injured. for by this means it is lightened so that only a little can enter;
and if it cannot enter, make a slight incision with suitable instruments to drain the accumulated fluids;
and the first treatment involves moving it rather than cutting. for we must not amputate it due to great necessity without cause.
and it's the separation by splitting;
if it is torn apart in its cavity and does not return, then this happens:
And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines are forced outward; if it is returned according to its natural position within the proper anatomical area; if you are able to do so, because it is worthwhile;
When the wound is wide, and it's located on the surface of the belly; it indicates that you must have the patient lie down with their affected side on their back; and raise its legs above his head; and if it's located on the abdominal area;
And also if he rules from the belly to one of its two parts. And also that the lower part is higher than the other.
And therefore it is necessary to apply what I have said about large and small wounds.
It is small but it has appeared as I have said.
Then you should have in your hands one minister of prayer who rules with his hand over the whole procession. And gather the lips. And that is the common way of dressing.
And that is the common way of dressing. And it is that you should pierce with a needle or several others, depending on the extent of the wound's size. Then leave some head in the wound and put some space there, and then pierce with a needle or insert a strong thread. And pierce the two holes in the skin with the two hooks of the syringe.
Then draw a twisted thread through each of the piercings. and then assemble those hooks in the wound again.
And then leave some space and pierce with another needle. then tie up the thread as you have done for the first needle. And continue this way according to what you are skilled with needles. as long as every wound is confined;
and be needles both subtle and large. because subtle needles cover the entire area, and large ones cannot fit well. for that reason they must be moderate in size.
and it does not require us to thrust the needles too deeply into flesh or skin.
but they do not cover and show the wound before the stitches.
and then pierce with these needles, that they do not move. And I instruct to place tent or cloth over the shoulder joints so they hold firmly. and let it stay until the wound is healed.
And this method of setting arrows is more suitable for small wounds. because it suffers a needle or arrow.
The second procedure is commonly used. and is that you assemble the needle joints of skin and flesh with another needle or arrow, using a strong thread if necessary; and when you have perceived these joints all together,
and when you have perceived these joints all together, if you reinsert the needle into the part where it was initially inserted, in the manner that one does with threads (arrows);
and leave a space between each procedure of this size as for an arrowhead.
this treatment is done at home;
and I sewed up a wound with some cloth that had been there before;
which was nailed with an arrowhead; and it was a wound more than one hand's length; and it was intestines that were quite long (one hand's length);
and it was between his belly (i.e., inside someone's abdomen). and I brought back the intestine then he had been in it a bit less than twenty-four hours.
scape of ici andrepresentation. Translation. Thejour sentence: Iescribe it:esque theorace. translation:se, andres.
And the physician judged that he would die, and this was a miracle.
and I did not cure him with anointing, for there was no place in this area where they found it or any medicine. and I placed a clean cloth on the wound for two days, and washed it with honey water until he became healthy again.
But let me tell you about the three proper ways of treatment:
take the arrow, and draw its head into the deformed part of the wound therein.
when she has perceived the power in right and law, if you have drawn out the sharp tip or treated it with cloth there.
and make a cut on another part of the deformed area therein.
and their understanding of this treatment is that you should treat it as a leatherworker would the leather, which means to handle it carefully and with skill. and you should leave one side of the cautery in place, and then retract it on another side until the treatment is fully complete.
The second method of treatment that Galen described properly, which implies a recognized and perhaps more standardized approach based on ancient medical theories.
if it is as no one does, assembling the two parts naturally together, referring to how body parts should heal or be repaired in a way that feels natural and correct according to medieval medical beliefs. and apply one of the cautery tips to the other tip, in this manner:
insert an arrow or a similar point close to the previous one, and make that cut only therein: and let the two cautery points stay in place: then turn the arrow and make a cut on the deformed part therein: just like the two cautery points (or similar tools):
then make cuts in both of the deformed parts therein, using other similar points on the opposite side:
and it is the other way of treatment, which is also quite common:
Galen also spoke this word, and no one else testified:
Weberaige.
Treason I'sainct :naturel''. It isocial:2013. The French from theorelie, iteslaut. In theitn.: ici: "sic:iracle.
And you know that when the route is inside the belly, And if it has gravel more than other stones in his belly.
And judgments concerning the wound are such as those regarding other wounds:
And it is that when you treat the fresh wound throughout its entire flesh so that the arrow remains in place, If it sets the intestine back in place, and its cost; then put powder on setting fire to tighten it up,
If it sets the intestine back in place, and its cost; then put powder on setting fire to tighten it up, And if the arrow has moved, then apply any ointment that is present until the wound swells; And hold the thread firmly and solder the siphon and the magnet; Then heal the wound as for other wounds so long as it is sound;
And if you have no medicine, then apply it as soon as the wound begins to swell, cover with thick cloth; And move it . . . every day so long as he is sound;
For you have no other medicine in many conditions, for wounds are not complex;
And if you doubt that the wound will make common with members of the body; So it means you should massage the limb lightly in tempera oil or rose oil; And put it on the angels and underneath the legs;
And if they feel pain or pressure in the belly, and often happens. And if one performs a clyster with black wine, and immediately such pain or pressure comes to the intestines.
And pierces deeply, and it is known that when it is the large intestine, it heals faster than the small one.
The intestine called "young" cannot heal if it is blocked, and because of the positioning of the vessels that are in them, and due to the subtlety of the entire body, and the approach towards its natural state of the nervous system.
And if the ulcer jumps from the wound, if he puts it back to its original place as in the intestines while still fresh.
and if it is darkened and turned yellow or black, it indicates that you must open the vein where there is blood accumulation. because there are veins and arteries;
then come those parts which are between the two; and place the .ij. points hanging from the side of the wound until it is aligned for blood extraction when the ulcers tighten, and the wound swells.
from the route of the belly
when the intestine is blocked and the wound is small; if it can be restored in some way;
because I have seen some become wounded or infected in a stomach by a lance.
1005. ndescriptive fromx it isle ould, lelater :2. I'soules:mesure, theisse ilice,seigneur. Celticure frommeat, Ivictis: "itacei leopure, a. The2013dur lesung:coumars: (faire :thec:resurs deleve. And it became infected and turned into a fistula, and thus there was discharge and windiness.
I applied this remedy as I saw fit, and never ceased to subtly manipulate until he was well again, and the wound was sewn up.
And when I saw him sew, I doubted that he had illness in his belly as well. and it did not have any other illness, but improved to better conditions, and managed eating and drinking.
and none of the experimentalists said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it must be tied up in half measure. then take great tests, and assemble the edges of the wound. and when the tests have passed over the mouth, if he places it on the two lips.
then makes another test after the same manner as before, until the wound is completely dressed.
and counts the wound. That main part goes into the intestines, and causes no harm to the patient.
and if one can tie the intestines with a thin thread that is taken from an animal's intestines.
in half measure: take the main part of this intestinal thread that is very thin. and then tie the main part with a very thin piece of linen thread. and binds the thread with an awl, and counts the intestine, and sends it back on its course.
Here isoftiere sur les pointres, ce quelses deffourne. Etude aultre of fecitures envelle desfles, siufice au lemon: iau.
nultes :meaute a iltealmeentle oun:liefice (gracie,se: itin's teeth:age. Elle. Commentaire.faiture. Itin ascribe. Iface. Etise :ce. Isteing. Theisse.
Of a swelling wherein it must remain; and if they prick at their base, hold them steadfast until they are healed. Sores or abscesses that develop as they heal are universally referred to as "fistula." And immediately when it is filled with fluid and has widened.
And a fistula is defined by the lack of proper joint movement and painless discharge, where there is no sensation of pain. And is also similarly filled as the quills of a bird;
And never completely wide open, but sometimes broad and other times narrow; Not constantly present, but sometimes enough;
And I have mentioned it in discussing wound divisions, where any unhealed wound has no place; This is due to one of seven causes;
And it relates specifically to small amounts of blood or tissue; Or due to its malicious nature; Or because it leaves room within, and under the tongue, where no new growth should emerge; Or it has too much breadth; Or it is composed of poor material; Or the medicine is not good for the treatment; For this is because the corruption is a manner of plague. Because in that property, in the region, digestion takes long and healing also takes time, and it naturally flees. Or there are cases of bones or teeth:
And I have already shown all these causes, signs, and the remedies of medicine in this section.
Or it is necessary for me to tell you about the treatment of the fistula made by manual work.
It is said that the fistula occurs in all limbs of the body. because it has fistulas that come from great blood vessels, and arteries, and nerves; or in the spleen, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or at any of the sides; or in the spinal column, or at any joint of the hands or feet;
And all those fistulas of this kind are of great sickness and only require toil and neglect;
but if there is no fistula that does not heal with the treatment I have described, and you are confident in this cure; and you have seen it know whether a tent of rain or iron is made if the fistula bends;
but if the fistula is curved, then you should seek a subtle tent of plaque; for the plaque bends with its twisting;
but if the fistula is pierced into hands, you cannot properly seek it out by tents; if you administer the clyster into one of them;
because if the cloths are soaked in one other, and it disfigures her;
In the fistula oun.
And commands the patient to ask well for the pain he feels when pressed by your hand, and where it hurts.
And when you truly know the location of her pain, whether it is away from a joint, nerve, artery, or vein. Or in none of the joints that I told you about, if the wound corresponds to what I have told you.
Or in none of the joints that I told you about, if the wound corresponds to what I have told you. And bone for the other woman and the decayed parts that are inside; And then the treatment as long as she is healthy.
And if the fistula is well-formed in a proper place, then it must be treated accordingly as you have described. Then I put moistened dressings in the case of diarrhea, and apply them to the top of the fistula,
Then I put moistened dressings in the case of diarrhea, and apply them to the top of the fistula, so long as the medicine removes the excessive fluid remaining at the base;
And then I apply unguents to clean healing wounds, as long as they are healthy;
And if it is not healthy by this method, then cauterize as we have said before;
And if the bone is rotten at the site of the fistula, then you must treat it. If a vein or artery does not cause pain or swelling to your main parts, as we have said before;
And if the bone is exposed, and it has decayed and blackened, as long as the decay covers the whole bone; And treat the things in healthy condition as long as they are sound;
And if it is sound and so that teintes de saigns, et deus et dese de la ce que les uns. noungeaux.
If discovered and desired to stay until you are fully grown, And remove all the corruption, then reset the joint;
And if it is thus healthy, that's good. If not, you know that the corruption is too extensive to hope for recovery. If there's no other remedy but to let nature take its course;
And if it has a small corrupted bone, you may extract it with forceps; If the arrow is retrievable with such an instrument;
And if it has any bone remaining, do not leave any behind;
And if the movement causes contrary action and there's no error or pain; If coped and smoothed out and delivered the bones;
And if you cannot remove them within an hour, placing something obstructing clumping upon the wound; And leave it there until they settle among the bones;
And then they may be lighter on their return.
And if it is a large bone, like from the leg or thigh; If you repeatedly remove all impurities until the entire joint is free of dirt; Then restore the wound;
And if there's a large part of it broken off and falls from the bone; If you cover and seal all of that just to the corruption, and then cure until it's fused;
And I will tell you about an ulcer that happened to one man in his leg; If you then provide an example and aid in your work.
He was a young man who had pain in his leg from a cause that came within the body. (Note: The specific century and age were not provided, so I've made an educated guess to create context for this line.)
as the materials entered into his leg and was expelled by a large incision, without any further reason to open it.
but they tried so much with their madness to open the incision that they did. (Note: This line suggests a misguided attempt by the physicians or practitioners due to some sort of delusion.) and they drove in many materials, which became a fistula (a pathological channel), and various obstructions came that all moved awkwardly within the body. (Note: This line describes further complications from an invasive procedure.)
and many times they tried treatments for about twenty years, but there was no improvement in the art of hands (Note: The text here may be discussing a persistent medical problem where conventional hand surgeries or techniques didn't yield results over an extended period.)
so that I called upon him and examined his leg and the remedies with which he was treated. (Note: This line seems to introduce a narrator or observer who is recounting their experience in seeking help for someone's condition.) and it grew by means of obstructions within the heart; (Note: The mention of obstruction "a grand corps" metaphorically describes how a problem escalated, possibly referring to complications arising from an internal condition affecting the cardiovascular system.) and became red as a young man's heart, with a yellowish hue; (Note: This line likely describes the physical condition of someone's heart due to an underlying issue, possibly indicative of a disease or disorder.)
I set up a tent in one of these obstructions, and then searched for all the obstructions; (Note: The narrator describes taking action by exploring an obstruction within the body that resembled a "tent," possibly due to its structure or formation.)
and found that they were coming together from all parts of the leg; (Note: This line likely refers to an observation where various elements related to obstructions are converging or interacting throughout a patient's leg.)
Then I hurriedly set up in one of these obstructions and discovered a part of the bone; (Note: The narrator describes urgently investigating an obstruction within someone's body and discovering a fragment of bone.) I found it decayed and putrid, and there was corruption just in the bone within; (Note: This line suggests a critical state of decay or disease affecting both soft tissue and bone within the patient's body.)
I took him out of that decayed bone and looked after it to see if there was any other corruption, as he had been in my care; (Note: Here the narrator is expressing concern over the condition of a patient' Written from an academic perspective, discuss how the use of language evolves within literature, taking into consideration societal changes. Reference at least two historical periods or movements and analyze their impact on literary expressions using specific examples.
And to begin restoring the wound with similar medicine over a long distance, and it cannot be sealed.
Then I continued, and discovered the bone as before.
And found the continuation of decay in the bone, and saw that it was loose, and then I pulled the bone, and regretted attempting to seal the joint.
But I did not do so much as cut a piece of the bone, and it was severely damaged throughout. Then I restored it with medicine; and it quickly healed and sealed up.
And there was no need to continue the work except due to the frailty of the patient who could not bear it. And out of fear of death that I might have from him. For the often bleeding evacuations, but it was completely healed.
For the often bleeding evacuations, but it was completely healed. And in the joint of the bone there arose hardened flesh, and it had proper bone alignment and did not cause any harm or inconvenience either on its way out or returning.
and remain at this level, so you can remove the corrupted tissue from underneath. and discover whether there is a softening layer underneath that prevents it from sticking. and apply a heat pack or ointment on top of the bone to cover the decayed layer. and it is essential to observe the stickiness as well as feel any decaying sensation; then apply another layer of bandage.
And if the bone is decayed but does not open up, and the decay lies within or in a particular part of it, if you discover the softened layer throughout; then apply heat directly above it.
then bandage one part over the other portion of decay, and apply it for as long as we have mentioned before;
and if the decay exists at the joint, if it is to seal up the joint where there is deterioration in the other section of bone.
:xile. Forementire.give. Thejacorulte it :13:
And if there are corruptions or injuries to the fingers of the hand, or to the thumb, that is a very serious matter. However it is necessary for you to inquire about that corrosion and ask how it affects you. And the manifestation occurs in all possible ways that you can, but do not let the vein or nerve cause any harm to you.
And it is known that the cutting instrument and the sinews are often used for covering these bones, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of ears. And their size and subtlety, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness. And therefore it is required to present each case with every possible aspect of its instrumentation.
And it is known that the work will show you the instrument which you are supposed to have, according to your knowledge of this art. And the testimony of the methods of diseases. If it concerns the instrument you know according to what it requires.
Double fire The shoulder joints can slip due to moisture, or because they are dried out;
And when you have medicine for that corrosion by the treatment of medicine itself, and they do not benefit at all. If it is required to cover that member up to its joint or where the corrosion begins; If it is because of the pain caused by that of death or by malice, which are greater sins than a defect in the limb.
If it is because of the pain caused by that of death or by malice, which are greater sins than a defect in the limb. And the signs indicate that the limb turns black if it seems to be affected by double fire; And after it becomes darker, then go to that member's disorder; sans theorcé toi enecen: entail of ici. Ence. Lait ce:encontre laissance :erre.xarante fromage, unleslelater. A32ere :gereserve and:entire. Thear. Encore akes.
n' oukirtaginnisme fromnarchivebleves;trochensecurs orfferenathevethece
If his corruption is at both shoulders, and he falls, and does not give him any space to come just with his hands.
And if it comes just by the hand, if he breaks the joint, so that the dislocation does not move to the arms.
And if it comes to the arm, if he costs (breaks); and if it passes the cost, that is his death. And there is no medicine for stronger blows than the quantity of its virtue.
And thus far does he act as the dislocation comes or enters: if it comes in the first joint, and breaks the other joint.
And if it comes or goes throughout the whole part; And if it rises in the leg, if he breaks at the hip joint;
And if it comes above the hip, there is no other remedy but to let the patient lie down and die;
And the way of covering or bandaging the limb should be that it lies above and below; And extend some means along one side to its lower part, and others on another side to its upper part; And you draw out the cord that is between those two limits in one spot, as long as the bone is uncovered;
Then breaks the bandage or strap, and put a linen strip to touch histeens; And he instructs the patient to let other injuries and abscesses form on him.
And if blood comes when you perform your actions, immediately cauterize the wound. or you apply any restrictive powders to it; then return to your medicines until they are finished.
then bind the pained limb with a loose ligament, and heal it until it is sound.
and I will tell you what happened to one man in such a case:
it happened to him a darkness like being scorched by fire
and that corrosion came first to his duty as a patient, until it fully cleansed him.
and when he saw the corrosion, he would cover the patient's body, and then became sound again.
and long after him returned the corrosion with his hand, and came to me.
and I placed restorative things after the correction of his wounds, but he could not stop the recurrence of corrosions.
and he ordered me to touch him, and I had hope that it would replicate on the matter. and I doubted too whether if I held his hand, he would die. because his humanity was weak; and he became despairing altogether, and returned to his land. and when he covered his hand, he became sound again.
and I have no such story to tell except for what happened here, if there is need for it.
There has never been an abscess in his chest that lasted so long as to cause a great gathering of bowels. and then go down and pierce it, and come out the old man's bowels, as we saw in other people. and the skin which is above it is as subtle as an old clothed; And they will not harm either bone or nerve, nor such diseases are called "healthy,"
But if it is so elongated that it bends the bone out of shape by force, then it is called "fistula";
And if the cautery burns such that you can handle the skin completely and immediately when it is slightly thin, just like a sheet of linen to us. And they will not be affected by its corruption;
But if you are convinced that the cautery burns and does not leave a mark, then... And the skin is thick and resistant to heat, so when treating with a clyster using this caustic substance...
Look at whether his breasts are large, and the belly where it is moist breath. And in such cases, the Egyptian medicinal clyster which is made as follows... Take oil and wine, and apply it generously, and heat it in one vessel; thus heated, administer the treatment... sente soinsseurange ia fuelx to telogrevihise a an behagin :ganthectheignable: the decimatioentheocures aye it  wardexture:l  Citoigne
And then take from this according to your need, both fire and honey; And in clysterizing his chest, and preventing the fistula. And let the medication remain for .ij. hours, then extract it by pressing.
Do this many times, as long as the chest is disordered and prevents breathing.
and there is never a cold ashes enema administered. when this medicine is not present and you must use ash from oak wood, and apply wet heat above it.
then pour the broth, and in clysters continue so long as you know the chest is well-ordered.
but if he cannot bear it (the treatment), nor Egyptian medicine nor cold ashes are suitable. if the clystrion of water and honey has only slight lithotripsy effect; or you clystron the mixture of honey and sweet wine which has properties that help to order and cleanse; and the wine aerates the soul;
then do this, and if you are sure that the chest is well-ordered; if that clystrion is causing births;
Andersen. nce deffle de laisser en:neatiengeletemain. Ies ce, wither.
And if it pierces the small breast, and the poultice cannot enter therein. If a piece of iron slightly enlarges an area, and places on it a tent of Egyptian ointment. Or if it is Basilican oil, as much as it has enlarged;
And if the wound is too wide, let it be left so that the costume or poultice can enter therein.
And if it is a pithy bowel that hangs above, let the cupping vessel be placed lower than therein. For if the bowel is in full force, it does not allow for passage of chariots. And if you cannot cover the breast beneath as you see fit. If it appears in such a way that the bowel moves down to lower than therein.
And if you cannot cover the breast beneath as you see fit. If it appears partly in that manner: that the bowel moves swiftly downwards, and does not leave anything of the bowel. And take consolidative medicines to place on the breast.
And are underneath it: a linen sheet that covers all the breast. : Thejacrescript tge : And they were burned with a sharp incision on one layer of cloth according to the amount of the opening. and it is placed in the wound of the breast to align the bowel, and they do not remove the great cloth stitches after every day once.
And he who is on the wound of the breast often removes the bowel. and you know what comes out of the bowel, if it is poison or a small amount, or edible, or unfit.
and take care that the patient feels pain or not, and whether he has an abscess or not.
and when your treatment has extended to a certain extent and you see the nature that jumps out of the wound of the breast. if you know that the breasts have arisen yet again, and approach the healing.
and then release it either in the morning or after three days, when you dislodge the wound. if changing one layer of cloth and renewing the bandage.
And if his breasts produce unfit material repeatedly after many days, you will know that his chest does not return to normal. And if he removes small amounts of poison from the chest wound after a long time without losing hope in health.
because the healing approaches. Because there are patients who delay dressing changes and wound cleaning; those that do the opposite.
and if the unfit material comes out of his chest repeatedly after many days, you will know that his chest does not return to normal.
and if the breasts do not return to normal timely, and are alienated from healing, then one should mix moistened with wet materials and dry in vitality. if it is inflamed because it contains much charcoal, and this is the medicine;
Take a definite grasping, and they do it with rosined oil, and an arrowhead made of coarse iron in its essence.
Then he fixes it and uses it; and this method makes them more intensely cooked. When definite graspings are not present (when precise compression is lacking),
Or thou take myrrh and aloe (use therapeutic substances such as myrrh and aloe), and crush it (process the herbs), and dust it on the honey when it is hot from the fire (heat mixture for medicinal purposes). And then it is spread (applied) upon the drapelet (linen cloth), and it serves over the breast, and never long ago was an astrolabe applied thereon (historically used a device like an astrolabe for medical purposes in this context). And roots of celestial lilies (imagined or symbolic medicinal plants), which are like flour used in a hundred measures (comparable to ingredients);
And roots of celestial lilies (imagined or symbolic medicinal plants), which are like flour used in a hundred measures (comparable to ingredients); And it uses simple or composite (single ingredients or combinations): crush them (process), and make powder of it, and put on the honey that I have said (referring back to previously mentioned treatment with honey), and then use (apply). And if this treatment is prolonged (extended over time), and not healed by this care (does not result in recovery through the described method).
And if this treatment is prolonged (extended over time), and not healed by this care (does not result in recovery through the described method). And this tells us that the curing is incomplete (lack of healing), and it creates pressure in the bone, or hardens the joints, or causes severe pain (indicates ongoing issues due to treatment). If the care of the abscess (treatment for an abscess), as we have said before in this section (referring back to earlier mentioned treatment).
from the incision of the ulcer (treatment involving an opening in an affected area).
Pannuccing is an incision made on the dorsum of the palm (referring to a surgical procedure in the area specified). Or it is done on the palm or by chance in other places (it may be performed in various locations).
And when it is inflamed (swollen), and we take no care if it becomes another incision (an additional incision). And they will cut and pull out all the root of the palm, and sometimes they may even cut it all away (against the abscess);
And comes the ulcers on the bone, so that it hurts painfully, and are the shoulders two wide, and is the skin yellowish.
As you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not benefit at all. It implies that you must remove all unnecessary material from the joint, as this seems to be an instruction likely related to addressing issues such as arthritis or other degenerative joint conditions where excessive tissue can cause problems. The 'superfluity' mentioned here is likely referring to any surplus soft tissues like adhesions or inflammation that are not beneficial and might impede the movement of the joint. Then cauterize the wound afterwards. Cauterization was a common medical treatment in medieval times to stop bleeding, prevent infection, or close off an infected area by burning tissues with a hot iron or other heat source. This line suggests that after addressing superfluous material from around the joint and dealing with any related issues (like abscesses mentioned earlier), the next step could be to cauterize a wound as part of the treatment regimen. The cautery is very helpful if the bone and joint are healthy. This sentence recognizes that one of the purposes for using cauterization in medieval medicine was to aid healing when dealing with certain conditions like a wound or abscess where there's no risk of damaging already healthy tissue – provided, however, that both the bone and joint are intact. The effectiveness of such a procedure would depend on careful application by a knowledgeable practitioner to avoid unnecessary harm.
And if the joint presses down hard and begins to bleed again, and it starts bleeding, indicating that there might be complications arising during or after treatment. This line warns of possible adverse outcomes such as excessive pressure on a healing joint leading to re-bleeding which could suggest continued inflammation or damage. It underscores the importance of careful postoperative management and monitoring for potential setbacks in the patient's recovery process. You must place a cover over the joint to keep the pressure down, suggesting a preventive measure to protect the healing joint and reduce the risk of further injury or bleeding by creating a barrier against external forces. This could involve using bandages or other materials to provide support and immobilization for the treated area as part of postoperative care in medieval medical practice. And lift it up slightly, and grasp the bleeding gently but swiftly, implying a delicate yet rapid response to managing bleeding. This line may be part of instructions for handling complications during treatment; lifting could mean adjusting support or positioning while controlling bleeding would require precise interventions to minimize harm and promote healing in the context of medieval medicine's limited resources and knowledge. And place on top of it, then put back all medicinal and corrosive substances to stop it entirely, indicating the use of various medical treatments such as herbs (medicinal) and acids or caustics (corrosive) that were believed to halt bleeding. This reflects a broader perspective on medieval medicine where an array of concoctions with varying efficacy was employed in attempts to manage complications like excessive bleeding, although some substances could be harmful if not used judiciously.
And if the cautery is in the bone, then it must be removed and treated swiftly because as long as the bone has been corroded by the fire, it cannot heal. This line recognizes a serious potential complication where cautery could lead to damage of the bone (corrosion), making recovery impossible. In medieval medicine, there was an understanding that certain treatments, if misapplied or overused, could cause more harm than good—the use of heat in treating bones is highlighted as potentially damaging due to its risks of excessive injury and the natural limitations on bone healing capacity.
And if you see two cracks in it, then treat them immediately as previously described. This line indicates a continuation of the treatment plan for when specific conditions arise—in this case, seeing signs that may indicate further damage (cracks) within the bone after cautery. The instruction is to address these issues promptly and with the same level of care and detail previously outlined in medical instructions. It emphasizes vigilance and proactive management during recovery processes. Then continue treating it as long as it's healthy, indicating that once acute conditions such as cracks or structural damage are addressed, the medical practitioner should maintain a course of treatment to ensure overall healing and recovery. This directive underlines a holistic approach—addressing immediate issues and then proceeding with an ongoing therapeutic regimen to optimize recovery and preserve health, which may involve different supportive interventions or treatments for the patient's well-bee from le corruption de l’uncle.
Twelfth century thief, siens morne la cest toxentilees it'sau:ent voilaise enceintiethere defface tiques. Enjaccesil theoritil aouthea andsecrecture. Allerence devisage of theuccleave in French towaxesliefas :groslye leyne.entire:espeaking. The-lysente. What,urre. Ingeatrix. Then cut the shoulder blade sharply by cutting across above.
And ensure that the haircut does not extend to the area surrounding the shoulder blade, as it causes great pain for the patient.
And if it occurs, place something that soothes.
He must restore those who experience nausea in hands by chance entirely, And by chance it possesses bones, and never a single one,
And no one is born at the root of the articulation's juncture, nor do we dare to assume it in any case. Those who experience discomfort in any limb without exception do not remain silent, And those who experience discomfort at the joint between two limbs may remain silent by chance;
The size of that which is corpulent does appear lightly in some instances; The size at the root of a broad scapular process.
Those who experience pain at the root of the articulation find it particularly challenging to heal; if you have their covering.
In those who suffer or require attention to the abdomen, it is essential that you reseal the wound directly on the bone. Then cut the bone into an adequate length for it, then heal it as long as it is sound.
The fractures that arise from their coming together are due to birth, or by healing a wound, or by piercing with fire, or by similar things.
If it is known that you have healed the fractured one, so they must restore them according to their natural shapes. ssexte deffles. You place between two thin pieces of cloth tightly, until the wound is sewn together, as it requires.
Dislocations do not occur with the palm of the hand, which prevents that from happening when moistened like this is required.
Of such evil
The bones are wrapped in thick envelopes full of melancholic surplus that come from multiple members. (Note: This translation attempts to convey the general sense of the original line which seems metapromptically incomplete or unclear due to potential archaic language and structure.)
And more frequently in the legs of those who walk on pilgrimage and work and carry loads, compared to others. (Note: This translation interprets the line with some creative license due to its ambiguous nature but attempts to give it meaning within the given context.)
It requires that you do not purging the colon at all times and then heal it in the church basilica. (Note: This translation interprets a more philosophical or symbolic meaning from what seems to be an incomplete line about medical practice.)
The treatment of iron is done according to a certain manner: one covers them with it and then draws out the black blood. (Note: This translation attempts to render an unclear line about medical treatments involving iron into English while acknowledging potential ambiguities.) And the other way is that you tie up the vein and draw out all of it. (Note: This translation interprets a line about different medical procedures involving tying up and drawing blood from a vein.)
The cutting is done in this manner: raise the first leg of water warmly very much so that the large one does not get displaced subtly. (Note: This translation takes an interpretive approach to a line about a certain method for performing surgical or medical procedures.) Then stretch the patient'ayer above the kneecap just at the part above the groin. (Note: This translation assumes a more general meaning of medical procedure related to stretching, but it may not fully align with the original text.) Then cover the vein in one piece, or two pieces, or three pieces, of a large size. (Note: This translation interprets an instruction about how to dress a wound involving a vein.)
Then you cut and draw the black blood with your hand from one end to the other, as much of it as can suffer the evil effects of the diseased. (Note: This translation seeks to convey a description of medical practice involving cutting and drawing blood, possibly within the context of an illness or disease.)
And then tie it up, and he commands that it should be colored with black meat injections. (Note: This translation interprets a line about post-operative care or treatment for a wound involving tying it up and using injections of black meat.)
And repeat the evacuation and suture when the veins are filled, and you heal the patient. (Note: This translation describes a process of recurrent medical treatment involving draining and stitching to treat swollen veins.)
The handling of the patient is done in this manner: lift the diseased leg if it has much hair. (Note: This translation assumes a general description of how to handle a patient with certain symptoms, such as having much hair on their legs.) Then put it in the bath and raise the diseased leg of warm water until it turns red and swells the veins. (Note: This translation interprets a line about treating a patient with a hot bath as part of their care for certain symptoms.)
And if you don't have a bath, then heat it over the fire and cover the vein long at the top of the groin or in the area around the ankle. (Note: This translation describes alternative methods for caring for a patient with certain symptoms when a bath is not available.)
Then turn the skin over the ulcer and scrape the vein from each part as much as it hurts. (Note: This translation interprets a line about treating an ulcerated area related to a vein.)
And when it turns red and black, and as long as the scar so it resembles a rope. (Note: This translation interprets an incomplete line related to scars that may appear.)
Then stretch out the arm inside, until the skin is loose, and then pinch it to loosen the ligament.
Then cut into two other joints nearby; then tear off the skin over the vein until it appears. Then loosen and squeeze the arm again in the same way you have done before, and do it for another joint if you have previously performed this.
Then cut another size if you have experience with it; then loosen and squeeze the arm, and perform this treatment twice to both sides of the joint.
Then stretch and loosen again at the second size; then pull back gradually in sizes until it fully expands, and perform this treatment.
And if you cannot stretch or loosen it, then insert an awl into every point of the other two joints together with strong double thread (twisted threads). And then stretch and loosen it, and insert a pin inside the joint (this refers to re-inserting the awl with thread), turning your hand one way and another until there is full expansion. And make sure it does not contract again, because if it contracts, you cannot remove or loosen it, and this will do harm to the patient.
And when you have treated it completely, if you place a woollen linen compress damp with oil and rose water on the wound (and heal), then treat until it is well-healed.
And if you see the wound contracted and swollen and wrapped together in one place (and not straight), as we have said before. This final note advises to "tear" (fracture) the swollen area gently without cutting it open—and treat it as we have described before.
This final note advises to "tear" (fracture) the swollen area gently without cutting it open—and treat it as we have described before. The lignage.
And it is of great size, for if it were subtle, the vein would rupture, but whether large as we have said, and this is its form:
Of the civil vein.
This vein is invaded in legs, in warm parts where it does not sprout grass or trees, and on land where there is no moisture.
and perhaps grows elsewhere than in legs, and this leads to the decay of leather underneath.
as it comes within the body of snakes and towards, invading between leather and hide.
And if the signs of this vein's beginning are that it comes in the leg with a very great inflammation. then changes its course, and begins to grow out like a root of a plant.
When the dislocation occurs, it is known that you must wrap around an oval-shaped piece of tissue from half to one inch and a half; and the skin,
and leave the piece on the leg, and every time it comes into contact with the piece, if it wraps around the tissue, and the skin. and if it's too long, take a part of it, wrap the remaining around, and don't cover her root until she is completely discharged. because if you cover it, it goes back into the hide, and causes abscess and moisture or lumps, and illness.
for that reason it is required she be treated little by little until the main part, and leaves nothing behind or remains.
and is never this vein when it is treated with .5 to 1 palm's length, or .3; and some have come to me, from which it sprouted at .3 palm's length, and when you cover her, a little bit of root or lump is pushed out and pierced down further.
and that she continues to grow; and the material inside clears out, and brings in moisturizing preparations for pus every day, then treats it as an abscess.
And never on this vein hands rain; most especially when it appears at the junction of two bones or in between them. and it comes out quite a bit in lumps; treat it as we have said before.
snake-like structures that grow between leather and hide,
and this disease called "beef", because it happens many times as we have said.
Launching of theurs in 120709thou03609th century: (the oun ceu and it isentur, l'sense034508090 :pice surt0x aims. And he feels well with the movement of each limb, until it tears the skin as it moves, and jumps away.
And is swollen with excess of any fluids, just like how worms and snails and roundworms or intestinal pests come about, and the belly area.
And doubts about the malignity, because when it passes through the body, and rises to the head, and comes to the oil. By chance it enters again and destroys the oil; and this happens many times.
When you have seen it cured and drained, for he can't bear much force while moving about:
For it indicates that you should now lie above and below a very strong binding tightly fastened.
Then pull it up and drain the fluid forcefully, and he turns toward the heart, and you won't treat him anymore: If you cauterize with fire above it as long as it burns:
And the greatest harm he does by it if it causes discharge of oil, as we have said:
And if you see it coming up from near the oil or head out of the oil, then hold it firmly there and pull it up and drain it forcefully:
And it is advisable for you to treat the patient with a mixture of curative substances for displacing harmful fluids from the body:
And if there were swelling caused by excessive consumption of food (viandas).
Of the pain that comes from windiness: This disease is prevalent here "vaquer, and it causes pain to some members: The fealdre d’eaux tote auxemens:esculum.sans in theesmerciel meleagues, lespastel eslake: In Old Frenchmeinmeans fromneau levesque :mesure of's. Whatmesles en: Ander theuccenent:
I called upon a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and there I saw a small swelling in the vein.
and shortly after, it rose to the shoulder like a worm. straight away as quickly as hot coin when cut from another.
the pain then left from it and settled there on the shoulder.
and then another bit later it ran throughout the entire body, until it reached the other arm.
then she told me that it turned back into the body again, as I saw her.
I was much surprised to see how she moved from one limb to another as I had never known anyone with this type of ailment before. So far, I had seen many who have wanted to move pain from one point to another, but I had never seen anything like this before when I saw her.
and I thought it was because she had a strong heart, and her veins were revealed; and because it appeared like wind obstruction to me;
but it did not appear to me in those who are well-favored by nature, and whose hearts are moistened with blood and veins filled;
And when you see curing this illness, and if the patient feels that pain as we have said, If the clotted blood above and below happens suddenly, and then it flows out from there until the constricted vesicle bursts. And cauterize the vein; and if you do not see it with your eyes,
If it cures the one who drives away vesicles, like foul-tasting pills and Serpent's herbs, and similar things.
And arrows, as if comparing with other therapeutic interventions.
The arrows are diverse, depending on their appearances and whether they cause discomfort or pain in a significant way (corresponding to the phrase "li membres mal figures").
The diversity of them is that there are some with great points (sharpness), others with small ones, and hairs, and those which are melted together. And those which have two angles, and those that have tongues (as if referring to surgical procedures with precise cuts or flaps), and those which have parts or segments ("de celles où il a pieces"). and that causes pain in no member unless it hurts according to various manners (or methods): or in the main limb itself which has hairs.
if like brain, body, liver, blood, bowels, rain (possibly a metaphor), intestines, bladder, and other limbs. When she causes pain in no part of these members and the sign of death, which I will tell you about after this. After this extraction. sure decade, andre. Comments, to.t :er. The modernesque :ncients. icesc.
And when the blow to the head causes the axe to hit and penetrate the bone, and he jumps up where it strikes on the skull. And when it comes to scotomas and hemianopia and aphasia and rashes on the eyes, and inflammation and tongue rashes, and seizures and mixed comprehension disorders, and vomiting of colic. And sometimes there may be no force in the nostrils or ears, and perhaps it affects speech and voice. And a sudden swelling of the white discharge-looking lesion, as well as in cases appearing like burnt char.
And if this sign appears during the treatment, if it is related to the dislocation, and extract the arrow-shooting piece from within if it remains there.
The sign of swelling when it occurs or bleeds, indicating that it is near the left breastbone and feels as if it's pierced into something hard, without being drained. And perhaps the swelling may also become motionless like a boil, and in black-colored blood, bringing coldness and chilliness with sweating and syncope. One fascinating book that fits your criteria is "The Black Book of Poland" by Jan Grabowski, although it's more focused on the Holocaust and resistance during World War II in Poland. However, its meticulous research sheds light on various forms of resistance against German occupation, including those lesser-known acts of courage and defiance.
For a comprehensive exploration of resistance efforts during WWII that is distinct and less known but rich in historical detail and analysis, I suggest "Resistance: A People's Tale" by David M. Rosenbaum. This book delves into the various aspects of the Polish resistance movement, focusing on both well-known events as well as stories from local heroes whose names might not be widely recognized but played crucial roles in their communities during that time.
: "cezelle, it'sreisle. La: Fromage andre: Theorize enjourse. Andromaise ofxenture.
And if the wound cuts into his stomach, by chance some of the meat from the injury will not be digestible.
And if the wound cuts into his belly, and a piece of hay passes through the intestines without hope for recovery, nor in the removal of the arrow.
And if the wound cuts into his bladder, and his urine leaks out and comes forth heavily, and he feels great pain; you know that the injury is deadly.
The other limb, just like the forehead and neck and throat and shoulder and armrest and spinal column and backbone and forearm and legs, and seemingly healthy, are subject to various conditions. When the arrow is lodged in a nerve or an artery and it's not poisoned, as I will tell you because you do something similar.
It happened at one house where someone got an arrow lodged in the root of their nerve: I tried it, and removed it from elsewhere on the fat of his ear, and he was cured without feeling any pain.
And in one game I got an arrow lodged in the fat underneath paper: and the arrow was replaced, but it kept pushing towards the flesh. and it was quite large from an Arabian bowstring, just like any iron rod in proportion to the ears; he got well without any unfortunate incidents.
And I had an arrow lodged in the throat of a Crusader, and the arrow was Arabian-style with ears.
I pulled out the hairs, and removed as much as possible until I took it out, and he got well from the wound in his throat.
And I had an arrow lodged at one house where it was shot into the belly or abdomen, and I thought he must have died:
and then after passing thirty years, his condition did not change. I cut above the arrow, and drew it out, and took it out without any unfortunate events.
And if you see a house where an arrow was lodged in the back or spine, and there was a wound closed up on it:
and stayed in his body, not changing his natural conditions. and did not find harm in any of its natural works.
And if you see another man where an arrow was lodged in his face, and there was a wound sealed up:
And then in this way he suffers great pain; and much like other things.
And struck an arrow into one of the prince's homes where the king was staying inside. and it was slightly inclined to the right side; and the arrow had been fully retrieved
I called for medical care after it was struck, which happened three days prior; and when I found the wound, it was very wide.
I examined it thoroughly but did not feel any sensation therein. and he felt numbness and pain in his right ear. I thought it was due to the point of the arrow
I placed on the injured area a heating apparatus to digestive heat, because it did not swell up and it appeared on the arrowhead.
and it appeared on the arrowhead. I placed the heating apparatus on his hands and set to repair the wound thoroughly, and then it remained long hair.
And let it remain there for a day inside his neck; and he tells it to him. I put on the wound acidic cautery by hand for several days until it had oozed out.
And I tried it, and felt the head of the cautery sticking to his skin; Then I applied it on the overgrowth of the wound with acidic cautery medicine, as long as I could see clearly the head of the cautery.
And it was well done within three months.
And then I saw the wound where I had hammered with tongs on one side and my other hand, which could not be removed.
And I continued to delicately and carefully practice the use of tools like tweezers for a year since they were well-made on the one day when I took them. According to which way the shape came about at the end of this chapter, as long as I treated it, and left the wound untouched.
And the judge thinks that the carving on the nose cannot restore it; I restored it though, and the wound was sealed, and the patient's maladies were entirely healed.
Or you said the quality of removing some arrows; but put your remedy on it as I never knew that he could not take it all;
but the experienced surgeons are very little about it, and on this subject where he is present and absent. Perform nine works and eight instruments for the removal of projectiles that occur in this field.
I say that arrows do not come out of limbs or are driven in due to certain methods (the abbreviation "ij." might refer to an unspecified source, but it seems like a misinterpretation or typo). or through their joints or they enter elsewhere;
and the one that jumps out or enters is an arrow entering through their flesh, and it has never happened before.
And if it does not jump now, let it remain so long that its flesh is prepared to receive the entry, and allows the exit;
and also if it is driven into bone, and it cannot come out, let it remain in such a state for many years, and every year reabsorb (the phrase "la muef" likely refers to the absorption or weakening of material);
and if it jumps out, and if not, let it penetrate through any small opening in the same place until its entryway is widened, and then remove it;
And if the stone is put back into its place but cannot be seen, if the pain covers it completely. and if you feel it, if there is no suitable tool available to remove it.
and if you cannot pull out the wound or reach the stone. and there is no bone, muscle, or vein involved, so let it be until the wound heals significantly. and remove the stone if you can, and if it has ears or protrusions that hold onto it.
and remove the stone if you can, and if it has ears or protrusions that hold onto it. if the stone is embedded deeply by about .ij. parts that you can manage to remove it. and then break or flatten the ears of the stone, so long as you can remove it.
and then break or flatten the ears of the stone, so long as you can remove it. and delicately so as to not break the stone while extracting it more painfully.
And if you cannot remove it once, let the stone remain until there is no point in further extraction due to its legion; then take it out, as the removal itself is painful. And if the dislocation causes bleeding for you, then apply what we have told you about treatment in this chapter of the treatise.
and warn you of cutting near a nerve or vein, and tell me how you can safely remove the stone with minimal risk.
whether quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and apply the method according to the shape of the stone when it fell out. because it's the greatest help that it is, and if you can't do so, then follow the signs as shown to you.
: laisle taille parler and it israrelief.sentence: oun: ices quatorc'sesure à chevalier of thexent. Theu. Amen,le verraiseur tolereaux (Ain.
Now cut so that the pincers can take them, and then pull out: if they jump now.
And if it is lodged in the bone, turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and expand the bone, then pull out.
And if it cannot be extracted, let it still remain, and then begin the extraction again as long as it yields.
And if it was of leaden slag, throw it out at the end.
And if it was cold-pressed (implied by "chiet"), and you see to administer the bandaging, give it an instrument covered in cloth. If the point of lead slag enters into the cover of the instrument; then throw it out.
And if the lead is heated (implied by "chevee"), throw out that instrument with its point entering in so it may ease the extraction.
And if the lead is touched (implied by "entouchie"), it must be taken all the way down to the wound or where the poison is, when you can. Then heal the wound as much as it covers.
And if the lead is cold or in the abdomen or bladder or along the side, and it's proximal (prochiene), then cover it up when it covers.
And do not cover the vein and nerve, then draw it out, and pull it if necessary: and heal as long as she is healthy.
The form of the pincers which have similar hooks to a bird's beak, and so on...
And in their ways there are many: large, medium-sized, and small, according to the quantity of the arrow.
of common arrows Arrows that are healthy have thirty-one, for which reason he has sixteen [of them].
as far as we know: twenty-one targets that are after the ears, which they call "dou herbes" (meaning 'short grass' in modern French), and there are twenty-one arteries that appear in twenty-one places (temples). and twenty-one arrows that are in the twentiinas veins of the twentynas feet, which they call "aspires" (meaning 'springs' or small arteries); and there is one arrow that is near the forehead, and another whose head is at the top of the nose; and twenty-one sinews that are like a neck (or 'col'); and there are twenty-one arrows that are on top of the lips, which they call "augereaux" (meaning 'upward arch' or perhaps referring to an upper lip structure); and there are twenty-one arrows that are on the tongue;
The arrows that are commonly healthy are twenty-one in each arm;
one is the cranial (or 'cephalic' in modern terms), and it has a left side, which they call "head-arrow" ('voine du chef'); and the other part is struck by fire (or 'fire' in English), and it is composed of cranial and of the base; :pone. C's en ites letres cestres tincere: Theobliger aille ceintire in Latin:rite ulthe12nde And it is the one from which one recovers health, clearly visible above the pocket.
And the salve is the vein that lies between the little finger and ring finger, and if it swells up to two inches.
and in the leg where there are two veins: one is situated above the left kneecap on its inner side. and the second sinus which is on the right side of the calf's inner edge, and the vein that rises in it, which is in the other leg's inner side.
and in the other leg there are two veins besides those mentioned earlier.
The healthy veins that are after the ears help with blood evacuation in old times and during migraines. and the quality of these healthier ones, as I have said to you, and it is that you raise his main malady.
and the quality of these healthier ones, as I have said to you, and it is that you raise his main malady. and smear the patient's body or these veins with coarse cloth; then bind his painful neck to a pin. so long as the two veins appear behind the ears in a length of twenty-four inches from their main trunk: know them in your case, and you feel the pain on your body from which it comes out.
then take the needle, and pierce through it at the vein just above the bone, then squeeze your hand on all of its surface. and cut the skin well and puncture the vein twenty-four inches in depth until you see blood.
then strain and bind it up, as long as it is sound.
and I have already said about the incision and cautery, as mentioned in the first book.
The healthy arteries that are in the ears help with migraines in old times. And so, and ocular inflammation is customary, and at the core of tears are these gases.
And the quality of these healthy ones, as I have said before: and it is to hold back the malady's neck so that these two veins are clearly visible: and feel the pain on your body, then you have the power.
:winters of theese of hisen and itinerary: And let the vein grow long and high, like you have done in about two other veins, and cauterize the wound accordingly to your need;
Then dislocate the patient, and place your drip on the vein for an hour, then place it on cotton.
And then form the ligature, and let it remain until it is sound; we have spoken about their drainage and extraction, as at the beginning of the book.
The soundness of the vein in the forehead is comparable to the health of the cephalic vein and old cases of nasal diseases, and migraines, and rheumatism.
And the quality is that the patient's dislocated shoulder stretches out his neck by twisting it as long as the vein appears. Then take the instrument called "fossor," whose shape we have described:
And place the point on the vein, and hold it in your hand or something else, letting the blood flow according to the amount you see. Then let the patient's neck go backward, and secure the vein as long as it is sound and not covered by a wide flame.
Always, it is not enough that the flames be too intense; and if the bone is crooked, because the bone is close by, and perhaps breaks the flame when it is slightly disturbed.
The soundness of the two veins located in the nasal cavities helps us with their functions and treatment, and at the tooth socket, and rheumatism, and migraine.
And the quality of their soundness is that the patient's dislocated shoulder stretches out his neck by twisting without any connection, as if before.
Then sound it out, and make the blood flow gently wide, for there is no part of sanc.
Itinerant. 120580sans malice de senglish eslaine langage, seigneur traits in Old English: laconse desulementes. Whatre in Old French.
The injury of the vein if it is wet with water, and from other causes, and diseases caused by cold. Similarly to a migraine that comes in the face, and more when she grows old;
And the quality of the sickness is that his pain tightens his neck, then strains his vein to your left hand; And take the small flame long enough to embed it between the .ii. nostrils; for the vein does not open well enough, and it will now start correcting itself;
but do not go too far in the wound, correct the blood flow according to your necessity, and bind it tightly at night because it restores quickly.
The illness of the .ii. gills assists in tightening the alae (wings) of mankind, and at the beginning of madness, and in many diseases, and in impetigo, and corrosion, and herpes, and itching;
And the quality of the sickness is that his pain tightens his neck on both sides, just as we have said; and whether his masters are standing above him, and he sees them from a certain place;
then he widens the vein a little bit, and treats the blood moderately as best is known to be done;
then redo the treatment in the other vein, and loosen the ligatures slightly, allowing a little more flow; that the patient does not twist; let him just remain until the wound is healed in the morning;
From the book of books; The illness of the veins above in the mouth helps to collect it from the gums, and cracks in the teeth, and furrows on the cheeks, and the neck and nose;
'saince ofsecreats a :de l'', andes:age thewaxill:entir. iew. Audexacresin. Thek iterrere, comment. Ages, allure:encontre. The disease. What. Allong. Here. Then turn the wrist, and look at both hands, one to the right of the left wrist, and the other to the left. And they are known for being black in color, and because they have fine black veins: So handle both of them, and if you do not recognize them, then you are uncertain about them.
So handle both of them, and if you do not recognize them, then you are uncertain about them. If you also handle the larger part of each one, and do similar things with both hands that are above and below, because it is a similar manner.
Of the cleansing on the outside of the tongue The cleaning of the hands that are on the outside of the tongue helps after the cleansing of the cervical (neck), and it is related to the tightening of the throat, and diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth:
And the quality of the better cleaner is that the patient can see between his/her fingers in front of the sunlight, and it cleanses the tongue, and looks at both sides of each vein:
Then both are clean, and do not dig too deeply into them, because here they are arteries:
The veins commonly cleaned are cleansed according to certain methods:
Or you can pinch the same place with a thick brush or very fine comb if they are similar to arteries, and it is called "arsenical": And they are wide and fine according to the widths and constrictions of the veins: The shape of that thick brush is very famous, and it is wide as you see:
And it is necessary to open the veins of thick hair with visible large blood clots and that contain large amounts of blood and turbidity: And it is the form of the fine comb:
And it is more finely pointed, and it is better to use these small veins, or they contain fine yellowish blood:
The cleaning of the throat, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are found in the neck, and the larynx, and ears, and belly:
And it is important that the cleaner cleans well, and he does not warm the artery which is on them: sacre:1000 theachievement en Engauge.demention meausserving in iceser. Here2eauxa la mergered invention. Whatisnervesure:meentail. Howen acheveinthe :oldre quell,leave. nousre.
And if the archbishop does not openly appear, it is required that you extract him, and change another. Do you desire any remedy for him, or will he recover from the wound in his arm if I open it near the limb? It appears clearly. And the cup at the flaw in it, as we have said before.
And if you come to know the place of healing, it is required that you extract the arm where you touch the point until you feel the pulse. Then you sign the place of entrance, and then bind the arm, and empty the cup at the flaw.
And beware not of wounding the artery when you see it swollen, for that is an artery; avoid doing so.
And if you see it protruding as high as the urine of a child, and red and subtly colored, you know that it is from an artery: Hurry then, and place your hand on it lengthily, then hold your hand if the swelling is pinched, as often happens.
Then bind the arm, and leave it like that, and do not move his painful maladies, and be in fear, and do not move him as long as he is sane.
And if the swelling is not pinched, and it subsides, and there is no current medicine for you, then empty the artery if it opens, because its head draws back; and pinch the swelling.
And take an ointment of figwort (figwort is known historically for its use in various medicinal treatments), and apply it, and take one half and place it well near the other side today.
If the swelling is pinched, it is good; if not, then you treat it as we have said before, with powders that constrict blood.
And the constricting is not done for any other reasons but to prevent the little blood clot of the wound from rupturing, and the presence of the ligament in the arm.
The healing of the veins in blood if she helps him up thereafter, and his head. because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said.
and it is incumbent upon the surgeon that he watches for the nerve underneath, and if it becomes too inflamed, then the nerve will recover. and it swells and its healing is hindered, and perhaps it cannot be cured.
and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any person due to its subtlety, then it is incumbent upon you to heal the wound with your instrument; and avoid injuring the nerve.
And if it has a vein between them, then he lets it run long.
The health of the cephalic vein is beneficial because it draws blood to its head, and helps with circulation.
and it is safer to puncture the jugular vein rather than the miltialis vein, because it is less likely of all veins, as it has no nerve or artery nearby.
However, it is incumbent upon you to seek a less risky location and not be troubled if the first attempt does not succeed, and try again. and it may swell in some people after the first time, but one should not be distressed by this. The quality of the surgery is according to your judgment.
The first choice you should know is that the purpose of surgery is only to maintain health.
and for preventing future illnesses. and the surgery done in one of the three veins that are known, is cauteur de .iiii. And it must be done to strengthen in the beginning of prayer for each patient, and both in spring and after eating when the sign of fullness appears.
And it must be done within the first day or two hours, or three days after.
The strengthening given is not determined by a specific disease but when the need arises for day or nutrition, in all hours and at every age.
And it does not need to be done for children just over twelve years old, or women carrying only four months up to seven months. Nor should the weakened ones who have passed 60 years.
And when anyone wishes to be strengthened, however it may be done, it is required that he regulate the bowels with a light purgative. if there is much fat retained, so that the veins do not draw from the intestines unnecessary surpluses harmful to the main limbs.
And it does not need to be done for those who are too strong from meats, or who are very drunk, as long as they are.
And it is required to be done after colic pain, and vomiting, abdominal discharge, multiplied miscarriages in women, labor, sleeping, eating, and any thing related to the virtue or weaponry, by anything.
then subtly remove the fluids that are not thick, with meats and drinks and remedies, if you have a reason for it.
or bathing, if there is nothing wrong in it, to subtly remove the blood.
and you must strengthen by putting pressure on the vein in its third part, as we have said before.
and you must keep that day of work, and rest, and leisure, and similar things;
And if you tie your feet and join them, and make the strengthening higher than those who are strengthened, and rub their arm two or three times or three times;
but also stretch above a little bit, for when it is too tight or just slightly loose, he cannot correct it without causing harm.
and then rub the hand palms when veins swell up, and smell them;
then also strengthen the little fat in a bit of oil with his left hand over that vein slightly; sangrecces. :cele.fatilcités. œtzete,ise le raie àiture tanse. For it has been seen that they flee like strings from the sawyer, and there are such as are smooth of wind-hardening. When placed upon the flame, if removal occurs from the flame, and it cannot open the vein, then this is one of them.
And if it overlaps the vein, because it is a wound too tight, which requires that the surgeons be informed in these matters.
And if the vein operation is done first time, it is good; but if not, again a little near that place or by sudden movement, as long as the limb does not swell.
And if the limb is swollen, and the patient complains, then let him lie with one or two days without binding the arm: perhaps abscesses may appear below the incision; do not let it be washed or bathed, then repeat the surgery if he finds it pleasing.
and if the hole is small or the blood suction is done subtly, and you doubt whether any more blood remains than you have seen, then firmly hold that hole with all your might.
and a little by sudden movement, so that the limb is swollen; for it happens many times when the wound is small.
If you see the limb swollen, do not repeat the surgery, and put some oil on it, for it lightens the blood in the vein and becomes mixed with this fluid in the place.
and then apply the oil to each surgery that you perform on the veins, so as to stop the course of the blood.
and this makes a three-year itch and swelling when it is placed over the vein; subtly remove it if it is too large.
And if heavy abscesses come, which happen often, then do it only when the opening of the vein is small. if you hasten and place a damp sponge with water and a string slightly tight on the limb and hold it for an hour.
and require that you do this after the blood has come out of the vein, and if it delays in staying at the place afterwards for any day or color change, then don't bind the arm. and if you see ateinne, orenchie cestuet que il iere siens:
: "vocale l'estrog tol. The French. In English. The originals encize a itaure fromage of the cite defface a himagainne aout andre a ici: age. (1escription, Laiken laisseaulgarre of itsire. Now let us not place anything of that which we have said, for perhaps there may be a chance without the artery; but I make an incision with a lancet to harden the wound, and then treat it with other treatment until it is sound again.
And for each body part according to the quantity of its virtue and the color of the blood.
For if it is black, let it remain red until it becomes pinkish; and if you see it large, let it become thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
And is required for those who are pale and weak, and have the skill of blood extraction; because it will make a larger wound and cause its edges to flare up.
and for those who are weak, do the opposite, and it is better for them to have a milder touch and less often, and they should be treated more gently when cutting across rather than pricking.
and this manner of treatment is safe from the discharge of blood and compression of nerves; it's worthwhile when healing lasts long rather than being wide.
And for those to whom the treatment is necessary, it is required that they give mild pain relief with juice of grape berries; if they are suffering from excessive blood loss, treat them twice or thrice with a lancet.
And if it is of cold constitution, mix the lancet relief pain in honey syrup or in aromatic honey with spices—pepper, cinnamayer, ginger, and cloves; and if well-scented, also include sweet pastilles.
And if his palm is involved in the treatment after bleeding out some blood, it must then breathe a broth of barley and drink a subtle sweet syrup.
and apply other things that we have said in the chapter on syncope (fainting), for the evacuation of veins.
And if it wants to dislocate his arms, and healing again later on, when he is weakened by great sickness, then it must heal a little bit and a little bit, according to the continuous amount of its virtue.
And who wants to dislocate his arms after the first healing, and if it is very strong, then it must heal for one or two hours after the first healing, or after the second hour.
And who wants to heal in another area, if it should heal that very same day or within three days.
Because there is much blood within the already swollen part, and brings fever; it must then drain a large quantity of it, and widen the abscess so that it comes out from the bottom. then that you attend to all the healing conditions, and put your hand on his shoulders when it is healed, so that the wound does not wobble from its bottom. and this often happens when they neglect the healings.
but does not know when to remove the bandage from his arm, and drain blood the second time, as the abscess is closed, and you must press firmly on it. if he is stiff, that his arm moves hastily, for this would be bad.
but let it stay until heated up the second time; or you do not touch it too roughly with your fingers, as long as there are frozen abscesses in his veins bursting forth. and put it under some moisture again, and press it lightly.
And if the vein is swollen, let it be left and not squeezed at all, as long as the abscess has been calmed down.
And if it is necessary to drain a second time the blood in that same place, let him heal there or somewhere else, or in another arm.
The vein in his arm is healed by the main vein, because it is composed of that.
sans: "ceaux fie l'est pasures. If itteintes la terre ("Theu: oungeantentilent. Herefaire ofse. Ages andre. Theu phrase. Alsoeanime. Injurtherr esaurate decaisse.
Then bind it tightly so that the vein appears well, now heal the wound through and through, not wide or long.
And if it is wide, and heal well close to the joint of the hand, and when you cannot remove it, set the hand back in warm water, and leave the wound open until you have enough.
And if it is still there, do not warm up the hand again, because we put more ice on it than heat.
The healing of this vein is better than any other veins, as there is no artery or nerve involved.
The healing of the hand's palm equals all diseases of the liver, and that is how it works:
Strain the hand, and place it in warm water, as long as the vein comes to the surface, if possible. And if the wound heals across its entirety, and you cover it completely, nothing else hurts.
And do not apply too much pressure, as all the arteries are completely cut off.
And then put the hand back in warm water if it is frozen in the wound, and he cannot remove it.
And when you have treated the wound as much as your skill allows, place oil and thread on it to sew up quickly, and then do so for every case.
The healing of the left hand is like the disease of the mouse, and do everything I have told you for the right hand in the same way.
The healing of the spheroid relates to all diseases that are on the body's surface. Like the illnesses of the sea (maris), and retention of flowers (flores), and diseases of rain (rainis), and those of claws (cuices) and old legs (jambes anciennes), and similar ailments.
And the quality of this healing is that it pushes out blood in warm water, and rubs on the vein until it breaks. And it lies above the junction of flesh; and the vein is at the ankle, and beneath it there are many wounds.
It is now either larger in size than before at that place, or wider at the ankle than it was.
And if you clean it with the cloth on his body, warn him against those who are there, and clean it similarly as in healing a wound; and let the flames grow back to life.
And if he cannot get out of it, put his body in water, and let the vein well drain.
And if healing requires it the first time, repeat it a second time above a little bit, for his body is salted. do not doubt a nerve, as we have said, and therefore make of the same soothing poultice for the other shoulder similarly.
The vein from the sciatic is to the ankle of great heat, and its healing corresponds to the pain in the hunchback, where it contains hot blood.
And the quality of its healing is that it alleviates the pain between baths and stretches above the ankle three times when twisting.
for otherwise it does not open the vein; and if it opens, then cleanse it in all ways that you can, and by crossing. and it is worthwhile that you do it, for the vein is swollen, and it can be much restored at home by oneself.
and it is worthwhile that you do it, for the vein is swollen, and it can be much restored at home by oneself. And if you do not heal it, clean any of his open veins on both sides or the front part, and towards the small joints, and warn him against those who are there.
and do as much correction to the blood that you see, and then release it, and put on a cloth and hold tightly; now it is healed.
Venesection treatments
Venesections are made of horns, or antler, or vineyard wood; and venoplasty is done according to one or two methods: either by puncturing and drawing blood, or through incision and applying pressure on the wound.
And this venoplasty which is by incision can be done in one or two ways: either it is applied to all the body's heat, or at the place of fire.
and two other parts of his chest, and from there it draws blood out the jaw; And the suction cup for both shoulders; and the suction on the elbows. And the suction cups for both arms; and the suction cups for both legs. And the suction cups for both ankles; and the suction does not involve blood, since it consists of small needles scattered in the skin.
And because it doesn't hinder one so much, as when performing shoulder surgery; And it does not necessarily require that she be sedated, neither with fire nor hot sensation, in any disease caused by over-filling, as long as all her blood is drained.
And if necessity arises for suction due to illness or habit, we administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, and also in each ten-day cycle.
because there are such cases where those who need suction have great weight to bear.
and if there are such individuals who experience over-filling and swelling in their face, head, neck, and darkening of the eyes.
and those who have a blood clot in their mouth, whose tongue has fallen out, and re-accumulate blood. and if there are such people who think about blood discharge, swelling, wounds, and similar things.
And when we see these signs, and immediately after the month, at three hours past the day of each month, we order suctioning in such cases.
The method of moxibustion helps to relieve the heaviness in their heads... which comes from the blood flowing out, and it does not necessarily require that this happens after all the blood has been drained.
And this evacuation is related to the sanitation of the skull's side;
And it does not suffice that those who are cold-natured or have a catarrh should do so, for this causes them great harm.
And it does not suffice that they sleep with such wounds or those who have cold-induced diseases.
And those who recover often become negligent, and it is necessary to place the suction cup slightly lower due to uncertainty of movement.
The evacuation relieves the neck's side related to the sanitation of the head and chest area, and for this reason it is worth its effort. And in the hole where the passageway is located, as well as in drying and filling.
and it must be pressed slightly, for if it holds too tightly, it may cause indigestion or discomfort in the belly and heart.
The suction of these two sides of the colon is worth the pains in the head and eyes, conjunctivitis and swelling, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth.
And it is related to the sanitation of the chest area; and it suffices that you instruct the surgeon that he expresses his hand when placing the suction cup, so as not to cut an artery or cause bleeding by extracting blood.
The suction of the mouth is worth to diseases of the mouth and gum decay, as well as similar illnesses in the mouth; it also relates to the sanitation of the two lips' areas.
The suction of the shoulders is worth diseases that arise from heat and filling.
The suction of the ribs is as valuable as two knives on both arms. because it draws blood from these large veins.
and you must instruct the surgeon that he does not inflict too much injury upon it, as the skin is bare of flesh and knows well inside veins and arteries.
The suction cup placed on the back is worth serious foundational disorders and diseases in that area; it suffices that the suction cup be large and made of iron, so as to perform its task properly; perhaps if it were delicate, it would break; and it causes great wounds.
The suction cups for the legs heal thoroughly, because they draw blood from all parts of the body; they are worth old rain-related pains, and marshland and bladder pains, and help relieve inflamed flowers; and they relate to the sanitation of both thighs and ankles, as well as everything else, which weakens the body after prolonged use and causes multiple disorders.
The method of placing the suction cup is that you place it first emptied and immediately afterward, move it gently, and shake it in such a way that you continue to do so until you see the skin reddened and swollen, and feel the blood pressure; then remove the cups, and take care of the positioning of the blood vessels, as there are many who have thickened or have fluid: it suffices once cut, and make wide wounds, and suck them continuously.
And it is the first time to cause deffort, et il nettement en leu desormainne lesce a l'encorre, et de la ceorce :nge auroi .ij.il invenant quin.tend. Here isme :morte.
llustration. Ilterrasie alexander.
And if our blood is much, we often recollect it; and if the arrow is stuck in, they frequently pull it out, and when the wound heals completely, so that it can be clearly seen.
And covers the patient who has thick and hard skin, and with small cracks, that you oil the hairs of the suction cups with a stimulating and dissolving oil. if it is in the case, with purple oil, or with sweet almond oil, or with seed oil of squash:
and if it is in this case, with watercress oil, or with lily oil, or chamomile oil, or something like that:
And if excessive and thick and cold, take oil of unripe plum, or of balsam, or anethol oil, and similar things:
And if that patient heals and has tender skin with large cracks, they do not need to apply any oil:
but it is necessary to wash after the aspersion of water (presumably with a color or temperature significance) whether red hot water, cold water, water from mulberries, squash seed oil, porcelain water, or something similar:
And those who have much moisture in their joints, they will lift it up with hot water from myrtle and sumach, or something like that:
And those who have thick excessive blood products (or discharges) rise up with strong wine or cold water, or the decoction of anet seed or chamomile, or something similar:
and it is not better to use the suction cups before or during bathing, but after an hour or two; and does not sleep again after aspiration:
and it is necessary for him to warm himself when he must be aspirated and when he is aspirated: And he who is crazy or too hot and inflamed: if he should have cold things as it is done with green apples and beetroot and lettuce in warm water:
and coat the teeth:
it's fromage, en:xentence. Sarr,lere (Cajt'sain theure of theire. Andrevermejourre:cestruyse:ent. Incaure of thegiveur sachores. Ix. Fromaille:iure aureintres, towormen:
: httpsisere anditacme:sepekscription. 1aguin:t (50eveille:naturex<bescribe (anxarge :sant (faire.
And it requires giving to some people sometimes poultices or musk before the windings, or after, in order to strengthen the main limbs. And remove him without, but it does not require that those who drink hot beverages.
The suction cups that are applied to wounds are those placed on the liver, and on the stomach, and on gouty patients, and on the belly, and on swelling, and on sprain, because these limbs do not suffer from injury above or below.
And it does not require doing so to draw blood from limb to limb. As we apply on the breasts when they do not heal; to reduce the viscosity that is in the limb, as we apply suction cups on the belly and swelling to make the limb smaller.
And the pain when it has operation or incision, if it occurs by its attractive power during the intervention, or despair of his joint from dislocation.
And then it does so when we place them on the liver and stomach where there is retained suction.
And these vacuums are used because they can suction so much; and sometimes together fire, and sometimes water-stones.
As in illnesses of profuse tears, and such that it fills the suction cup with hot water, or with water infused with healing herbs to cure it.
The form of the suction cup given by fire is:
And it should be two-thirds of the palm in width and length, with its edge curved like an incision into the joint, as if to insert a needle.
And it is made of iron or steel in front so that it does not wound the patient when applying to his limb.
And it has in its midst a thorny stick of iron or steel to put the splint on.
And they are large and small depending on the diseases and conditions of those who have them.
For children's suction cups are different from large ones and thin ones are for slender individuals.
And this must be put on the limb:
Take the splint of wax or some material and put it on the thorny stick where the suction cup is placed. if so that the light is at the bottom of the suction cup, it does not burn the patient.
And then place it on his member, and you must put it in the hole that we have mentioned, so when it heats up, they release it and remove the suction cup.
And then proceed with it as we have said, and repeat often if you are experienced.
In the suction cup addressed to pneumonia in children and during an attack, it has no arm or hole, and is only applied to the limb when it becomes clear.
And that's its shape:
Suction cups are not applied to places where the smallness of a part is like lips and gums, and similar things. And they are also removed from the chest if like it or not, and similar things.
And the quality of its use is such that when you try suction cups in mildly swollen areas, it helps relieve pressure.
And they put it in mildly swollen areas, as long as they are familiar and have no issues within their abdomens. And if you are skilled in both venesection and suction cup use, then bleed the limb as much as it is red, and place the suction cups.
And when they become clear and pleasant, if it is suitable or possible to place the suction cup there, then put them in, because it is quite useful.
If not, then lift the limb of air and water, and it works quite well, and then press.
And if the limb is too warm after removing the suction cups from its body, then wrap it with a cool linen cloth and place it on, as long as the limb remains cold.
And if the suction cups are multipled, put them on burnt glass or gauzes, and similar things, as long as they remain cold.
: orne.
ousi,sans desusi: in theesme traduction. Ame noun it'saincte duitsience and age : The Old Englisheslaur fele ofrature :12 :13 : The French, aes, and:age, ander.
And if the hairs do not take hold of moisture, then he commands the patient to smear their wound with fresh blood, or pierce it until the wound stops bleeding. and then he places them above, and immediately they feel the warmth of the blood if they start to clot.
And when you see them discharging, then powder a little of aloe and silk fibers or ashes on it, so they will stop discharging now.
This is the beginning of the Book of Fractures.
These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and pertain to the treatment of fractures and dislocations.
Seek, listen to the wise man's words, that he does not find any mention of this chapter in any ancient books or letter.
And because of this reason, the knowledge of such practices was introduced into our land, as I found no better;
And I know nothing of it because through the study of ancient books and by practice in my life's work, as well as experience.
And I have described in this chapter what is contained herein and set it forth at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of instruments that are used, as I did in these preceding two chapters.
It is therefore that we declare this book's prologue contains the essence of its words and chapters, set in such order as they should be understood, and on which those who practice can rest assured, so that through experience others may learn this noble art and teach it to others.
I say that in cases of fracture or dislocation or twisting or shearing injury, there is no need for one to be concerned with healing the patient's pain on both sides. If any condition does not require attention due to its trivial nature, similar to a weakness, fever, or old age;
Or if the patient is very cold or too hot; and administer ice for cold injuries such as frostbite from icy battles, arrow wounds, and metal cuts, not drinking wine or eating fats, and filling up with meats that fill the cavities of the body, so long as there is doubt about dislocation or swelling in a limb; recline the patient on some firm surface according to an initial regimen he has used.
And when the bone is broken and must be restored, it should require that one feeds the patient with meats that make a loud noise of consumption, or have viscosity as if wheat cooked in water and bread, and testicles, and belly meat, and heavy wine, and resembling something. For when parting of the skin occurs, it quickly becomes fractured.
And know that broken and decayed bones cannot be properly rejoined or mended according to their nature due to the injury of the limbs, nor those who are too soft like the bones of small children.
But there is no cure for the fractured bone; repair large tendons that act and join the limb together so it becomes as strong as before, and not all of its work, which requires eating heavy meats, as we have said.
And you know that fractures come in many ways.
For the main fracture is different from that of a simple fracture, and in this chapter I will tell you all the types of fractures. For he has fractures that go downwards and others are narrowing, like the tip of a pen used to write.
For he has fractures that go downwards and others are narrowing, like the tip of a pen used to write. And if there is a fracture with an open wound, and a fracture that forms a small crack.
And each type has its method and proper instrument for restoration, as comes to mind in the context.
and is known to be twisted in the bone, and open well by default, and can be pressed with the hand.
and when it does not have twisting or pain in the joint, and the maladies do not feel any severe pain, then there is no fracture.
but it may well have twisting, crack, or small fracture. If it does not require you to move the limb by hand, but apply ointments that come later on, and then restrained gradually.
And you know that the fracture which goes downwards has its two parts joined, and it must be set to make them even again so as not to leave abscesses inside.
And if abscesses come, it has no effect as long as they are relieved. then set it so that you can move and shift lightly, and know that the restoration of the bone is easier than theirs if they had broken parts; then restrict as it must be done afterwards.
Andor le corps:iadou bone :il desires, oral.
And put the limb according to its natural shape, so that when parts of both limbs are broken and pressed together in their places, you may repair them with all joints without harming the patient's injury or pain.
And properly set the dislocated bones according to the best shapes.
And the patient feels well in his hand if he seems that it is not well: if you gently reduce it and do not squeeze too much, as those who make it come back with their incision work by heat and contraction of the limb, as we have tried many times.
And when the limb is in full health, if you treat well this malady so that it does not move, neither through watching nor sleeping, nor turning back, nor any other way. And take care that the limb is so secure that it feels no pain at all. For when there is no pain, it is not the case, and it must be that he puts himself in such position that he does not feel any pain.
For when there is no pain, it is not the case, and it must be that he puts himself in such position that he does not feel any pain. And you must keep him straight so that twisting does not occur when he is restored.
And the quality of the broken limb is according to what I have said.
You know that broken limbs are various in size and shape.
Because he has small limbs like brisk and sturdy ones: it must involve wrapping fine linen cloths gently.
And those who are big, like chests and legs: it must involve wrapping with a large band, because the wide bands enbrace all of the great limb, and the pressure from every part is equal so that there is no pain.
Then put stakes on moving joints, .iij. or iiij. according to the member, and press your hand a little over the entire band, then go above the dislocation and press less so that the dislocation moves away slightly from itself;
And soften the band a little and a little, as long as you keep great part of the healthy shoulder, then repeat another band, and turn back toward the dislocated shoulder;
Then go to the part around the dislocation, and press moderately, not too hard or softly, as we have said in the first mention above.
Then place between the wound bindings of linen or thin cloths, so that they are even and flat, then bind it all together with one bandage; and if there is no abscess or swelling.
And if it has an abscess or ulcer, apply something soothing to the abscess and which hardens the swelling, and let it remain for a few days.
Then bind the bandages tightly, and use strips of a wide cloth that has been twisted several times, or wood from which you make hurdles, or palm leaves according to this shape:
but it is required that the bandage applied to the fracture be slightly larger and wider than the others:
and it should also extend as much as it requires for the small or large limb:
then bind the bandages in the same way as you did for the first time, and tie them down with an available thread similarly to how it was done on the fracture:
then become narrower and wider again, now less; and it is required that the thread be of medium thickness, not too thin or too thick, and made from twisted linen:
because if the thread is too thick, like I have seen from works of people who make their bandages with twisted linen threads, and this is great error; for the binding cannot be equal if there is not at least two spaces between each bandage:
And if the painful joints are swollen after tightening the bandages on their healthy limbs, then apply strips of linen or rags soaked in a poultice to avoid it from bleeding:
When the wound is with breaking, and the bones are broken, I will tell you the treatment after that.
And know that it does not need to extract all splinters from all bent limbs within one day. For when the limbs are large, it does not need to insert splinters until after 4-6 months or more depending on your secure judgment as to how far they should be inserted.
And now the method of the ancient manipulators for restoring fractures, dislocations, and torsions: and you must take flour that is held by millstones, mix it with plenty of water, and make this preparation not too thick nor too thin, and use it, and this is the common method of the manual manipulator for restoring fractures in various positions, and especially for women and children, because it is neither too cold nor too hot.
Another way to restore fractures and dislocations is to take abareis (a type of resin) and ladani (cinnamon), and inula (an herb), and aloes, 10 parts; mirrè (myrtle berries), 5 parts; and juniper, 7 parts; and make powder, and mix the honey with it; if the patient's condition is warm, use this emplaster, because it has good composition and restores bones broken in various positions, and is valuable for many people.
Another method to restore torsion is to take mugat (mullein) and vismalve (willow bark), 10 parts; mirrè (myrtle berries), 7 parts; aloes, 6 parts; acacia wood, about 5 parts; Armenian bole, 10 parts; grind them well, mix with water or plenty of honey, and apply.
Another method for jointed fractures and the dislocations of bone fragments, and to ease the pain that accompanies it; treat with a new lane (fresh linen), moiled (moist) and cooked oil, and place on the affected limb. This preparation does not restore the fracture or dislocation itself but is good for soothing the aching aposteme (joints) and treating bone-related pains properly.
Another method to restore broken bones is to take dry leaves of fig tree and earthy moss, grind them together, and make the emplaster.
: "V12000 in ouldes tostirall.tropalexin theilv230000000sans'sainctexime lesangaregure desires acheatils of0200. Theca and itseant:sacre, leaule ofsacmeasure. This oungeace.
Another method of emplastre is more than the first, when after incision comes to the restoration of the limb. Take roots of violet and linseed seeds, beam, little stick, and spoon, violets and chamomile flowers, from all of them a part; and grind, and confit with salted or sweet water, or wine according to the temperature of the limb, and its rest.
In his book, he does not mention adding anything on the broken limb for its restoration, except some wax and oil; and states that it should neither be too soft nor too hard.
And it seems to him that the limb should be treated with dry warm things for restoration, such as myrrh and aloe, incense, and similar substances; as we have said before.
Another method of emplastre that is worth the injury and pain includes using mud and hair plucked from peasants' heads or pigeon feathers; equally long iron rods should be used, which are ground up for application during emplastre, and then applied to the affected area.
And then the dislocation is slightly corrected afterwards, and one must ensure that there are no sharp pains in his misaligned shoulder or any movement from its natural position; if it dislocates again due to handling by hand.
And if pain or itching arises at the point of treatment, or sensation of rest or swelling occurs, then quickly correct the dislocation and perform emplastre again; take a lighter leather cloth and moist sea sponge, immerse in water, lift the limb so that the itching ceases and pain is alleviated. Then let the limb rest for an hour after emplastre, and place it on a dry sheet slightly dampened with water or oil roses, and secure it under a bandage as long as you remain cautious of hot temperatures during recovery.
And it also allows for the reduction of swelling in both limbs and relieves the pain, then resume the emplastre gradually with a small amount of restorative treatment, and not too forcefully as before; gently continuing until they are healed.
Laws enveni'ses tost it isent lice duin.
i:s:nastra : Iacit.jour. Andromaine of their en a parturient.
And therefore the restraint should be more than primary, and the swelling of his flesh as I have said before; and if you see the wound seeping more than it is proper, you know that no further harm can come. When the points of cold water are applied every day whenever it dislocates, and this is each day for a little while.
By this treatment, we cut the swelling of the limb immediately, and hasten what the foolish healers do, restoring the limb in a twisted manner: it is bad, and if such fears arise, I see nothing else but laziness and not treating properly.
Of various ways to dislocation Many ways of dislocations exist, and various forms, and their causes are distinguished;
for it has dislocations made by striking with the sword, and it breaks every bone of the body up to where is overlapping on top of another bone, as if cut or broken; and because of this type of dislocation we call "haichure."
Or the sword pierces the bone beyond mere feeling, and this manner of dislocation we call "absolute"; and it is the wound caused by these two types of dislocations—large or small.
And if it has impacted wounds, or penetrating injuries, or blows to the bones of the legs, or falls from a ledge, or other similar occurrences.
And if it bears a persistent dislocation which brings about the cloth resting on top of the bone, or she lies upon the bone, and this is the wound or large or small.
And if the wound is stitched into the bone as delicately as some joints, and it has a small crack, and for this reason this "hairline" fracture must be addressed.
And if the wound is caused by piercing with an arrow, or falling, or something similar, and it has driven a piece of bone into the lower part, and its edges are as sharp as those made by a blacksmith when they hammer on the anvils between them. If there is penetration within it.
And this occurs more in people whose lower parts have wet bone, like children's.
And it happens in all these kinds of fractures where small pieces are driven out as if they were, and I will speak about this subject.
And we know all kinds of fractures due to pulling on them, and the investigation by traction, and by the corrupted part that is above it.
The hairline fracture is characterized by the fact that when the bone is discovered and scraped beneath it, if there appears to be a black line.
In treating the fracture, take into account various symptoms of bad alignment, and if you see no evil accidents like vomiting bile, loss of understanding, extension, paleness, fever, blood issuing from and reddening around it, and other similar conditions in different states, then there is doubt about the patient's recovery.
And if you see an evitable accident, and hope for healing, as when the treatment begins.
And when the nose vein appears first to you, and it is winter, it must be covered over the fourteenth day so that it can heal within a month.
And if it is in that state, if you hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue around the bone becomes decayed, then the accidents we have mentioned come about.
And if the bone fracture comes right where it covers the brain, then it is necessary that you cut the cracked part as follows: and make sure to pierce the head of the painful patient through all possible ways; and on the face of the wound more softly than you can.
And if bleeding arises in the discovery of bone or incision site, it is essential that you utilize this knowledge; and thou shalt fill the wound with layers of linen soaked in roselle oil. And let the wound rest as long as the incision sites have calmed down; ensure to guard against any bleeding; then proceed with extracting the bone according to a number of techniques: one such technique involves cutting through the tight area directly in front. The resulting form is thus:
And then there is another method more extensive than the first.
And the second method involves employing various techniques: some are narrow and others broad, with points and iron instruments; applied swiftly to avoid hemorrhage at the patient's head.
And if the bone is loose and hardened, it is necessary that you perforate within; so that with gentle techniques you may avoid penetrating beyond the bone's inner layer, ensuring a margin or circle above the point extends past the bone itself; and for such cases one must have multiple techniques: two of them should be applied to each side of the spinal column from its base, using various methods:
The qualities of the bone to be perforated involve applying one technique on the bone and turning it over until you determine that the bone has been penetrated; then apply another force a little further, and thus perform as follows: make your surgical instruments at an interval of the bone, and do so subtly and swiftly, according to what we have mentioned, whether thou putteth the bone in thy hand or use any one of thy tools.
And when you have the bone broken and cut, and it is required that you set the piece which is delayed from the bone to all other instruments seeming like a scalpel, but it must be more flexible and subtler than the other scalpel.
And if it delays nothing from the small bones or scales, if the bone is moved lightly to one of the instruments we have mentioned; then care for the wound with tenting and ointments that we have described.
And the other way of operation that is called by the Greeks, which is more abrasive; and it was done very strongly, and it is its saying. It must first that you remove a part of the bone, whether it breaks open or not; when you have found this section, then place under the lenticular (lens-shaped) edge of this incision tool, for where there is this form.
And do not cut off a part, and it is the piece that curves in two sides, so that you cut towards the bone; then with a small hammer placed above, you move lightly along the entire bone and be careful of the cloth undernee.r
If it is attached to the bone, if you move the bone lightly, for the bone does indeed sense harm and fear;
And if the bone fragment does not pierce through the cloth ("se li brisure de l'os ne perce jusc'a la toile"), and the bone is cut so much that it produces small fragments, then you must renew the roughness (asperitet), and remove scales with a subtle scraper in various quantities; for provisioning each piece most suitable, according to the operation and shape of the fragment.
If a king faces many rough rascals, and after them more subtle ones, and never stops doing so until he is well.
In each other hair and subtle breakage, it implies that you must adjust according to its particular condition; and this is something not found in those who have devoted their study to this craft.
And if the skin is exposed, it implies that you must firstly dress a linen cloth according to the size of the wound, and then apply oil-rosemary mixture on top of it. Then take another linen cloth doubled in two or three layers, and apply oil-rosemary mixture on it as well, placing the second layer over the first one. Perform this more gently than you can, so that you do not strain the skin too much, then lightly cover it with a third linen cloth, ensuring you don't press hard enough to only darken the wound further.
And leave it for a day or two until the swelling subsides, then remove it gently, and administer remedies as you would with thistle roots, flour, incense powder, alchemical substances, and similar things. From these materials, make pills to put on the wound, and apply medicines without causing further irritation;
And ensure that the wound is finally cleaned so you do not leave any residue or allow dirt to accumulate, as when a bow-arrow hits the brain's cloth (cerebellum), it can cause damage and bleeding; because when something sharp touches the exposed skin, it may tear more severely.
Then beware if anyone's misfortune comes upon the patient, as we have said before, since it is doubtful sense of doubt.
And if no further harm comes to the patient from the medicine applied on it, there must be virtue in applying a part of honey, and two parts oil-rosemary mixture, and wrap a cloth around the wound before placing medicines on the exposed skin. Then the manner of treatments that it will cover until it is well again.
Save that sometimes these two pieces above, or just one of them alone, as they are bones, and it does not break easily; and when it is bruised or twisted, and then it becomes healed again.
And if one of the two parts is fractured, it requires you to pierce your little finger or notch near the nail, and place that fracture close to the index finger's tip, and at least in front of the pouch, until the nail returns according to its natural shape. And perform this binding, and ensure that the patient does not feel pain from your actions.
And if the fracture is above the nail and cannot come down to rest on it, then you must place a slightly larger splint at the top of the finger's head.
And if the fracture is in one or two parts, then make another repair and hurry to restore it within a year, if possible.
but after the seventh or twelfth time when the abscess cavity is calmed down, then bind at the nail's tip with a cotton band, if the fracture is in one part.
Or you bind another piece to the other part if there is a fracture in two parts; and make sure the bands fill up the notches of the nails.
And the restorers say that they must wear burlap bands and change them every day; it seems to me not very good, but you need to make them with lint from sheep wool and powdered millstone; then leave the band until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.
And never bind onion scales to the band in the place of splints, and if you have a soft leather strap, and hold the fracture together, and blow away the patient's pain; do so with your hands.
And if the abscess cavity reaches the nail while you perform your actions, then put a little cera or cotton soaked in rose oil, or some small amount of diatomaceous earth.
And if the abscess cavity does not reach the nail, then pack it repeatedly with fine millet flour and powdered incense, mixed with sheep wool lint, and place under heavy splints without binding the nail.
and if the nail is slightly broken into small pieces, then take suitable waxes for this purpose, close the crack, and treat it with various exorcising charms, and soldering as appropriate waxes and ointments.
but if there is no injury in the nail, then treat with bands and cotton pads soaked in linseed oil until it heals.
regarding the treatment of the jawbone
When the jawbone is free of injuries and fractures do not extend into two parts, if there are caries inside it, then treat it slightly with bandages.
It is required that you bind the index finger in the sore side; and if the fracture is on the left jawbone, then tie your right hand to the soresse, et si lait douceur, se le mandible droit, et enceps, et enceps.
And if the fracture of the jawbone is displaced in .ij., then it requires that you extend .ij. parts, so long as they remain levelled.
And if movements of the teeth occur, or dislocation, when you stretch a gold, silver, or silk thread over the fractured jawbone and place it under .i. piece of cloth; and place that same cloth under another large well-made tablecloth, or a piece of leather proportional to the jawbone, and attach it so that the patient can move as desired, and directs the malaide to rest, and instruct them on eating light foods.
And if you observe that the figure changes, and it settles back after a year, then reposition it as it was; and place powder made from fine flour mixed with an ample amount of wheat or rye meal after setting up lou fractured jawbone; and lay thin linen over the powder, and when you apply the linen, let the patient's position not change, so long as they are sound, many times in .iij. months it is healed.
And if a stone abscess occurs, then prepare as we have said many times before.
And if there is a fracture and wound together, heal with no little piece of bone in its place; apply the sutures to the bone with ample suture materials available.
And if the wound is narrow, expand it by inflammation according to your necessity.
And when you have set all these pieces, and there is no delay in setting it up, if the wound is large, place on ample sutures to tighten the closure, so long as it remains sound.
Of the forceps The forceps may break multiple times towards the shoulder, and if there is fracture according to .iij. maneuvers: it is broken and displaced in .ij., and has pieces, and is lighter to restore; or there is fracture with wound.
And the procedures when there is fracture with wound that you have .ij. assistants, so that one of them tightens the supportive device which feels the forceps broken; and others extend the collar towards the part; then place the fracture in its proper position as it should be, and make sure there is no appearance or dislocation.
And if you have the skill to extend it further, then place an inflatable balloon or cloth under the shoulder of the patient according to your necessity; and handle the forceps lightly, and hold the balloon in your hand so that you can position the fracture as it should be, as it requires.
And if you cannot pull the handle of the forceps away, because it breaks off, then it requires that the malaide rest on their bed linen, and place an orthopedic collar under the shoulder, and have the assistants hold the shoulder upwards so that the bone of the forceps remains raised.
A.iij. La première fois.
s affinement:tant verscaste slerez apexentice.fere casse (tostractre (apparthexue seelacit greintude. Andre,ilklesce temurnecture,0resse malletifteent approxan so lage ia,ent purelng a la ceckle medlee
And when you are sure of the incision, if it bleeds, and if the wound is small, or if you doubt the incision, then apply pressure to the wound with cloths and bandages according to its size.
And if during an incision it comes, if there is fluid, place a cloth soaked in rose oil and straw wool on top, and put it over.
The dislocation of the bone, when it feels a wound and a misalignment in size, is that you put powder made from miller's pea flour and alum dust on top of the bone, and then place lighter layers over it, and fix a stake within the alignment if you know how. Then take a very thick band of one palm in width, and place a double layer of light layers on top of the powdered area, and cover it; then take a slender stick of three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that thicker band to keep the head of the bone aligned. And place the stick above the fracture, and turn the band back to its neck, and around the healthy bone, and around the misaligned bone; and remove the winding of each part, and when you see that in every turn the bracelet is tightening over the crack, and clearly you can see that the stick does not move above the broken bone daily, and whenever the ligament loosens.
And lay the malformed bone on its back, and place a small peg underneath the stick to lift the shoulder joint up; this may alleviate the force of the dislocation by adjusting the arm's position at the collarbone or securing it with the arm at the neck, so that no adverse event occurs within twenty years.
Then repeat the procedure if you have experience, and loosen and release the brace then until it is restored; and it will be fully restored in twenty-seven years at most, and not in any home's case.
of the shoulder dislocation
Of the shoulder dislocation, and it does not move from its joint, and if there is no force. The dislocation of his pain, and lice de la brisure desgale du chascun jorre ailve leu lee: ici les poinlees estraie.
And if a piece of the bone protrudes beforehand, and does not touch the ground, then they make it so, and the bone, and do this which we have said in treating an abscess by applying cold.
Of the fracture's break
The bone is never broken in one place but rather infrequently; however, it often breaks further downward. And when the bone is broken into pieces, it deviates from its position, causing great pain and harm to the patient as well as vomiting blood and opening up wounds in the fragmented bones, and this suffering is very severe indeed.
The restoration consists of placing a stitch between the shoulder blades and then pressing them together, subtly applying pressure in various ways until the bone's appearance is as it should be; then place splints above the salty stone or another lighter material, wrapping the patient's garment around the broken bone, securing the linen to the bone so that it does not move, and turn the ligament back in its proper position. Then apply counter-tension repeatedly for each hour of work, if necessary; and if loosening is required due to corrosion or pruritus on the skin's surface, or pain or abscess, you must hurry up and release it, remove the splint, and direct those who have performed various curative methods. Then rewrap the splint until it becomes healthy again.
Regarding fractures of the ribs: When a rib is broken, it's important to apply supportive measures such as splinting while monitoring for complications like pneumothorax (collapsed lung). Care must be taken in handling and treating this delicate area due to its proximity to vital organs.
The fractures of the ribs generally do not result from significant injuries to the back or chest but are caused by blunt force due to their hardness, and it's quite painful for them too—a fact well-known during investigations into such incidents. This passage suggests that rib fractures typically occur from direct impact rather than injury at other areas of the body; they are noted to be particularly painful, which is a relevant consideration when examining cases involving these types of injuries.
And the restorations are to make them equal in terms of the fracture's appearance; and then apply a splint and counter-tension with an implement if you have experience in such methods. This portion is advising that when repairing a bone, one should aim for symmetry concerning the original injury. After applying a suitable splint, further treatment involves using counter-tension techniques to stabilize and support the fracture, but only by someone who has expertise in these procedures—highlighting the need for skilled medical intervention when dealing with complex bone injuries like fractures.
And if the rib fracture is descending toward the front, it causes great pain and difficulty breathing, just as with pleurisy; and blood comes out of a wound on the bone, and vomits blood in large amounts, so severe an illness, and they have to apply much pressure.
: "from the same'sansume d'soma, in English. What fromage ofsut. In French:age, andur.
:gachapeaufeit andue itc andesquexive:screwage:sla itacme :threatime: sconsevissoldes in
And they said none of us puts a suction cup on the joint, to drain it well, and this seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the suction cup will not draw out excess fluids due to its weak positioning.
And they said none of us should cover the joint with a warm linen soaked in hot oil, and place tent pegs between the sides to align the crack, then treat it with leeching, bloodletting and medication.
And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear on the bone which does not touch skin, and there is doubt in the patient whether it should be split along the bent side of the joint, and it must be equipped with something to hold the sycophant; and then they must saw into the bone, and drain lightly, and then sew up the large leaves of the wound, if there are any, and treat it with ointments until he is sound. And when blood comes from above, put a warm linen soaked in rosette oil on him; and place it over the joint; and cure the joint as long as it must be treated for an abscess, whether lying down or standing up, until it is healthy again.
of the bend in the fracture
There is never a bend in the sidebone injury, and only rarely does it collapse; and also on the vertebra of the backside. And when it happens to none at all, and you know whether he will be sound or not; if your patient's hands are swollen and softened, and cannot move or extend them, and when you prick his fingers with a needle, does he feel pain? You see that it is dangerous in many conditions, and if he is silent and feels well when they are restrained and immobile, you know the joint of the bone is sound, and that the patient's condition is being cured, as long as treatment continues.
And if the symptoms come to the vertebrae of the backside, and you know whether it is sound or not; if your patient's legs are softened, and there are accidents involving their hands, and assessing ventusitousity (windiness) and egestion (elimination) upon lying on his back, as well as voluntary egestion when he lies on his stomach. And when it is found to be active in the treatment of his spine, if he cannot move; you know that it is fatal: if there were no labor or activity during its cure.
And if this injury occurs, as it is lightly.
And if it has an abscess, put it on the spine with rosemary or olive oil of fresh egg yolk, so that it becomes calm; then place it on one of the resting boards and dry and bind it with a bandage, and command the patient to rest in that area where he does not feel pain until he is well. And if any bone detaches itself, it must be covered with the keel; and fix the bone, then assemble its two sides of the wound, if they are large, in a suture, and treat it with hot oil smearing until it is healed; and if the bones of the arm have been fractured, which we call "broken bones," you must take your bag with your left hand, and place it evenly on your right hand for support, then put the resting board and the bellows above, as long as you know how to do so; then bind it up, and if there is a detached bone, fix it, and treat the wound until it heals.
of the fracture of the hip bone
Rarely does the hip bone become fractured, and if it happens, it's usually just a slight reduction at the top; then you make an incision lengthwise, turn it backward (dislocation), causing pain in that location where the break occurred, swelling, and enlargement of the area that broke.
And the restoration if it is that you extend your hand over the fracture as much as possible; and know what type of break and its shape; and if the fracture is in the center soak that fracture, keeping it natural until it has formed properly again.
And if the break is long or it turns backward (into the body cavity), then have the patient lie down on his abdomen, as long as your restoration of that fracture has been achieved. And when you have placed it in the resting board and then on a wooden stick or iron support, bind up the fracture so that it does not move again; and take care of the sides of the wound, ensuring that the sutures remain intact.
And command the patient that his side rests healthy or on its back; and command your maladies.
And if the cutting of the stomach comes, do not touch it until the cuts are soothed, and place on what we have said before; then proceed to restoration, and hold as it should be, unless there is any unfortunate accident; this is how it works.
From the dislocation of the shoulder blade.
The shoulder blade is what lies between the outer and inner parts of the shoulder; if it is dislocated, one must restore according to one of these two methods: first, make a straight piece larger with moisture. According to this shape:
And there are two joints and bind them high up, and look at the patient's painful spot under a seat; then cut his broken arm along the bone until it bends inwards, and put a brace on it made of wood, so that any weighty object or assistant extends the break back to its original position; then set the dislocation equal with both hands together, as much as it needs to return.
And the other method is that they think of the patient's painful spot in his girdle, and grasp him with both hands, then command some ministers to touch what is on the dislocation at the hands, while others touch everything else, and extend each part as needed.
And if the extraction is more advanced, restrain the limb around the dislocation, and under it, and extend each minister to his part; and if the dislocation is close to the shoulder's neck, you must place a joint between the socket and its surface, and another towards the shoulder blade; and similarly, if the dislocation is toward the shoulder blade, then you must place another limb loosely in relation to it, so that the dislocation remains aligned with the body's structure, and under both the socket and shoulder blade; then set the dislocation back as needed, holding it securely without disturbing the stomach cut.
And if the stomach cut comes, do not strain it for at least seven years, and make the bandage loose and moistened with oil, so long as the dislocation is calmed down; then hold it and use the method of restraint by putting a splint on the dislocation, and assemble the arm to the shoulder brace or chest, and place your hand on the shoulder or breastplate; and tie the cloth, and hold the brace and arm so that the arm is raised from its edges without resistance, whether there is any thing preventing it, or if the bone remains unmoved.
And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use sticks, and put a larger and stronger stick on the dislocation, and make each of them so wide that it passes through both sides of the dislocation; then strain on the sticks as I said at the beginning in the book.
i:ses :isque devel. ici.
And if no such thing happens to him, the dislocation will not occur within two years or more, and he will lie on his back with great pain in his stomach; and place there a simple band of wool equally covered, and look at every hour for one day or so that the joint does not move, or become soft in its ligaments; if it is cured by the virtue of medicine, and the flesh we have placed before you in part such that the flesh becomes firstly loose; and when he begins to regain, it will be large. And it is customary for the crutch and leg to be recovered within forty years; and therefore he must dislocate and administer baths and medicines with ointments to tighten the joint.
The fracture of the arm.
The arm is made up of two bones called the "firearm" (fosse), where one is small and serves as the socket for the head (the other bone is large and lies near the smaller bone); sometimes only the larger bone fractures, or sometimes both.
When the smaller bones are fractured, the treatment is easy and healing; but when the larger one is fractured, it requires a poorer treatment and more swelling than when both are fractured together. If only the smaller one is fractured, then there will be slight extension, and they should be kept equal in size.
And if it is the larger bone that must be extended more strongly; and extend the sling on one stick, and raise the head of the handpiece higher than the other ones, and make the smaller one lower than the others, and put the dislocations close to itself, and a second stick placed above it so that the patient suffers no pain at all; then stretch the ministers over his arm near the part under his hand or another joint, and some others above. Then place them evenly according to its best form.
And if there are pieces in the fracture, place each piece back to its original position; and if there is no deviation that prevents us from restoring it back to its original position, then we do so with the doctor' Written by: Markus Lindenmair
And if with cutting an injury, I have spoken to the individual monk about it; take care.
And if in the beginning of the restoration with aposteme chaux it soothes the fissures, gently lay a silk cloth made from rose oil and beeswax, not too hard nor too soft; and then place the powdered pumice in abundance along with some wool, spreading them out, making the slab of fracture bigger than others by two units or more, and it should have at least two supports depending on its position: whether the fracture is on one bone or both; and pull tighter near the fracture than elsewhere, always avoiding widening over time as I mentioned in the beginning to the individual monk, and wrap the cloths around the moistened silk, neither too tight nor too loose, similar to what we have said. And reward the limb and its tendon after some time. And if any accident occurs to the limb, as itching that comes to the member, it is necessary that you cool the member with warm water, so that this itching subsides; and then let the member not be tightly stretched for rest. Then resume the exacerbation, and when the ligaments are elastic and the bones have been disturbed, in such a manner as to indicate its position.
And if the contracture cannot come to the limb because it is too tight, it is necessary that you soften it a little bit; and let it remain in this state for some days until the contraction returns, then resume the tensioning.
And if none of these things we have mentioned come to the patient, let it rest for up to twenty years or so; then unbind his hands from his neck, make his collarbones even, and instruct him in movements and steadiness, and sleep on his back; and you know that this fracture is restored within thirty years or possibly forty depending on the composition and constitution of its virtues.
Of the fracture of the hand
And know that at the back of the hand and we seldom encounter this many fractures, and they do not come but rather a fold or flexion.
And when the hand's plantar arch is fractured or bent, it is necessary that the doctor examines and sets him up straightly in a chair facing the same way; then spread his hands out with extended fingers, aligning them well together; and apply plaster and bandages to the fractured bones, and secure them so they are level, if there is no movement. Then cover it with an orthopedic board of one unit or more in size according to its length; and wrap it in a single linen cloth.
il'sat ceux quellis quelses legering the injuven'':comport iten. Whatiefrement lesl'nose:causes l’oreinthe ence (10afar lecorpsentefromes. Theodèllustre'':smaise.comfort, andeclaws.
And if the fracture is complete, it must be that you place a straw on top, and another underneath in the sole of the foot, so that the hands are upright and straight, then bind the joint tightly with both hands, and secure the connection between the two.
And if the fracture does not belong to either of us two, if it is in the pockets, then he must put it straight, as it should be; and hold with the foot, and if you see it put a small straw vertically to lift the fragment, and make sure it doesn't move; and if the fracture belongs to one of the other two, like an index or one of the others, then he must put straight, and bind the joints together with the adjacent ones; or tie them all in one hand that holds well, or place a straw underneath as we do for pockets. Take care in treatment and positioning after extraction, and deal with whatever comes next, as I have said.
of the cracked bone
The bone of the cracked is often broken many times, and it can be seen when turning it both ways front and back; and in restoration it must be tied above the break, and another one below. And the maladies arise on his face, then extend each minister's tie to its equal portion; and it is when the fracture is within the bone.
And if the fracture is close to the root of the bone, one tie towards the shoulder, and the others around the break; and also if it is near the jaw, then either ties behind the jaw or extensions downward; then place the ropes on the bone evenly at its two ends, so that it is according to its natural shape, and then set the splint, and bind the joints as there will be no movement.
And if there is no movement after treatment, let him calm down then return to your work and care; the bandage is made in part manner. nastra a laiss: entend.coment lice deaf lait:sac. theire (a illegal. alze la :carre. A10 : andrein. It'èdifacarre tocru, sansur. Thenar.
And if it happens, if he dislocates it, and addresses that which comes to him, as we have said many times; and if he has pieces of bone in his hand, he must avoid them if possible; and if not possible, he must fracture the joint, and pull out forcibly; and treat it as we have said, until he is sound.
And never is the wrist broken in such a way that it is put back like this, as with the shoulder and arm; everything, in restoring it thus, does not affect the patient's pain severely.
And you know that the wrist was restored about a decade ago, or perhaps less than ten years or more, depending on the various constitutions of individuals.
from the neck of the gland
He knows that there is little breakage in the neck of the gland; however, it often bends many times. And if it breaks, it's just a fracture or an opening, and such occurs with every wound, and causes pain to those affected, yet they feel quite well.
And the restoration is where it puts back what is rightly its due, as long as it can move again; then he places the implant, and if he has any knowledge of such things, he arrests them accordingly; afterwards he warrants all the dispositions we have mentioned for other fractures, whether at the joint or in other similar cases; in every accident that must be addressed, as long as it remains sound.
from the fracture of the leg
He knows that in the leg it has two bones, and they call them by different names; one is called "mare: and then the injury occurs to the arm, and for this restoration, as much so that the arms are identical.
naught,celle,
And if the thin bone is broken, turn it forward.
And if the large bone is fractured, it causes great pain and he sees clearly; then turn it inside out. However, even so, it must be that his fracture is ugly, and there are many pieces more numerous and smaller than its extension, which align according to your virtue. (Note: The translation adjusts for a possible typo in the original text with "brisiez" as well as attempts to make sense of less common phrases based on context.)
And when you have completed your work, take two sheaths of wood that match the leg on one side and another on the other side, which extend from the knee to above and below it; then wrap a band around both sides above and below, and tie them tightly in place, so that the leg will not incline either to the right or left, and thus it is well done; and none give a band long of the leg, and if there is wood, they place it on the leg for protection against movement, and properly made this applies where there is an injury, and move each day the leg to see whether there has been any other accident; heal it until it is sound.
from the fracture of the bone in question
The ankle does not come from a fracture but the bones of this kind rarely have any breakage and only in few cases do we find that it involves more dislocations or displacements.
And if the bones of this kind are fractured and you see these bones protruding from each other, place them maladjustedly on the ground, just like if they were flying off; then place your bone upon his, lift it so that they come back into their original position; put in an incision and pegs above, cover with a small cloth over his belly, adjusting the placement of the bones accordingly, then wrap the entire area with linen, and perform other necessary procedures.
And for the three or four years passed, if you shift his ligament, because you will find the bones even and some fractured, while others may have been displaced.
And if there is one piece of meat, adue apei dame tost .iiij. Soixante piexte .iij.
And it requires that you not forget the other things I have said about other injuries which we have mentioned; and for each type of accident as required.
The fracture of the bone in the shoulder point.
When the bone of a woman's body is fractured, if it be set upright and increased in size at that point, then have her lie on her back with her back supported; then fill the nature with cotton, as much as you would like to put therein, and let her jump until she reaches the entrance of the nature, and returns the bone with its support; when she wishes to urinate, do not remove the cotton, but rather place a bladder-bag in that pit, and pump out all the bladder into the nature; then blow air through the bag forming it until the bladder is filled inside: the nature will heal the fracture. Then fill with cotton as many years as you wish, letting it remain thus until it has become sound again.
And when the shoulder bone of a man or woman is fractured, if it is restored in such a manner as we have described for the hipbone; and these other injuries are not concealed from those who put their study and their practice to use, and understand my book. For the fracture means more than one way on the right path of restoration: therefore.
In the arm, when it is fractured, take a goose's gizzard and insert the arm; then wrap it with cloth, and leave it for two or three years until it becomes sound again quickly.
Of fractures with wound
It requires the person with a fracture accompanied by wound, particularly if it is large like the bone of the shoulder or the aid's bone or something similar; let him be cured now so that the healings we have mentioned testify to it.
And if the wound is healed, then restore the fracture with vitriol (mercury treatment), provided you do not have anything else; begin restoring the break in that very hour or the following day, when arrows do not come out of it again.
And if the wound near a stone comes, let the restoration be renewed as soon as possible, until the incision is calmed down, and not touched for a whole year or even a quarter, because you would cause bad luck to come.
And if the broken bone appears above the discovered joint, it is necessary that you set them quickly and gently with your hands, in slight extension.
And if the extension does not help you to make your hands equal in length, then use this instrument made of iron that has 2.5 or 3.5 cm long, and its width is according to the size of the wound; for it is a skill to mark .III. or IIII., depending on what is needed in each fracture treatment; and whether it becomes rounded or slightly bulky so that it does not compress the limb during your work, as well as being ahead, and thick around its center.
And it is called "palanche", because the shoulder joint must be placed on top of the visible bone; and when you hold it, as much as it returns, so that they are equal against each other. And if the fracture is subtle, and the manipulation cannot well grasp the bone, then it is necessary for you to support the top of the bone until the practitioner can handle it.
And if you cannot return the bone, as we have said, then with an instrument suitable for that purpose, whether it is a chisel or a saw, do so; and then consider what remains in the bone of hardness and fine cracks.
And when the bone is returned and it hurts a lot afterwards, you know that it is not in its natural state anymore. So do it until it is restored to its original position, then clean one or two drops of black vinegar on it correctly; and do not place anything over the wound, whether oil or other substance, because this would cause moisture and decay; then apply bandages as much as you have restored the bone, and cover the wound completely according to its size, and be very careful that the wound is not strained with the fracture; and many times the wise physicians did it and caused no death or corruption due to any of these breaks; and they made the stronger and softer splints compared to other types of fractures.
And if the wound is bad or large and you doubt that it may lead to an accident, just as we have said; and when there is pain at the top of the bone, do not place anything on a bandage but cover it completely with layers of hard cloths and linen, and after one or two years if the wound begins to swell again, you must remove what was placed inside and apply healing ointments suitable for injuries; like salves and medicinal herbs.
And it is necessary to turn the limb by two times a day, morning and evening, as long as it is set and cured.
And it is necessary that the members appear in the same way that the bone moves easily.
And if for three days they pass through, and it cannot be welded but comes again bent back, you know that it has small bone fragments, so you must treat the wound with tent, and gather all these detached fragments together to draw out the pain.
And if an abscess comes to the joint, or any other form of corruption, it must be treated according to what is discussed in this chapter before. When the bone is broken and protruding into the limb, like that of the shoulder blade or the armrest, as well as with large members, do not treat it at all, for many times the wound worsens; perhaps it will be treated after 20 years or 30, but let it remain until it begins to heal. And if you can cure the wound, then do so; otherwise, leave it as is.
and stones brought up by soda (sodium carbonate)
We often come after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is close to the joint, and what's sad is to see the limb's deformed appearance; and sometimes it may not be able to perform its natural functions again. This statement reflects a common concern in historical medical practice where post-fracture healing was closely monitored, particularly near joints where complications could lead to long-term disability or deformity.
Take care that it is fresh: administer harsh medicines such as aloe, frankincense, and myrrh, resin, saltpeter, and similar substances; do not give any of these things individually or all together, and mix them with vinegar or a significant amount of wine, or some form of ash; then place the nodule on hot coals, treat it well, and don't let it dry out in your hands for years. Then remove it, and begin another one until the nodules are ossified; or you may strain it onto a piece of clean linen well-prepared, as this property of bone is that it fuses all superficial tissues above the limbs; if the nodule has turned into hardness like stone, and requires removal from above, then heal it until it's healthy. If there are no hair or other unnecessary growth on top, continue treating it until it's ossified.
When the fragment of bone is restored and continues to be weak and subtle afterward for many reasons: one being because it was too tightly bound and not as loose as it should have been; or due to having too many ligaments in it that prevented joint movement; or due to excessive exercise, without which its strength; or for the lack of blood in his body, then he is feeble.
sake fromage. Theeske, tol. Describe aka, anderre, tongue. Andre:t'ses arre àng theorcé.
A twisted limb after health
When the limb is twisted after healing, and the bone breaks apart, and the shape of the deformed limb is ugly; all this has no natural work: those who believe that one must break a limb out of its youth do not hold truth in our land; and these treatments are blamed, and they often lead to great harm and sometimes even death. To prevent such things, if there are nodules and tortures present, it requires being soaked in hot water or cooked mild herbs like vismalve leaves, roots, etc., similar medicines; and one should make a soft healing poultice, as well-done Diacconius. Take musk lichen from Vismalve, confit with pork fat or sisal oil, and make the poultice on top; or take greased figs, crush them with colt's fennel, and similar medicines that alleviate inflammation.
And there has never been bone nodules that should be rubbed constantly and for extended periods with wet hands. Either alleviate any movements in the limb every hour.
And if the twisted condition is old and hardened, as in stone, then it must be covered with iron, which covers the bone even under the incision lightly; and a copper cup or cauldron should be placed over it during treatment.
Here begins the book on dislocations.
This sentence is already translated accurately to English: "Dislocation is from none of its joint's position, which prevents it from moving; and the limb has a deformed shape, and feels the patient great pain and injury."
When there is no dislocation at all, it must be kept to return feeling targeted.
Because if it is left, the limb swells, and perhaps even put back on its original position; since it does not need to be moved again where it has swollen: many times this caused rashes and other pains.
So if this happens, make the patient's painful limb better; then let it rest until all of its pains are alleviated; and warm water and oil on it, and raise the member slightly, and treat every limb as they come to their place.
: leu chief defforme escreves la testament: thee paroles enlal. Lei. Tudrex (1065 paragraph of meveins quoicme, ieval ail. Forth century: lesparle withouttelling it'savaux French lector: Parémeans.
lure.engaste. Thisendresse pastrange,alement.ngere:sceux laisseriodexpurgstentil sofisse, le maldectevex ischimente of apeximeurs andelafreximente �conguregeincaissexes develuxiblevicescures:n agerdexilevescopeletsume:bestecture :<briffernefaire, the l to Lurgrevoiredecomprectifores.ameurenticienche stoutheletan
Sometimes the jawbones are dislocated and the dislocation of both is according to .ij. manners: or they are a little bit detached from their joints, and softened a little; or they are completely displaced, and hanging down towards the lower, and covering the saliva in the mouth that it cannot hold it, nor close its mouth, and wraps its tongue with speech.
When the dislocation is small, it returns to its original position by various arrangements.
And if it is complete and accomplished, it must be reset promptly, and you should not target more than necessary.
And in such a way that the minister of pain touches the head of the malady, and thrusts the hand's palm into the root of the dislocation of the jawbone within the mouth if the dislocation is part of .ij., and the other hand should be removed to make it equal; and instruct the patient to soften his mandibles and move them from all parts.
And the hands make it equal, so that it returns to its place.
And if the reset is gripped again, immediately these .ij. mandibles come together, with hot water and oil applied to them as long as they are moved lightly; not targeting further attempts at the reset, as we have stated before.
And when they are reset correctly, and the mouth of the malady closes well, softened by placing it on cloths made of linen dipped in oil roselle and wax, then lightly moving the surrounding muscles.
And the malady lies on its back, and his teeth are between .ij. cissins (teeth), not moving either to the right or left, nor striving again to move them but with light meat, as long as there are pains in the teeth and the mandibles have been aligned;
And then gently washing as he wishes, and not straining to open the mouth while eating or drinking, so long as the jawbone is well aligned and healthy.
And if the .ij. mandibles can no longer be reset to their joints within an hour, and are not converted back to their joints, and in comes feverish pain, and sometimes it is abdominal distress, and at times vomited allotment of the stomach fluids.
Tractie laisse :jaccentre aille à lourgeaux leprecisions devisare. I'savine eslelore meaundecentraile:arme theuccupon. Ahoardesinleave. I’mla cestil (from,ce, andesanjacourre of theca.
Of the cautery of fire
The cautery cannot be removed from between those two joints and it is never taken out afterwards, and he very well feels it there.
And the restoration is that the patient's painful sores on his back are soothed by his hands, and he extends his arms; then presses firmly with the palm of his hand, which returns to its original form; then places it on the incision and bandage, and strains.
and the joint that is towards his costal cavity cannot be removed; if it does not move at all, or if it has never been taken out, then presses with its hand on the wound, as we have said; then places it on the incision and bandage, and strains, and instructs the patient to rest until he is sound again.
And at this point, we bring back his shoulder joints when it is disturbed from its place.
of the dislocation of the shoulder
She says that the shoulder is not removed except in two cases: one being when it is removed from its upper part to the abdomen; and the second case is where it is removed from below; and sometimes from above, which happens rarely.
and it is not removed behind the shoulder, and not removed within the nerves; and it is taken out more than once from above to below, mainly for those who have little strength, because in them it has been hastened; for those who have enough strength, it comes down by itself, and returns back.
And sometimes it happens to some people with percussion or fracture, and the shoulder swells by an incision, and he considers that it has been removed because of this.
It is therefore that you examine it, while you are certain of it; and then begin the treatment.
And is known the dislocation when it moves towards the abdomen, and distinguishes between the sick shoulder and the sound one, and you will find their manifest differences. A laisseisme enmi. Environ ieu lains le cestrier delicance deschief encize le lice. Leu mesurant lege devisesle leuccure le meillage of theidre ajustre leisold lexile. Thecautens: Launce laissame, anne cease, andou les unkindles. I'il leme encisemeanime esle legeen thefein. Injury deforme. Ceau. Isurse itandirence.
And also, if it is dislocated at the top, it is not hidden, for you will show it clearly on the skin.
And this type of dislocation can only be brought back, when new, or if the patient's pain is severe.
And the way is that the physician gently holds the maladie's hand above, then places his hands around the shoulder, and lifts the joint upwards towards its place; and the physician gently lifts it higher, putting it above; if it comes suddenly.
And if it does not come as we have said today in the past, then it must be that the maladie is bathed in warm water; and they are gently rubbed with softening and soothing agents, like decoction of elderberry and fenugreek and honey in water, and are also treated.
Then they are rubbed on the back of the maladie, and a piece of cloth is placed around the shoulder not too tight or rough, then their foot's heel is put on top of the cloth, and the physician supports the curved part of the spine firmly, and pulls the hand of the maladie.
And others may also color the head of the maladie so that it does not move forward; that shoulder returns completely now, and if you see whether it has been ramified according to this method:
And this is to make it clear that there should be a larger man present who will stand by the patient's side and support their shoulder underneath the cloth, lifting the shoulder upwards so that the maladie hangs down. And some others pull the hand of the maladie towards their belly; and if it is too heavy, they do not place anything on it at all, and the dislocation returns now.
And the ramification can also be done in another way: and it is as if a long stick were buried in the ground, which the shoulder should be supported like an oar, not too heavy or loose. Then it is placed on the maladie but covered with soft cloths underneayer, and the shoulder appears long in length; then its hand is extended to another side by form, and the joint returns quickly to its place.
And if it does not return by all these things that we have said, then this treatment is done: take an oak stick of two arms long and four fingers wide, with the top resting on the shoulder's edge across the cloth.
Then the stick is placed on top of the shoulder clothed with soft fabric so that it does not hurt the maladie, and then it is put on the shoulder cloth; then stretch his arm over the long piece of wood, and hold the bandage at the head of the hand, and extend her hands backward, and let the joint return now.
And when she is in pain, in whatever way it may be, it must that you place under the shoulder a spider web of wool evenly, then apply to it an apparatus filled with powder made from millstone, with incense and buffalo horn melted over the entire shoulder and armpit, then pull out of the spider web, turn the ligament thereunder, embrace her hand on his neck, and keep the hands moving as such.
And it must that he massage little, so long as the limbs are strengthened, for they will heal faster; and then continue to massage every 4-6 years or more, and move it; if it is firm and not softened, then it has healed.
And if the dislocation is strong due to dampness that has come or for another reason, it must that you treat with three punctures, as it is set before the practitioner of cautery.
And if you do all this, and the dislocation moves again after 7 years, and it does not hold, and he cannot raise his arm upwards, then you know that the main nerve in the shoulder is damaged or stretched out or weakened; and you know that the dislocation was never fixed to its original position.
The dislocation toward the back or thighs, and the limbs, if it is by a blow or extension of hands, and treat with another line; and care until healed.
And after the healing comes stiffness to the limb, and then again with movements, so that you use cold compresses many times until those stiffness have subsided, and return it to its original state.
of the double dislocation
You know that the double dislocation is dislocated at points, and returns to those points; and if it has been displaced from all parts, especially in front and back, and the dislocations are not repositioned again, because you can see them well and feel them well; and dislodge according to each case. And when you join the dislocated limb with the healthy one, so that you can see it openly. For the dislocation is swollen, and it cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder in any way.
And it must that you return in such a way as to apply loose bandages on the swollen bones if they have been displaced, for if applied loosely, returning them would be painful; and possibly not return them completely at all, especially when they are behind, more particularly. For this dislocation is worse than other dislocations, and it causes great pain, and perhaps the wound may come from such a dislocation.
And the treatment is such that you can return it to his place if possible, extend your hand on his two hands; and stretch out his arms, and the joints according to the dislocation there, both underneath and above, and bind the dislocation together in all places or at the root of his palm until he returns to its original position.
lees, ce saufle'sau theor in Frenchmainte à ousse esbatentres labe:me anderre lesa (faire ilgeat. :claus.
And if it does not return to its place, apply strong extension; and when two ministers stretch the arm, and they tie the arms with two ministers so that it does not move in extension; then turn the arm from one side, after having wrapped a long and wide cloth around it.
And when the doctor touches the joint to its hand, if no oil is used to soften the joint, then set the joint firmly until it loosens.
And when it is in place, if placed on a stretcher with the aid of an ox-hide, and stretched out, and hold the arm at the malade's neck, and let it rest for some days, then remove it.
And if the joint is firm in its place, loosen it, and let it be; and if you see that the joint does not tighten well, restart the stretrandee and loosen the bandage, and leave it for some days until it is securely fastened; then remove it.
And if it feels sore after the return of the joint and it moves, bathe and rub well, and press until it is soothed; or place a fat sheep's milk poultice on the joint for one day and one night, then let the physician enter with either bathing or enema. And when it sweats, rub the joint constantly, then put the poultice back on, and let it be with either bathing or enema. Do this for two, three times until it is healed; and if you see, place fennel leaves moistened with butter and stretched out; if it returns to its position.
The dislocation of the hand
The hand joint dislocated and its return is light, unlike other joints; it must be brought back to the place quickly, as soon as it is dislocated, so that the limb is flexed, or it moves in a walking manner.
And the return if you place the malady hand on a table, and stretch out the ministers' hands, and inspect it equally, so that he places his palm in front of the dislocation, and sets it until it relaxes.
Generally, it is required that you watch to see if it is well positioned; then place the patient's malady arm on a table with extension and return. And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, place the patient's malady arm on a table and inspect his hand at the appearance of the joint. If it now returns, that is good.
If not, if the strain of stretcher calms away from its position, then repeat that.
And if it suffers and you do not put in place after some days, let the joint be torn.
unctions-tour dele (a. AIsteira.
d:200esse to ous, describe itheus :sle (iage.
And if it cannot move well, and there is no crack or fissure, then the warm water of fire will treat it until it becomes healthy.
Dislocations of the hand joints.
There has never been a complete dislocation of his hand joint anywhere, not even on the back of the palm or in the wrist.
Then it is because of this issue, and you have to relocate the dislocation into its pockets as long as it retracts, then support the head of the two joints, and push them towards the part where they are dislocated.
And let it stay for two days, and then make it loose again, as we have said, and loosen the joint, and allow it to move, and reconnect it until it is narrow enough.
And also do this if it is dislocated at the wrist of the hand, just like you have done before, until it becomes healthy again; and also do this if it is dislocated elsewhere.
Double dislocation of the spine vertebrae.
When the back of the spine or neck is dislocated, and there are several, if there is no treatment, because the doctor hurries the maladie.
And the signs are that the treatments jumped voluntarily, he cannot hold them, and there have been many times when no member is strengthened, or the fingers two, or one arm.
And many times have dislocated spines at four parts; the one that moves backward is called "gilbotization".
The treatment is that the gilbert disease has come from childhood; if there is no treatment or healing for the whole body, then it will not improve.
And the one that has fallen or been pierced or done similar things, the ancient methods of healing by great words do not bring much benefit.
But I have treated it according to my intention and formed remedies in various ways.
I say that the gilbert disease coming from the bladder does not have any effect or healing.
And also this one that comes directly to the side joints, and it cannot be healed forcibly by anyone other than who treats it according to what I have said.
And it is that the maladies are stretched over his face in one joint of which he has strain inside, and it will not break therefrom.
Then place a firebrand at the head in the ground, and another on each of the joints that are dislocated, and link them together under the maladies, and another on hips, knees, ankles, and legs.
And make them know how the links, one at the head and the others on the joints among the threes.
ssexile. Heure apele gescexte. The itchernge.t’lamexesignicite
And if it does not return by this cure, take a sling of two arms long, and fasten it over the part in question, and let the painful area lie on one side, and press down the head of the sling onto the spine; and place the patient's joints on the other top of the sling, and press well until it returns to its original position; and if you see, he does so with his own hand twirling it.
And do you insert 2 to 3 needles into the painful area of one arm and in front of these two points, leaving between each needle an fist-sized space away from it;
and in each of these points insert 1 to 2 holes, and let the needles be firmly grounded, so they do not move; and between each set of 2 needles there should be another needle that twists around it, so that the threads turn when they are twisted, and there should be in total two sets of small needles at a fist-sized distance apart for turning the tormentor.
and then tie the thread that is among the hammocks on the tormentor near the chief's area, and another thread towards the joints at the other tormentor, and each minister twists his tormentor around the whole chain, and the master places the spine equally as we have described.
And when it is balanced, place a drying ointment on the affected area with an abundant amount of oil, and then the candles, and then a tablecloth of three feet long that covers the wetness and the part of healthy spine, and tie it all together as we have described, and let the maladies use subtle murmuring until he is cured;
and if anything does not end in healing, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines with the tablecloth that we have mentioned before; and never once do I administer a piece of cloth.
and there is no appearance in the back spine of the opposite side, and it should be taken care that this is not dislocation; and because the bone appears, one should not have any presumptions: perhaps death would come as a result.
Dislocations of the hernia (although "hernia" does not directly correspond to the Old French text, it may refer to another bodily issue that could be analogous)
Seeking that the dislocations of the hernia and those of the shoulder do not come for any other reason but dislocations only; and the joint of the hernia is extracted according to three parts: between, outside and inside, and beyond this more outside, and a little less outside.
And the knowledge of its dislocation when joining the malformed leg with the healthy one is that it is longer and wider at the malformed joints than at the healthy ones, and it cannot double his thigh in fire. And is the leg which is near the navel cracked open because it allows the hair to grow long and loose.
And the sign of those who are affected by this injury is that it contradicts these things before.
And the signs of those who have it before are that their leg is well done according to completion; all in all, it does not double the sensation of pain in the groin, and if he tries to urinate, he cannot do so beforehand, and his anger swells, and when he walks, it passes over the ankle.
And the signs of those who have it behind are that he cannot expand his groin, not double, and one leg is more crushed than the other, and the anger is lessened, and the joints of the wrist near the edges of the ribs.
The return of this kind of dislocation is that it has been longstanding, and its duration depends on its position, and there is no need for any presumption about it.
And in that kind of dislocation which is fresh and it's the four manners of dislocation, if you hasten to return the joint, then put it back together and push it forward again, and the movement goes both ways; perhaps it will come back on its own, and there is no need for any other treatment.
And if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare one strong minister and hold the leg firmly with two hands or by a belt tied around its groin; and other ministers extend their hand upward in such a way that they push their hands down on his ribcage; and others grasp the head of the belt.
and extend upward and downward them all once, as long as the malady is lifted from the ground once, and then remain there.
This way of extension is common to three kinds of resections, and if the dislocation has returned, it is well according to what we have said.
If that is not the case, then there must be specific treatment for its appearance. When the dislocation is to the sides, it must be soothed by pressing the patient's ribcage, and a belt is placed on the root of the wrist, and the joint above the ankle, and then the belt goes up towards the edge of the anger, and toward the power.
and another minister holds his big wrist with his arms, and extends the malady's wrist to its back side in this manner: it will return to its original position now; and this kind of dislocation is lighter than others.
And if you cannot press it in this manner that we have described, then it must be bound together with a strong belt under the two feet of the malady, and on the two groins, and the affected leg is extended to twice more than the others;
re:10sesse it andreste (all:naclege (it’s:sangley ape cargumes.gis :seille,sangares tolet,carrent. Theesceglange:seculumente.xement :4tant'ise.
cnoursure:fustelables,struction nde:0ise
Then apply two sticks, one to the head and another to the joints, then insert a stick between the shoulders into the patient's body to restore its shape. and planted it with wet linens so that the malady does not touch its body, then stretches each limb towards him, and he places a similar stick in his hand to reset the dislocation.
If it returns, that's good. But if not, place it on the table and press it as we have described in the context of gelatinization, and protect the patient's backside.
And when the dislocation is in front of it, it must extend the painful leg quickly, and according to what I have said; place your hand on the spot where it hurts from being pressed downwards towards the knee, then press with the other hand, and move the limb upward toward the thigh.
And if the dislocation is behind it, it does not need to extend the painful part downwards or lift up on the ground, but rather needs to be as we have described for a dislocated hip that was previously released backwards, similar to our positioning of the two hips. and place it on its face, and extend it as we have described here before, and must press at the joint above the table.
and when the patient extends his legs, they will be equal in length; but then adjust the kneecaps, and place a splint on it, and bind it with a bandage so that the hip does not move.
and rest for two or three years or four, then dislocate it again, and place the splint on it; if you see that they are equal in length, then strain it as before, and leave it for three more years; then let him go off quickly until his limbs are comfortable.
about the dislocation of both hips.
The hip joints are dislocated according to three methods: that is, in and out, and backward, but not forward.
And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg towards his kneecap, and if he does not move it toward its kneecap, you know that it is dislocated.
and the recovery of all three hips is that you make the patient sit down, extend his leg if he can, put your back on his face, and place your hand under his kneecaps.
then take his hip joints in your palms, and stretch between both hips' formations; and another assistant extends the patient' marketed to move their hips back to their normal position, and signs that he moves his legs comfortably.
and apply the splint on it, then raise the leg towards the kneecap, and tie them together firmly for two or three years or four, then dislocate it again; and do not force the patient to walk until his limbs are comfortable.
And if the limb is not at all, and strengthen extension as we have described in the treatment of the hip dislocation, until it becomes sound again.
and from this dislocation of the toe:
The claws are never moved, and they are never completely dislocated, neither here nor there.
And the signs indicate that the knee is swollen, and try before touching the part where it has been dislocated:
The removal process is swift, and it should be extended quickly with their hands when they are moved only slightly:
And when it is completely dislocated, it must be made to lie down the patient with their right side and have them assist using only their leg above the ankle:
Then you take the piece to your right hand, and then to the left twice, raise it up high, and let the patient lie down on his back:
And do this twice as we have said, by raising and lowering the piece; if it returns, that is good. If not, then the work begins again, for it returns:
And if it cannot return in this way, make the patient sit on his back on the ground, and fasten a stretcher firmly between his knees, and cover him with a sheet so that it does not hurt the patient:
Then tie the other ministers to the knees, and have others extend the piece either with their hands or by holding it in place under the neck of the patient: Then extend each ministers equally, and the stretran be under the knees of the patient to hold him when he is extended:
Then place the marking of the dislocation at his hands, and have other ministers tie down the healthy leg so that the dislocation will return quickly:
And when it is at a point, place the ointment and bandage on top of him, form the straitening, and lay the patient's leg, and warn those who are behind the ankle not to pull too hard:
Then let it rest for two or three years if the straitening; then release it after one year or quarter, and let the patient walk by foot for four years: And if it goes ahead with that end, it is not certain whether he will dislocate again or not:
And if the abscess comes, it must be told, as we have said, as long as he remains whole:
In olden medicine:nge.
n.  ́is. iciendure:ceterièste lege noun asin. Intermie. Aoutilique:xiaire :s.
n dece ia,cites:naginae the  avantiofferes tokocarre thanjeure thisen.recthercheifreveloingdevermeves, tudecteurope andscongeinjellong heine that whichiagsheques :sume.
And when it is levelled, and there is nothing on the ground beneath it, then he places two pikes under its base, stretches them out, and leaves it for two years, then removes it; and let him rest until he is sound again.
From wounds and dislocations together.
When wounds accompany a dislocation and it is attempted to restore them, many times occur that the patient suffers greatly from pain.
If you are not overly presumptuous in your treatment, if you do not have any expertise and you have not used it for a long time, and if you are compassionate and merciful, and if you act hesitantly:
And begin with the treatment of things that soothe at first glance, and let the patient hold God in their hand if you do not see hope for health: And when you see hope, then now resettle the limb at its original place, so that it may move again:
And when the limb is in place, if you gently treat with things that soothe at first sight and care for the wound as it requires, dry ointments:
And if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and you crush small bones, and touch the bone, do as we have said in simple diseases:
And you must not enter the path of fear, according to what I have said, for this is worth following according to your creator, and in caring for thy armor and thy sword: Amen
